                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              LATENT EXPORTS: ALMOST IDEAL GRAVITY AND ZEROS

                                      James E. Anderson
                                       Penglong Zhang

                                      Working Paper 28278
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28278


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




We thank Pol Antràs, Andrew Bernard, Arnaud Constinot, Thibault Fally, Ben G. Li, Yi Lu,
MarcMuendler, Dennis Novy, Theodore Papageorgiou, Stev Redding, Anthony Venables and
seminar participants at the Australasian Trade Workshop, Boston College, the Empirical
Investigations in Trade and Investment Workshop, and the Tsinghua Workshop on International
Trade for their helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by James E. Anderson and Penglong Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Latent Exports: Almost Ideal Gravity and Zeros
James E. Anderson and Penglong Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 28278
December 2020
JEL No. F13,F14

                                          ABSTRACT

Almost Ideal gravity associates zero trade flows with variable and fixed trade cost variation in a
flexible demand system. Latent trade shares between non-partners are inferred from the Tobit
estimator applied to trade among 75 countries and 25 sectors in 2006. Latent Trade Bias (LTB) is
the difference between the latent trade share and the as-if-frictionless trade share. Explained LTB
variance decomposition shows 52% due to variation of variable trade cost, 24% due to non-
homothetic income effects, and 24% due to fixed trade cost effects. Counterfactual variable
(fixed) cost reductions suggest cases of successful export promotion between non-partners.


James E. Anderson
Department of Economics
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
james.anderson.1@bc.edu

Penglong Zhang
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
zhangpenglong@tsinghua.edu.cn
1     Introduction
Action on the extensive margin (entry or exit) of bilateral trade accounts for a large por-
tion of the variation of trade in cross-section or time series.1 The standard Constant Elas-
ticity of Substitution (CES) gravity model loads the explanation of zeros onto fixed export
costs because standard iceberg unit costs must rise without bound to drive trade to zero.
In contrast, economic intuition suggests that choke price exceeded by high per-unit trade
cost may be an important alternative explanation for zeros. Choke price variation is in-
tuitively likely to be large ­ demand elasticities with respect to price vary across source
countries and bilateral trade costs vary across destinations. Income effects may differ
across destination countries, as variations in income per capita interact with income elas-
ticities that differ from one. An Almost Ideal (Demand System) gravity model is devel-
oped in this paper to explain zeros by a combination of choke price variation and fixed
export costs. Choke price variation is further due to variable costs and their interaction
with varying demand elasticities and variation of income elasticities interacting with vari-
ation of per capita incomes. Variance decomposition reveals that variable cost variation
accounts in the estimated model for a much higher proportion of zeros than does fixed
cost variation or income elasticities variation.
    The estimated model is applied to illustrate its potential for evaluating export promo-
tion on the extensive margin. Export promotion motivates national policy, both unilat-
eral and in trade negotiations, while firms search for profitable new destination markets.
Quantification of the various causes of zeros is needed to guide export promotion on the
extensive margin. Some types of export promotion policies are permissible under WTO
rules, basically affecting fixed costs via providing information, facilitating links, helping
with licensing and regulation requirements, and negotiating bilateral fair treatment in the
application of regulations. Exporter countries could target export promotion more effec-
tively if they knew which cost was more important. Commercial attach´        es to embassies
and consulates in each destination could allocate time between intensive and extensive
margin export trade accordingly. Exporting firms could target entry markets more effec-
tively with a sense of which of the zeros were viable for given cost advantages.
    A gravity model based on Almost Ideal Demand System (AIDS) preferences and het-
erogeneous firms has a closed-form suitable for estimation.2 The version developed in
    1 Baldwin  and Harrigan (2011) report the incidence of zeros in U.S. trade in 2005 is over 90 percent in
imports of nearly 17,000 HS10 categories from 228 countries. Time series action on the extensive margin is
documented by Besedes and Prusa (2006). The time a country is "in" a market is often fleeting and about
30% of trade relationships experience "flipping' on and off.
    2 We interpret gravity as in Anderson (2011) ­ a model of the distribution of given supplies across mul-

tiple destinations.


                                                     1
this paper is flexible enough to allow heterogeneous price, fixed cost, and income elastic-
ities to interact with a combination of fixed costs and iceberg costs in determining trade
flows both positive and latent. We extend the Feenstra (2010) version of AIDS to allow
exporter-specific substitution parameters, and exporter-specific non-homothetic income
effects on the reservation prices associated with latent trade.
    Latent trade is defined (in Section 5.1) as the hypothetical stock required to make the
agent indifferent between consuming it and selling a marginal unit after absorbing the
fixed trade cost. Trade Bias, in the literature, is the difference between predicted trade
and as-if-frictionless trade. Latent Trade Bias (LTB), as used in this paper, is the difference
between the latent trade share (the absolute value of a negative number for cross-border
trade) and the as-if-frictionless trade share ­ a Trade Bias concept applicable to both latent
and positive trade (see Figure 3 in Section 5.1 for details).
    The Tobit estimator of AI gravity predicts the latent value of bilateral trade shares
for non-partners, given the inferred bilateral iceberg costs and entry costs as well as the
demand parameters. The estimated sectoral AI gravity model implies that, on average,
variable cost explains 52% of the variation in LTBs, while fixed cost explains 24%. The
remaining 24% is explained by income effects on demand due to the variations in per
capita income interacting with variation in origin-specific income elasticities. Variable
cost dominates fixed cost and income effects for almost all sectors. The variation in the
causes of zeros implies differences in the efficacy of export promotion policies on the
extensive margin.
    AI gravity is estimated using the bilateral manufacturing trade and production data
among 75 countries and 25 sectors in 2006. The three-digit sectoral aggregation allows us
to match trade with production data in order to estimate a full (internal trade inclusive)
gravity model. Our version of AIDS in principle allows 75 price, fixed-cost, and income
elasticity parameters (origin-specific). To reduce the parameter dimension in estimation,
our estimator projects the price elasticity parameter for each exporter as a linear func-
tion of exporter income. Intuitively, goods produced by rich countries are less likely to
be substituted for, and thus are price-inelastic. The estimation results show that bilateral
distance reduces trade by less for richer exporters, implying significant distance (price)
elasticity heterogeneity across exporters. Price elasticity heterogeneity also varies signifi-
cantly across sectors.
    Counterfactual experiments in export promotion assess the relative importance of
variable and fixed costs in preventing trade from occurring. Cost reductions can shift
the delivered price below the price associated with the break-even quantity. An extreme
counterfactual eliminates either variable or fixed cost. On average, the elimination of bi-


                                              2
lateral variable cost decreases the number of current sectoral zero flows much more than
does the elimination of bilateral fixed cost. These are the upper bounds for what the hypo-
thetical export promotion policy could do. More relevant to export promotion targeting, a
10% cut in variable cost induces trade in a much larger number of potential bilateral pairs
than does a 10% cut in fixed cost. Here, the three-digit ISIC level of the data presumably
hides a much larger number of potential targets in more disaggregated sectors.
    An alternative clue to export promotion from our application is that reducing vari-
able cost improves the probability of a new trading partner more if the source country
is poorer. The results are consistent with the intuition that products from poorer coun-
tries are more price-elastic and thus are more likely to induce trade to occur when variable
trade costs decrease. Similarly, reducing export fixed costs (e.g., regulation cost) improves
the probability asymmetrically across exporters with different incomes. Moreover, The
marginal effect of reducing fixed cost on switching zero trade to positive is smaller than
reducing variable cost.
    A headline example is Ethiopia's export trade in leather goods in 2006. The application
suggests that a 10% cut in pair-specific fixed entry cost would open 21 export markets. A
10% cut in variable cost would open 39 export markets. In both cases, the new destination
markets of Ethiopia are mainly in countries with middle to high income per capita (e.g.,
Norway and Poland in Europe, and Canada and Mexico in North America).
    Our counterfactual export promotion experiments should be regarded as a "proof of
concept" for two reasons. First, our estimation strategy is based on choosing variable and
fixed cost proxies that plausibly do not affect both.3 Variable cost is proxied by bilateral
distance. The fixed cost proxy is the regulation cost of firm entry. Future work on export
promotion targeting should add to our inferred measures of variable and fixed costs any
available direct trade cost measures. Variable and fixed cost counterfactuals can combine
variation in such costs with the structural gravity parameters estimated with our meth-
ods.
    A second reason for treating our estimates with care is that our estimator models the
extensive margin only. The intensive margin operates through the proportion of firms
already exporting. This proportion is not observed in our data at the required origin-
sector-destination level. The potential omitted variable bias is small because the overall
proportion of exporting firms is observed to be small, and necessarily smaller still for
sectoral bilateral trade.4 Future applications of AI gravity to data including firm-level
   3 Variables such as Free Trade Agreement membership,        common language, common legal traditions, etc.
affect both fixed and variable cost. Tariffs are directly a variable cost but may be systematically related to
fixed costs (i.e., interest group pressures for tariffs are low in sectors where fixed costs already limit trade.)
    4 On average in our ISIC3 data, zeros account for 28% of bilateral trade flows among the world's 75



                                                        3
information can incorporate the intensive margin.
    Our treatment of zero trade flows associated with flexible demand systems is distin-
guished from the preceding literature in its application to export promotion policy issues,
while in a technical sense it is an extension of that literature. One treatment in the liter-
ature assumes away an extensive margin by modeling trade as a Poisson arrival process
with zeros accounted for as events with no observed shipments in the observation win-
dow. A multi-sector extension of the Ricardian model with random productivity draws
(Eaton et al., 2012) generates zeros at the sector level with a CES demand system (Costinot
et al., 2012) without either fixed costs or choke prices. Allowing for an extensive mar-
gin associated with fixed costs implies that standard CES gravity estimators that exclude
zero flows are potentially biased due to selection effects. Helpman, Melitz, and Rubin-
stein (2008) adopt the Heckman two-stage estimation procedure that uses an equation
for selection of trade partners in the first stage and a trade flow equation in the second.5
Baldwin and Harrigan (2011) add quality-selection to the Melitz (2003) model and, to-
gether with productivity-selection, show that only firms with the lowest quality-adjusted
price export. Choke prices without fixed costs can be generated in quadratic demand sys-
tems, e.g., in Melitz and Ottaviano (2008). In contrast to AIDS, quadratic preferences do
not generate a closed-form gravity model that can be estimated. Also, Pollak and Wales
(1992) offer evidence that the translog somewhat outperforms the quadratic expenditure
system in household budget studies. Novy (2013) uses the one-parameter translog de-
mand system by Feenstra (2003) to derive a micro-founded gravity equation that features
an endogenous trade cost elasticity and potential choke prices, but does not explore zeros
since there are very few zeros in his sample.6 This demand structure is the special case in
which all goods enter "symmetrically".7
    Our alternative AI gravity model implies that latent trade is associated with observed
zeros, while the same model applies to positive trade flows. A Tobit estimator of AI
gravity is thus appropriate, treating the zero flows as left-censored observations at zero.
largest economies in the year 2006. Details are in Section 2. For some large bilateral pairs the proportion
of exporting firms may be discrete, so omitted variable bias is potentially significant. In future applications
to HS10 digit trade, zeros are far more prominent and omitted intensive margin bias would be much less
significant.
    5 Fixed costs of bilateral exporting combined with heterogeneously productive firms and CES demand

are the explanation for zeros in influential literature based on Melitz (2003). Firms draw productivities from
a bounded Pareto distribution. The value of the bound is essential to the model because there would be
no zeros with a sufficiently high bound. In this sense, fixed cost alone explains zeros ­ sufficiently high
variable cost cannot generate zeros in the CES structure with the elasticity of substitution greater than one.
    6 Novy (2013) uses aggregate exports among 28 OECD countries for the year 2000. Only seven of the

bilateral observations are zeros.
    7 Also see Feenstra and Weinstein (2017).




                                                      4
In contrast to homothetic demand systems, choke prices can be due to the combined
effect of high income-elasticity and low per capita income. The closest predecessor to
our model is that of Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal (2016). They extend Feenstra's one-
parameter translog to a non-homothetic AIDS gravity structure with income elasticities
that can vary by source country. We extend their model to allow price (variable cost) elas-
ticity heterogeneity across all N source countries.8 Our version of AIDS allows variable
cost to affect trade (including latent trade) flows differently across exporters. It is a rea-
sonable compromise between parsimony and a realistic approximation of origin-specific
variations in demand elasticity reflecting quality variations inter alia. Relative to Fajgel-
baum and Khandelwal (2016), we find that allowing for price elasticity variation greatly
reduces the significance of income effect variation. The more essential difference is that
we focus on zeros with measures of latent trade.
    Our paper is also related to a wider literature on zeros in international trade. Armenter
and Koren (2014) propose a statistical model using balls and bins to account for the large
number of zeros in firm- and product-level international shipments. Our economic struc-
tural model accounts for the same pattern in a setting from which policy implications are
drawn. Eaton et al. (2012) show that the standard heterogeneous firm model can be mod-
ified to generate an integer number of firms that account for the zeros in bilateral trade
data. Our model nests heterogeneous firms within a more general demand structure.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section presents the zero
flows in data. Section 3 derives the Almost Ideal gravity model. The model estimation
is discussed in Section 4, and applied to quantify causes of the zero flows in Section 5.
Section 6 conducts counterfactuals on export promotion policies. Section 7 is the robust-
ness. Section 8 concludes. An appendix contains additional details on the derivation of
the model, descriptions of the data and estimation, and added counterfactual details.


2     Zeros in the Data
We use trade and production data for the world's 75 largest economies in the year of
2006 sourced from CEPII.9 The data record bilateral trade flows and production across 25
industrial sectors in the International Standard Industrial Classification (ISIC) Revision 2.
Thus, there are 75*75 = 5625 country pairs (including domestic trade observations). On
average, the frequency of zeros across all sectors and pairs is 28%. Figure 1 shows the
    8 The
        general bilateral price elasticity matrix of AIDS has N × ( N - 1)/2 parameters in Deaton and
Muellbauer (1980). AI gravity as applied here reduces the number of parameters to N × 1.
  9 See Appendix Table B.1 for the country list.




                                                 5
                                     Aggregate manufacturing

                                  Machinery except electrical
                                           Machinery electric
                                                       Textiles
                                               Food products
                                   Fabricated metal products
                                              Other chemicals
                                             Wearing apparel
                                    Prof. and sci. equipment
                                        Transport equipment
                                              Plastic products
                                      Printing and publishing
                                         Industrial chemicals
                                         Paper and products
                                             Rubber products
                                             Leather products
                                          Glass and products
                                                Iron and steel
                                 Other non-metal min. prod.
                                         Non-ferrous metals
                                                   Beverages
                               Wood products except furniture
                                                     Footwear
                                      Furniture except metal
                                         Petroleum refineries
                                                      Tobacco

                                                                  0       20   40     60     80 100
                                                                          Percent of country pairs

                                                                              No trade       Trade



                          Figure 1: Zero Trade Frequency across Sectors

zero flow frequency in each sector. The zero flow frequency in the leather sector is closest
to the average level. 15% of the country pairs do not trade machines. 65% of the trade
flows in the tobacco sector among the country pairs are zero. Zero trade flows are more
likely to occur in tobacco, petroleum, and furniture sectors, while less likely to occur in
machinery, electric, and textile sectors.
    Zeros could be simply a result of a group of countries not trading with one another.
To dismiss this possibility, we take the "average" sector, leather, as an example.10 Figure
2 plots the trade matrix among all importers (rows) and exporters (columns) in descend-
ing order ranked by GDP. So the first row (column) displays the U.S. import from (export
to) each country (including itself). The second row (column) follows Japan and succeed-
ing rows (columns) follow Germany, China, etc.11 Again, the blue dots represent zero
flows, and the yellow dots represent positive observations. The diagonal elements are the
domestic trade of each country and are all positive. This implies that every country pro-
duces and supplies leather products to its domestic market. The general sparseness of the
trade matrix is evident ­ the fraction of zero observations is around 30%, and almost all
countries are associated with zero flows. More specifically, there are zero flows in every
row (column), meaning that no one imports (exports) leather products from (to) every-
  10 The zero frequency of international trade in the leather sector is 30%, close to the average zero frequency

of 28%.
  11 Note that the year is 2006 in our sample.




                                                                      6
                                                        Leather
                                                Exporter ranked by GDP         YEM_USA
                               IDN_NOR    RUS_CHL                   TJK_USA
                                         10    20    30       40   50     60     70


                               10
              IRL_RUS
      Importer ranked by GDP




                               20


                               30


                               40


                               50


                               60
             USA_TJK

                               70




Figure 2: Zero Trade Flows by Country Pairs: Leather Sector




                                                          7
where. The two exceptions appear in the third and fourth columns ­ Germany and China
export their leather products everywhere. Second, zero relationships are concentrated in
the lower-right corner, implying that smaller countries are less likely to trade with each
other. Third, the many zeros in the upper-right (lower-left) corner, which suggests that
even large importers (exporters) are associated with many zeros. For example, the U.S.
neither exports leather products to nor imports them from Tajikistan. The trade flow is
also zero from the U.S. to Yemen. Furthermore, even some large economies do not trade
leather goods with each other. For example, the observations from Russia to Ireland, from
Chile to Russia, and from Norway to Indonesia are all zeros.
    Although the zero frequency is different across sectors, the distribution pattern is very
similar to that in the leather sector. The prevalence of zeros in sectoral trade does not just
come about because of a certain group of countries, but every country is involved to some
extent. (See Appendix Figures B.1-B.4 for the trade matrix of each sector).


3     Model
This section outlines a general equilibrium model and derives a gravity equation that can
reconcile both positive and zero international trade flows.


3.1   Preferences
We consider a world economy with N countries, a continuum of goods   , and labor
as the only factor of production. Denote the exporter as i and the importer as j. Con-
sumers have the Almost Ideal Demand System (AIDS) preference introduced by Deaton
and Muellbauer (1980), which can be rationalized as a non-homothetic second-order ap-
proximation to an arbitrary expenditure system. Specifically, in any country j, there is a
representative consumer with an expenditure function given in logarithmic form as

                              ln e j = ln Q j + u j       p j (  )( ) ,                    (1)
                                                       

where e j is the minimum expenditure at which the consumer can obtain utility u j given
prices p j ( ). The price index ln Q j is given in logarithmic form as

                                            1
        ln Q j =       ( ) ln p j ( )d +              ( ,  ) ln p j ( ) ln p j ( )d d .    (2)
                                            2
                                              ,  




                                                 8
To satisfy homogeneity of degree one, the parameters are constrained by ( )  (0, 1),
   ( )d = 1 and ( ,  )d = 0 for any  . Symmetry is imposed to satisfy Young's
Theorem, ( ,  ) = ( ,  ). Concavity is imposed by the requirement that {( ,  )}
is negative semi-definite.
    We let                     
                               ( ) ( ),                if  = 
                     ( ,  ) =                                                    (3)
                               -( )(1 - ( )), otherwise,

where ( )  (0, 1) and ( )d = 1.12 Specialization (3) satisfies the general re-
strictions of the AIDS but imposes a tight restriction on the cross-effects. In particular,
complementarity is ruled out ­ all off-diagonal terms of the substitution effects matrix are
non-negative.13
    Applying Shephard's lemma and differentiating the expenditure function with respect
to log price p j ( ) generates the expenditure share in good  for consumers at country j
equal to
                                                  p j ( )
                       s j ( ) = ( ) - ( ) ln             + ( ) ln r j ,                 (4)
                                                      ¯j
                                                      p

where
                                        ¯j =
                                     ln p            ( ) ln p j ( )d .                                      (5)
                                                

    These expenditure shares have some nice features. First, ( ) is a taste parameter
for the good  , which shifts the expenditure share independently from the prices and
income. Second, ( ) is the price elasticity for good  . The variation of ( ) allows
for asymmetric demand responses to price changes. This gives AIDS preference CES-like
components because the price terms -( ) ln( p j ( )/ p        ¯ j ) captures cross-effects in sub-
stitution with the log of a ratio of own price to an average price p       ¯ j . Third, ( ) is the
income elasticity which captures the non-homothetic component of the preference. Posi-
tive ( ) implies luxury goods (with high quality) while negative ( ) implies necessary
goods (with low quality).14 We refer to r j = e j / Q j as adjusted real income (expenditure)
by individual price index. When ( ) = 0 for all  , AIDS becomes the homothetic
translog preference. When ( ) = 0 and ( ) = 0 for all  , AIDS becomes the Cobb-
  12 This paper and Zhang (2020) were begun together applying the method in equation (3).
  13  (  ) = ( ), ( ) = ( ) for all  and  , is the special case proposed by Feenstra (2003) followed
by Arkolakis et al. (2010), Novy (2013), and Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal (2016). Our specialization (3)
allows for more price elasticity variation. Our estimation implies positive  estimates, consistent with the
model.
   14 Note that  (  ) and  (  ) are semi-elasticities since they relate expenditure shares to logs of prices and

income, but we refer to them as elasticities to save notation.


                                                       9
Douglas preference.
    AIDS allows for reservation (choke) prices above which demand is equal to zero. For
a single consumer in isolation, this implies difficulties in identifying the demand system,
since reservation prices are unobservable for the unavailable goods (Feenstra, 2010), yet
have effects on positive demand.15 In the many country gravity context, all goods are
consumed somewhere. Thus the demand parameters can be identified. We also can iden-
tify the trade cost that it would take to serve any bilateral market. The full price vector,
including the reservation prices, is implicitly solved in the gravity model. The resulting
effect on positive shares is controlled for by the destination fixed effects that control for
the effect of variation in the full price vector via the theoretically founded price index (see
Appendix A.1 for proof). This procedure essentially jumps over the unobserved reserva-
tion price problem.
    For comparative static experiments of the sort we deploy in Section 6, the extensive
margin changes and the response of the full price vector involves the shift from reserva-
tion prices to active market prices. Appendix A.1 analyzes this case with an extension
of Feenstra (2010) to admit a higher dimensional class of substitution effect and to admit
non-homothetic income effects in the latent goods group.


3.2    Firms
In any country i, there is a pool of monopolistically competitive firms. With the demand
                                                          wt
function (4), firm  maximizes its profit p j ( )q j ( ) - z(iij) q j ( ) where q j ( ) is the quan-
tity, tij > 1 reflects bilateral iceberg trade cost between country i and country j, and
wi is the wage rate. Assume symmetry across the varieties  from country i such that
( ) = i , ( ) =  i , and ( ) = i .
    Assume firms cannot observe their productivities until they set their prices. This is be-
cause firms face a large cost of deviating from a posted price for many reasons, e.g., pun-
ishment by buyers. The assumption is fairly close to reality for many goods (household
appliances, motor vehicles, bicycles, etc.). The firms in each country i draw productivities
from the same distribution, so they set a common price, resulting in a common markup.
Note that the markup can vary by country of origin.16 The profit-maximizing markup is
1 + ( i )-1 sij if markets are segmented. For simplicity, we assume that markets are not
  15 The reservation prices in principle are solved from the subset of goods for which there is no trade, then
substituted back into the set of goods for which there is positive trade to control for their influence. This
imposes considerable nonlinearity in parameters.
  16 In contrast, models of monopolistic competition with CES preferences require uniform markups by

country of origin.



                                                     10
segmented,17 hence arbitrage forces markups (over full cost of production and trade) by
firms of country i to be the same across destinations. Firm  from country i thus sets its
markup based on the expected firm share in the world market which is denoted as s¯i . The
common markup is denoted as µi . Thus

                                           µi = 1 + ( i )-1 s
                                                            ¯i .                                           (6)

    Then a firm receives a random productivity draw in log-level ln z. Following the recent
literature, denote a = ln z and assume a follows a special bounded Pareto distribution
with accumulative density function as

                                                    ln a
                                       G ( a) =          , 1 < a < H,                                      (7)
                                                   ln H

where 1 and H are the lower and upper bounds of the distribution, respectively.18 Pa-
rameter H also reflects the dispersion of the productivity. The equilibrium price in log for
markets that are served is
                                ln pij (z) = ln µi wi tij - ln z.                        (8)

From equation (4), firm z's market share in country j is

                        sij (z) = i -  i ln(µi wi tij / p
                                                        ¯ j ) + i ln r j +  i ln z,                        (9)

and its profit
                                                  -1
                                   ij (z) = (1 - µi  )sij (z) Ej - Fij ,                                  (10)

where Ej is the total expenditure of country j, Fij denotes the fixed cost for firms from
                                                                     ) = 0, we can get the
country i export to country j. Then from zero profit condition ij (zij
cutoff productivity in log is

                                         µi
                  ln zij = ( i )-1 [         f - i +  i ln(µi wi tij / p
                                                                       ¯ j ) - i ln r j ],                (11)
                                       µi - 1 ij

where
                                                  f ij = Fij / Ej                                         (12)
  17 The  assumption avoids having to deal with a complex endogeneity problem in firm-destination
markups, but is also plausible for many sectors. Segmented markets require firm-destination-specific bar-
riers that prevent spatial arbitrage. For many products, these seem unlikely. Nevertheless, the no segmen-
tation assumption rules out pricing-to-market behavior observable in some well-known sectors.
   18 We normalize the lower bound as 1. Alternatively, we assume G ( a ) = ln a-ln L = ln( a/ L) , L < a < H ,
                                                                            ln H -ln L  ln( H / L)
which is equivalent to our setup.


                                                       11
denotes the adjusted fixed cost by the total market expenditure.


3.3    Aggregates
Let Sij denote the total market share of country j imports from all firms of country i. By
definition, the bilateral import share is

                                                   H
                                       Sij = Ni            sij ( a)dG ( a),                                           (13)
                                                      
                                                  ln zij


where Ni is the measure of firms in country i. Here the total number of firms Ni are
exogenous while the proportion that export is endogenous. Using the demand system
structure and rearranging yields

                                                                    H                        H
         Sij / Ni = [i -  i ln(µi wi tij / p
                                           ¯ j ) + i ln r j ]                dG ( a) +  i            adG ( a).
                                                                       
                                                                   ln zij                       
                                                                                            ln zij


The first term on the right-hand side is the intensive margin of trade. The second term
is the extensive margin of trade. Where firm-level data is available, the evidence shows
that a small fraction of firms serve any destination market, all the more so when trade is
sectorally disaggregated.19 Due to the absence of data on the proportion of active firms
                                                                                H
in each sector bilateral market, we impose the simplifying assumption that ln z dG ( a)
                                                                                                                 ij
is very small. This assumption suppresses the intensive margin. The resulting exclusive
                                                   H
model of the extensive margin of trade flows  i ln z adG ( a) is reasonably justified by
                                                                        ij
the focus of this paper on latent (observed zeros) vs. low positive trade.
   Then equation (9) and (11) give,20

                        Sij / Ni = i -  i ln(µi wi tij / p
                                                         ¯ j ) - i f ij + i ln r j ,                                  (14)

where

                                i = (1/ ln H )i + ( H / ln H ) i ,                                                    (15)
                                 i = (1/ ln H )  i ,                                                                  (16)
                                i = (1/ ln H )µi /(µi - 1),                                                           (17)
                                i = (1/ ln H )i .                                                                     (18)
  19 Bernard  et al. (2007) investigate manufacturing firms across three-digit NAICS industries and find that
the overall share of U.S. manufacturing firms that export is relatively small, at 18 percent.
  20 Proof in Appendix A.2.




                                                     12
Note that i ,  i , and i are productivity-adjusted tastes, productivity-adjusted price
elasticities, and productivity-adjusted income elasticities. Thus, i > 0,  i > 0. i
and i have the same sign. Relative to i ,  i , and i , they include dependence on the
supply side productivity distribution parameter H . Finally i is the marginal effect of
fixed cost on trade shares. The coefficients satisfy i Ni i = (1/ ln H ) + ( H / ln H ),
i Ni  i = (1/ ln H ), and i Ni i = 0. And thus  i =  i / i Ni  i . Note that the total
number of firms Ni is exogeneously given, but the fraction of firms that export is endoge-
nously determined.21 The main parametric action in our model is on the demand side.
The supply side productivity dispersion parameter plays a role in the implied trade elas-
ticities.22 Aggregate share per firm in (14) is decomposed into four parts. The first term
i includes all origin-specific factors, and the last term i ln r j includes all destination-
specific factors multiplied by an origin-specific coefficient. The two terms in the middle
are the effects of bilateral variable costs and fixed costs.


3.4    Gravity
Market clearance for each origin i is given by

                                              Yi =        Sij Ej ,                                     (19)
                                                          j


where Yi is the total income of country i. Using market clearance in the AIDS share equa-
tion yields the AI gravity equation.23 Thus:

                             Yi                tij
                Sij / Ni -      / Ni = - i ln(      ) - i ( f ij - i ) + i ln(r j / R),                (20)
                             Y                 i Pj

where Y is world total income, and

                                        ln i        (Ej /Y ) ln tij ,                                  (21)
                                                     j


                                      ln Pj     Ni i ln(tij /i ),                                      (22)
                                                i
  21 The endogenous fraction of exporting firms is also in the firm heterogeneity models of Chaney (2008)
and Novy (2013).
  22 The productivity distribution is invariant across countries in our model. We could allow productivity

distribution location parameter, H , to be origin-specific, but its variation is absorbed into productivity-
adjusted elasticities. The standard Pareto shape (dispersion) parameter is set equal to 1 to linearize the
resulting reduced form model.
  23 Proof in Appendix A.3.




                                                         13
                                          i      (Ej /Y ) fij ,                                       (23)
                                                  j

                                        ln R     (Ej /Y ) ln r j .                                    (24)
                                                  j

    On the left hand side, Sij / Ni - Y   i
                                        Y / Ni is the deviation of bilateral trade per firm from
its frictionless level Y i
                        Y / Ni . There are three terms on the right hand side, which cap-
ture the variable cost effect, fixed cost effect, and income effect, respectively. The first term,
            t
- i ln iijPj , is the effect of relative bilateral trade resistance from origin i to destina-
tion j where ln i and ln Pj are the outward and inward multilateral resistances in logs,
respectively. The relative resistance term is very similar to the CES structural gravity
of Anderson and van Wincoop (2003). The last term, i ln(r j / R), is the non-homothetic
component of the gravity equation and captures the effect of relative income per capita of
market j where ln R is the average world income per capita in log.
    The middle term, -i ( f ij - i ) exploits the AI structure to capture the effect of relative
trade "fixed cost" that reduces bilateral trade via the firm-level extensive margin from
origin i to destination j. The intuition is that fixed cost raises the market entry barrier
and fewer firms export. We refer to i as the outward "multilateral fixed resistance" that
summarizes the average trade fixed cost between a country and its trading partners.
    We dub equation system (20)-(24) the Almost Ideal (AI) gravity model. The name nat-
urally refers to its base in the Almost Ideal Demand System and connotes that (20)-(24) is
the most flexible and complete gravity model in the literature thus far: (i) AI gravity in-
cludes both variable and fixed trade costs; (ii) AI gravity incorporates both the intensive
margin and the extensive margin of trade; (iii) AI gravity has non-homothetic compo-
nents; (iv) AI gravity allows for asymmetric price elasticities across exporters; and (v)
AI gravity can generate latent trade flows analytically.24 System (20)-(24) retains the de-
sirable properties of the received literature in reducing equilibrium spatial arbitrage be-
tween M origins and M destinations, involving M2 bilateral relationships, to a set of M
inward and 2 M outward multilateral resistances. Compared to the CES case with only M
outward multilateral resistances, fixed export costs add an equilibrium multilateral fixed
cost resistance term. It is useful to confirm that system (20)-(24) satisfies the requirement
of homogeneity of degree zero in variable trade costs ­ a scalar rise in all tij s by propor-
tion  leaves tij /i Pj unchanged. In contrast, a scalar rise in all f ij raises i in the same
proportion, thus f ij - i is changed in this proportion.
  24 When i is constant and i is zero for all i, AI gravity becomes the special case proposed by Fajgelbaum
and Khandelwal (2016).




                                                      14
4       Estimation
The estimation of AI gravity derived in Section 3 is described in this section. Section 4.1
describes the data and specifications. Estimation results using aggregate trade data are
presented in Section 4.2 and results using sectoral trade data are presented in Section 4.3.


4.1         Data and Specifications
Trade and production data for 75 countries in the year 2006 comprise the sample.25 We
follow Novy (2013) to measure the number of goods that originate from each country, Ni ,
with the extensive margin data constructed by Hummels and Klenow (2005). The exten-
sive margin is measured by weighting categories of goods by their overall importance in
exports.26
    Bilateral variable cost is projected by

                                         ln tij =  ln distij + t
                                                               ij ,                                     (25)

where dij is bilateral distance as calculated by CEPII,  is the elasticity of trade cost to
distance, and t ij is the error term.
     The fixed trade cost is measured by the regulation costs of firm entry collected by
Djankov et al. (2002), following Helpman et al. (2008). These entry costs are measured
via their effects on the number of days, the number of legal procedures, and the relative
cost (as a percentage of GDP per capita) for an entrepreneur to legally start operating a
business. We use the monetary cost in our baseline estimation and non-monetary costs
in the robustness check.27 Moreover, we construct the bilateral fixed cost as the average
cost for an entrepreneur to start a business in the exporter and the importer country. Thus
it is country-pair specific. Then we divide this cost by the importer's total expenditure,
according to equation (12), to compute the adjusted bilateral entry cost f ij .
     A key estimation problem faced by all attempts using gravity to separate inferred
fixed from variable costs is the need to find proxies that arguably do not affect both. Our
proxy for the variable cost is bilateral distance.28 We augment the variable and fixed cost
proxies with a uniform cross-border friction that in principle combines both variable and
    25 Details
             are discussed in Section 2.
    26 Wealso use other measures for the number of goods as robustness checks in Section 7.1.
  27 See Section 7.2.
  28 Many of the standard proxy variables in the gravity literature reflect both. For example, trade partner-

ships and common language very likely affect both fixed and variable trade costs. Even tariffs could reflect
both if high fixed cost in protectionist countries is associated with low tariffs.



                                                     15
fixed cost components.
    Recall that real expenditure per capita is defined as ln r j = ln(e j / Q¯ j ) where e j , nominal
expenditures per capita, are observable. Aggregate price index ln Q        ¯ j can be proxied by a
Stone index following the literature,29 that is

                                                 N
                                         ¯j =    Sij ln( pii distij0 ),
                                                                  
                                      ln Q                                                             (26)
                                                i =1

where pii are the quality-adjusted prices estimated by Feenstra and Romalis (2014). We
pick 0 = 0.177 following Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal (2016).
   The AI gravity equation derived above is

                             Yi                tij
                Sij / Ni -      / Ni = - i ln(      ) - i ( f ij - i ) + i ln(r j / R),
                             Y                 i Pj

where there are a large number of parameters to be estimated. There is a set of productivity-
adjusted variable cost (price) elasticities { i }, a set of fixed cost elasticity parameters
{i }, and a set of productivity-adjusted income elasticities {i }. In order to reduce the
number of estimated parameters, we impose some restrictions. First, we impose the con-
straint i = c0 + c ln ri where c > 0 and ri is the exporter income, similar to Fajgelbaum
and Khandelwal (2016). This is because rich countries are more likely to export high-
quality goods. The theoretical restriction iN                                      N
                                               =1 Ni i = 0 implies c0 = - c i =1 Ni ln ri ,
transforming this linear relationship to

                                          i = c(ln ri - ln r
                                                           ¯ ),                                        (27)

                   N
where ln r ¯ = k    =1 Nk ln rk , and reducing the number of productivity-adjusted income
elasticities to be estimated from N to one, i.e., coefficient c.
   Second, we assume productivity-adjusted price elasticities are also correlated to ex-
porter income. Specifically
                                         i = b0 - b1 ln ri ,                          (28)

where ri is the GDP per capita of the exporting country i and b1 > 0.30 Poor countries are
more likely to export price-elastic goods. Then we reduce the number of productivity-
adjusted price elasticities to be estimated from N to 2, i.e., coefficients b0 and b1 .
   Third, the structural model suggests that the coefficient on fixed cost is a function of
  29 Deaton   and Muellbauer (1980) were first to use a Stone index to proxy the AIDS price index. The trade
literature, like Atkin (2013) and Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal (2016), uses this approximation.
   30 Novy (2013) and Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal (2016) assume symmetric price elasticities, i.e., b = 0.
                                                                                                    1



                                                       16
the markup in equation (17), and thus a function of the price elasticity parameters implied
in equation (6). Then we have

                                                            ¯i ).
                                     i = (1/ ln H )(1 +  i /s                                         (29)

Since the fixed cost coefficient is linear in the price elasticity, we can estimate i in a similar
way to distance elasticities. Specifically, similar to (28), we assume

                                                   f        f
                                           i = b0 - b1 ln ri ,                                        (30)

                                                                    f
where ri is the exporter income of exporter i and b1 > 0. The rich country's goods are
more likely to have a smaller price elasticity, a higher markup, and thus a smaller fixed
cost effect on trade compared with those of the poor country's goods.
    The AI gravity model incorporates zeros and action on the extensive margin because
it theoretically generates both positive and non-positive trade flows to match non-zeros
and zeros in data. The Tobit method is thus appropriate to estimate AI gravity. A poten-
tial import share could be negative when the associated bilateral trade barriers are large
enough. Since the negative share is censored at zero in the data, Sij in the AI gravity equa-
tion is the latent value of the systematic (observed) trade share. If we denote the observed
import share in data as S  ~ij , then


                                  ~ij / Ni =     Sij / Ni , if Sij  0
                                  S                                                                   (31)
                                                 0,         if Sij < 0.

Note that (31) can be estimated using the Tobit model given the censoring mechanism.31
  The specification of the AI gravity equation under the preceding restrictions becomes

                                                                f               f
     Sij / Ni = -b0  ln distij + b1  ln ri × ln distij - b0 entrycostij + b1 ln ri × entrycostij

                 + c ln ri × ln r j +  Internalij + b1 ln Pj × ln ri + f ei + f e j +  ij ,           (32)

where f ei = YY / Ni + ( b0 - b1 ln ri ) ln i +  i - i ln R, and f e j = b0  ln Pj - c ln r j × ln r
               i
                                                                                                   ¯
are exporter- and importer-specific fixed effects. The multilateral resistance terms ln Pj are
not observable since they have inside parameters {  i }iN =1 . But b1 ln Pj can be controlled by
exporter-specific coefficients on ln ri . We also add a dummy variable Internalij , which is
  31 Helpman,  Melitz, and Rubinstein (2008) also pointed out the potential use of the Tobit model. If such
zero trade values were just the outcome of censoring, then a Tobit specification would provide the best fit
to the data.



                                                       17
0 for import and 1 for internal trade, to capture all the other unobserved trade cost across
border, similar to Ramondo et al. (2016) and Anderson and Yotov (2017). Unfortunately 
cannot be identified from b0 and b1 . So we pick  = 0.117 directly following the literature,
and then b0 and b1 are identified. We expect the coefficients of ln distij and entrycostij
are both negative, while those of the interaction terms ln ri × ln distij , ln ri × entrycostij ,
                                                                                        f    f
and ln ri × ln r j are all positive. In other word, all parameter estimates {b0 , b1 , b0 , b1 , , c}
should be positive. The productivity-adjusted elasticity parameters are identified by

                                        i = b0 - b1 ln ri ,
                                                   f       f
                                        i = b0 - b1 ln ri ,
                                        i = c ln(ri /¯
                                                     r ).

Unfortunately,  and  i cannot be identified form each other. The original demand pa-
rameters i cannot be identified from the productivity distribution parameter H . But the
original  i are identified by

                             i = (b0 - b1 ln ri )/  Nk (b0 - b1 ln rk ).                         (33)
                                                       k

   To investigate more extreme variation of zero trade flows, we estimate sectoral AI
gravity equations using disaggregated data. Specifically, we estimate

  k           k               k                            f                   f
 Sij / Ni = -b0  ln distij + b1  ln ri × ln distij - (b0 )k entrycostij + (b1 )k ln ri × entrycostij

              + ck ln ri × ln r j + k Internalij + b1
                                                    k
                                                      ln Pjk × ln ri + f eik + f ek   k
                                                                                  j +  ij ,      (34)

where all variables with a superscript k are defined in the same way to those without any
superscript but in sector k. Distance is constant across sectors. Since the sectoral data on
entry cost and extensive margin are not available, we use the same measure as those in
the aggregate estimation. We run the regression separately with corresponding data and
obtain the estimates sector by sector.


4.2   Aggregate Results
We begin by estimating the AI gravity model in equation (32) with aggregate manufactur-
ing trade data. The results are reported in column (1) in Table 1. The estimated exporter-
and importer-specific fixed effects are dropped since they are not the parameters of inter-
est. As always in gravity estimation, the coefficient of distance is significantly negative ­


                                                  18
distance reduces the bilateral trade share. AIDS gravity fits the smaller shares better than
CES. Novy (2013) finds that the translog model generates a reasonably good fit for inter-
mediate import shares in the range from 0.05 to 0.15. He points out that for large import
shares both CES and translog models produce larger residuals, and the translog model in
particular underpredicts the actual import shares. Since 99.7% of the import shares in our
sample are below 0.15, the AI gravity estimates are consistent with Novy (2013).
    A more novel result is that the coefficient of the interaction term of distance and ex-
porter income is significantly positive, implying that the distance reduces trade by less for
rich exporters than for poor exporters. This suggests that there is a significant distance
(price) elasticity heterogeneity across exporters, and the magnitude of the coefficient re-
flects the size of the distance elasticity dispersion. Since we assume that  = 0.177, the
estimates imply that b  ^ 0 = 1.158/0.177 = 6.542 and b  ^ 1 = 0.128/0.177 = 0.723. Thus the
productivity-adjusted variable cost (price) elasticity is  i = b       ^0 - b  ^ 1 ln ri , where ri is ex-
porter GDP per capita. And {      ^ i } N can be calculated from equation (33). As discussed
                                       i =1
earlier,  and H cannot be identified from their estimated product.
    The coefficient of entry cost is significantly negative, which implies that the entry cost
also reduces the bilateral trade share. The estimates imply that b       ^ f = 5.805 and b     ^ f = 0.550.
                                                                          0                     1
                                                                     ^ f     ^ f
Thus the productivity-adjusted fixed cost elasticity is  = b0 - b1 ln ri . The coefficient
of the income interaction term is not significantly different from zero. This suggests that
there is little income elasticity heterogeneity across exporters ­ non-homotheticity is not
statistically significant in aggregate trade. The income elasticity parameter c            ^ = 0.017. This
positive coefficient implies that richer importers (higher ln r j ) are more likely to spend
larger shares on products from richer exporters (higher ln ri ), conditional on trade costs.
The productivity-adjusted income elasticity is       ^ = c
                                                      i     ^ ln(ri /¯r ).32 The coefficient of the
internal trade dummy is also significant, implying that the internal trade share is larger
given all else equal. This home-bias term picks up all the relevant forces that discriminate
between internal and international trade.
    The interpretation of the Tobit estimates for latent trade is not straightforward. The
Tobit coefficient estimates the linear increase of the latent variable for each unit increase
of the predictor. As the latent variable is identical to the observed variable for all obser-
vations that are above the threshold, it also measures the linear increase of the predictor
on the response for all observations above that threshold.33 For example, the estimated
  32 Note   that the   ^ s are semi income elasticities, which measure the deviations from the unitary elasticity.
                        i
We call them income elasticities to save notation, as discussed earlier. The actual income elasticities are
1+   ^ i /(Sij / Ni ).
  33 See Wooldridge (2010) for detailed explanations of the Tobit model and how to calculate the conditional

expectation for the variable of interest.


                                                       19
            Table 1: AI Gravity Estimation: Baseline

                                      (1)          (2)          (3)
    Import share per firm            Tobit        OLS         Heckit
    Distance                       -1.158       -1.131       -1.115
                                    (0.026)      (0.025)      (0.026)

    Distance × Income ex           0.128         0.126        0.124
                                    (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.003)

    Entry cost                     -5.805       -4.195       -6.012
                                    (0.893)      (0.798)      (0.947)

    Entry cost × Income ex         0.550         0.397        0.573
                                    (0.088)       (0.079)      (0.093)

    Income im × Income ex            0.017        0.025       0.058
                                    (0.021)      (0.021)      (0.023)

    Internal                       2.829         2.896        2.870
                                    (0.080)       (0.080)      (0.080)
    ^
                                   0.121
                                    (0.002)
    Mills                                                     -0.117
                                                               (0.047)
    Observations                    5625          5625          5625
    R-squared                       0.576         0.642
    Log-likelihood value          -2078.929     -1938.263
 Notes: Table reports the estimates of the AI gravity in equation (32) using
aggregated manufacturing trade data. Estimated exporter- and importer-
specific fixed effects are dropped. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Significance * .10, ** .05, *** .01.




                                    20
coefficient of entry cost, -(5.805-0.550 ln ri ), is the marginal effect of the entry cost on the
latent share Sij / Ni , as well as its the marginal effect on the observed trade share S      ~ij / Ni
above zeros. The slope for zero observations is different from this number. The Tobit
model suggests that the average marginal effect of the predictor on the response for all
observations is equal to its marginal effect on the latent variable multiplied by an adjust-
ment factor. With the estimated standard deviation of the error term,            ^ , we can compute
the adjustment factor. Its value is about 0.504, evaluated at the estimates and the mean
values of independent variables.34 Thus the average marginal effect of entry cost on the
observed trade share S    ~ij / Ni is -0.504×(5.805-0.550 ln ri ). Similarly, taking the interaction
term into account, a one percent increase in distance leads to a decrease of (1.158-0.128
ln ri ) in the latent trade share Sij / Ni , in contrast to a decrease of 0.504×(1.158-0.128 ln ri )
in observed trade share S      ~ij / Ni . For example, China's GDP per capita in log is 7.62 and
thus the average marginal effect of log distance on the observed import share from China
is -0.092. The Tobit estimates are related to but differ from the OLS results reported in
column (2). The Tobit coefficient estimates have the same sign as the corresponding OLS
estimates, and the statistical significance of the estimates is similar. The similarity arises
because the aggregated manufacturing sample has a very low proportion of zero trade
flows. But directly comparing the coefficients with the Tobit estimates is not informative.
    As a robustness check, we compare the Tobit estimates with the Heckman two-stage
method (Heckit) which regards the zero flows as missing values. Similar to Helpman,
Melitz, and Rubinstein (2008), the first stage estimates the inverse Mills ratio using a
probit model. The second stage runs an OLS estimation by adding the inverse Mills ratio
into the regressors. The results are reported in column (3).35 All coefficients have the
intuitive signs. The coefficient of the inverse Mills ratio is significant, which implies there
is a sample selection bias when dropping the zero flows in the gravity estimation. This
result confirms the systematic nature of the extensive margin, and suggests applying the
richer structure of AI gravity using the Tobit estimator. Although there are very few zeros
in the aggregate trade flows, there are sizable differences in results between OLS, Heckit
and Tobit estimators. The differences are even more significant in the sectoral estimation,
where zero frequencies are higher.
    We also report the estimates of AI gravity with different elasticity specifications in
Table 2 to compare our baseline specification estimates with the results under the speci-
fications of Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal (2016) and Novy (2013) along with other varia-
tions. The results under their specifications run on our data are similar to their results,
  34 In   the Tobit model, the adjustment factor of the coefficient is (xb/).
  35 See   Heckman (1979) for detailed explanations of the inverse Mills ratio.


                                                       21
                          Table 2: AI Gravity Estimation: Specifications

                                     (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)
    Import share per firm
    Distance                      -1.158      -0.038         -1.158     -0.041      -0.037       -0.043
                                   (0.026)     (0.010)        (0.026)    (0.009)     (0.010)      (0.009)

    Distance × Income ex          0.128                      0.128
                                   (0.003)                    (0.003)

    Entry cost                    -5.805      -0.316         -5.805     -0.353
                                   (0.893)     (0.098)        (0.893)    (0.096)

    Entry cost × Income ex        0.550                      0.550
                                   (0.088)                    (0.088)

    Income im × Income ex           0.017       0.004                                0.006
                                   (0.021)      (0.002)                              (0.002)

    Internal                      2.829        3.024         2.829      3.000        3.038       3.003
                                   (0.080)      (0.095)       (0.080)    (0.094)      (0.095)     (0.094)
    Observations                    5625         5625          5625       5625         5625        5625
    R-squared                       0.576        0.352         0.576      0.352        0.351       0.350
 Notes: Table reports the estimates of the AI gravity in equation (32) with different specifications. Estimated
exporter- and importer-specific fixed effects are dropped. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance
* .10, ** .05, *** .01.




                                                        22
assuring that our differences are due to specification rather than data. Column (1) is our
baseline result for equation (32). In column (2), we drop the elasticity heterogeneity term
measured by the interaction with exporter income, yielding a distance elasticity equal to
-0.038.36 The coefficients on distance and its interaction with exporter income are robust
for the translog model in which the non-homothetic term is dropped as shown in column
(3). When we further shut down the elasticity heterogeneity, as shown in column (4), all
coefficients remain significant with intuitive signs.
    We check our results with Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal (2016) by keeping the distance
and non-homothetic terms as shown in column (5), and with Novy (2013) by keeping only
distance as shown in the last column. The coefficients of distance are robust compared
with column (2). The coefficient of the income interaction term in column (5) is 0.006 and
significant, very close to the 0.0057 in Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal (2016), despite the
different sample used in our paper. The biggest difference between our paper and Fajgel-
baum and Khandelwal (2016) is the interaction term of distance and exporter's income.
Column (1) and (2) show that the distance elasticity heterogeneity in our model makes
the income effect heterogeneity less significant. In contrast, Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal
(2016) focus by assumption solely on the income effect heterogeneity.


4.3    Sectoral Results
We report AI gravity estimates by sectors in row (2)-(26) of Table 3. For reference, the
aggregate estimation results are reported again in row (1), equal to column (1) in Table
1. The sectors are sorted in descending order by the coefficient of the interaction term of
distance and exporter income. Overall, the disaggregated AI gravity model works well.
The coefficients of the variables are, in most cases, significant and the estimates vary
across sectors in a sensible way.
    First, distance is a large impediment to sectoral trade: all estimated distance coeffi-
cients are negative and statistically significant. Distance elasticities vary greatly across
sectors, consistently with variation in value to weight and the physical requirements of
transportation. All the coefficients of the interaction term of distance and exporter income
are significantly positive, implying that the distance elasticity heterogeneity is common
across all sectors. Products produced by richer exporters are less distance elastic. The
coefficients of this interaction term are different in magnitude, which suggests different
sizes of the distance elasticity dispersion. The largest value of this coefficient is 0.27 and
  36 The estimate of the distance elasticity is -0.025 in Novy (2013) and -0.043 in Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal

(2016). Our result is in between.



                                                    23
                              Table 3: AI Gravity Estimation by Sector

 Import share per firm    Distance    Distance    Entry cost   Entry cost    Inc im     Internal   Obs.    R-sq.
                                      ×Inc ex                   ×Inc ex      ×Inc ex
  (1)   Aggregate          -1.16***    0.13***      -5.81***    0.55***        0.02      2.83***   5625    0.58
                            (0.03)      (0.00)       (0.89)      (0.09)       (0.02)      (0.08)

  (2)   Furniture          -2.59***    0.27***     -31.60***     3.04***      0.13**     4.44***   5625    0.34
                            (0.06)      (0.01)        (3.28)      (0.32)      (0.06)      (0.20)
  (3)   Beverages          -2.48***    0.26***     -18.46***     1.77***       0.05      3.65***   5625    0.34
                            (0.06)      (0.01)        (2.77)      (0.27)      (0.05)      (0.18)
  (4)   Tobacco            -2.73***    0.25***     -17.60***     1.65***       0.09      0.98***   5625    0.35
                            (0.08)      (0.01)        (4.44)      (0.43)      (0.08)      (0.25)
  (5)   NonMetal           -2.10***    0.22***     -10.45***     1.01***       0.02      3.35***   5625    0.32
                            (0.06)      (0.01)        (2.57)      (0.25)      (0.05)      (0.18)
  (6)   Petroleum          -2.26***    0.22***     -13.76***     1.32***       -0.01     1.30***   5625    0.29
                            (0.07)      (0.01)        (3.31)      (0.32)      (0.06)      (0.20)
  (7)   Leather            -1.72***    0.18***     -16.55***     1.61***      0.12***    1.61***   5625    0.27
                            (0.05)      (0.01)        (2.35)      (0.23)      (0.05)      (0.16)
  (8)   Food               -1.67***    0.18***      -9.34***     0.88***       0.01      3.73***   5625    0.36
                            (0.04)      (0.00)        (1.61)      (0.16)      (0.04)      (0.13)
  (9)   Plastic            -1.60***    0.17***     -12.30***     1.18***       0.04      2.34***   5625    0.34
                            (0.04)      (0.00)        (1.76)      (0.17)      (0.04)      (0.13)
 (10)   NfMetals           -1.59***    0.16***     -33.16***     3.20***      0.10***    1.28***   5625    0.35
                            (0.04)      (0.00)        (2.34)      (0.23)      (0.04)      (0.13)
 (11)   Printing           -1.35***    0.14***      -6.61***     0.62***       -0.05     3.77***   5625    0.37
                            (0.04)      (0.00)        (1.65)      (0.16)      (0.04)      (0.13)
 (12)   Wood               -1.36***    0.14***     -11.53***     1.11***       0.04      1.94***   5625    0.49
                            (0.03)      (0.00)        (1.65)      (0.16)      (0.03)      (0.10)
 (13)   Glass              -1.40***    0.14***     -20.69***     1.99***      0.14***    2.17***   5625    0.37
                            (0.04)      (0.00)        (2.01)      (0.19)      (0.04)      (0.13)
 (14)   Transport          -1.08***    0.12***     -16.14***     1.55***      0.07***    1.63***   5625    0.63
                            (0.02)      (0.00)        (1.06)      (0.10)      (0.02)      (0.07)
 (15)   Footwear           -1.15***    0.12***      -4.49***     0.44***       -0.00     1.09***   5625    0.40
                            (0.03)      (0.00)        (1.60)      (0.16)      (0.03)      (0.11)
 (16)   Apparel            -1.13***    0.12***     -10.55***     1.03***      0.06***    1.87***   5625    0.60
                            (0.02)      (0.00)        (1.03)      (0.10)      (0.02)      (0.08)
 (17)   Paper              -1.04***    0.11***      -4.74***     0.46***       0.04*     1.45***   5625    0.50
                            (0.03)      (0.00)        (1.17)      (0.11)      (0.02)      (0.09)
 (18)   IronSteel          -1.01***    0.10***     -17.75***     1.70***       0.03      1.72***   5625    0.42
                            (0.03)      (0.00)        (1.77)      (0.17)      (0.03)      (0.10)
 (19)   OthChem            -0.97***    0.10***         -1.07       0.10        -0.01     1.45***   5625    0.69
                            (0.02)      (0.00)        (0.80)      (0.08)      (0.02)      (0.07)
 (20)   ProfSci            -0.82***    0.09***       -2.78**     0.26**        -0.02     1.23***   5625    0.32
                            (0.03)      (0.00)        (1.25)      (0.12)      (0.03)      (0.10)
 (21)   Textiles           -0.90***    0.09***     -12.91***     1.25***       0.01      1.69***   5625    0.57
                            (0.02)      (0.00)        (1.02)      (0.10)      (0.02)      (0.07)
 (22)   Electrics          -0.67***    0.07***        -1.89*       0.17        0.02      1.32***   5625    0.28
                            (0.03)      (0.00)        (1.13)      (0.11)      (0.03)      (0.10)
 (23)   IndChem            -0.58***    0.06***      -9.31***     0.89***      0.05***    1.59***   5625    0.57
                            (0.02)      (0.00)        (1.02)      (0.10)      (0.02)      (0.07)
 (24)   Machines           -0.57***    0.06***      -9.89***     0.96***      0.08***    0.95***   5625    0.57
                            (0.02)      (0.00)        (0.83)      (0.08)      (0.02)      (0.07)
 (25)   MetalProd          -0.61***    0.06***       -2.02**     0.18**       0.05**     1.77***   5625    0.55
                            (0.02)      (0.00)        (0.90)      (0.09)      (0.02)      (0.07)
 (26)   Rubber             -0.66***    0.06***      -3.86***     0.36***      0.08***    1.24***   5625    0.39
                            (0.03)      (0.00)        (1.23)      (0.12)      (0.02)      (0.09)
 Notes: Table reports the estimates of the sectoral AI gravity in equation (34). Estimated exporter- and importer-
specific fixed effects are dropped. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance * .10, ** .05, *** .01.
                                                      24
is almost five times as large as the smallest value, 0.06, which implies a big difference
in the price elasticity dispersion among sectors. Furniture, beverage, and tobacco prod-
ucts are the three sectors with the biggest distance elasticity heterogeneity, while rubber,
metals, and machinery are among the sectors with the smallest distance elasticity disper-
sion. This is intuitive because products in the former sectors are more differentiated than
those in the latter sectors. Second, most of the coefficients of the interaction term of entry
cost and exporter income are significantly positive, implying that the fixed cost elasticity
heterogeneity is also common across all sectors. Third, most estimated coefficients of the
income interaction term are positive, but only eleven of them are significant. This sug-
gests that the non-homothetic effect is weak in most sectors. Significant non-homothetic
income effects are found in sectors like glass and furniture products. In these sectors,
richer countries are more likely to export high-quality goods and also more likely to im-
port high-quality goods. Last, international borders reduce trade, all else equal. All the
estimates of the coefficients on internal (the dummy variable capturing border effect) are
positive, large, and significant at any level. Furniture, printing, food, and beverage prod-
ucts are the sectors with the highest internal estimate, while machines and tobacco are
the ones with the lowest estimate. This is intuitive because the other unobserved trade
barriers, like consumer tastes, play an important role in the former sectors while are weak
in the latter.


5     Zeros and the Roles of Variable and Fixed Costs
In this section, we use the estimation results from Section 4 to quantify the roles of vari-
able and fixed costs in causing international zero trade flows. Section 5.1 constructs a
hypothetical negative trade variable that measures how far from trade a non-partner rela-
tionship is. In Section 5.2, we decompose the variation in the hypothetical trade measure
into a variable cost component, a fixed cost component, and an income effect component.


5.1   Latent Trade
How can we understand the latent value of bilateral trade censored at zero in the setting
of our model? A diagram illustrates the micro-structure of this unobservable negative
value.
   Recall that demand qij (z) for good z from i sold in j is implied as a decreasing function




                                             25
                                         pij




                                  ~ ij
                                  p


                                                                                     S( pij)




                                                                   virtual subsidy
                                   c
                                  pij
                                                                                               ~ ( pij)
                                                                                               D
                                   v
                                  pij
                                             virtual quantity
                                    g
                                  pij
                                                                                                          D( pij)
                                                                                                                    qij
                          *
                         qij             0                  ~ ij
                                                            q                            
                                                                                        qij
                                 latent resistance

                                                   LTBij Ej / pij




                                                                  )
                                         Figure 3: Latent Trade (qij


D ( pij ) of pij by equation (9), i.e.,37

                  pij (z)qij (z)/e j = i -  i ln(µi wi tij / p
                                                             ¯ j ) + i ln r j +  i ln z.                                  (35)

The break-even-condition for good z is determined by the quantity qij (z) at which average
cost equals price:
                              pij (z) = wi tij /z + Fij /qij (z).                      (36)

Denote the break-even quantity as S( pij ). Figure 3 plots D ( pij ) against S( pij ). pij  c is the

choke price. Since D ( pij ) for the firm with the highest productivity draw z is everywhere
below the break-even condition supply S( pij ), no trade occurs. A hypothetical larger mar-
ket D ( pij ) for the highest productivity firm is tangent to the break-even-condition supply
curve and generates the minimal level of quantity demanded q        ~ij that initiates trade.
   One way to induce the buyer to consume the break-even quantity q                ~ij is to offer a
  37 Notez is the productivity of firm z. Firms from the same origins charge the same markup before
drawing productivities.




                                                                   26
buyer's price pij      v , the virtual price.38 Trade occurs with a subsidy to the buyer equal to

p~ ij - pijv , the virtual subsidy. An alternative hypothetical way to induce trade is central to

this paper. Endow the buyer with the hypothetical quantity equal to q                                 (also equal
                                                                                              ~ij - qij
to q  ~ij + |qij |). We use this distance from the negative value to the break-even demand to

measure how far from break-even is the implied demand, i.e., how far from occurring is
the trade. We term this distance latent resistance. In the negative region, the consumer
would hypothetically sell the product if she or he has inventory. If the consumer owned
the full amount q                 to enable consumption q
                          ~ij - qij                                ~ij , the amount |qij  | is sold in the world

market at price p       ~ ij and the remainder is consumed in the amount q             ~ij . The latent resistance
q~ij - qij is welfare equivalent to the virtual subsidy p                      v .39 One plausible way to make
                                                                       ~ ij - pij
the virtual variables actual is as follows. The government buys the amount q                                 from
                                                                                                     ~ij - qij
the world market at the break-even price. It resells the amount |qij                     | on the world market

at that price, while sells the amount q                ~ij on the domestic market at the virtual price pij      v.

The net loss is ( p             v )q
                        ~ ij - pij   ~ij , just as in the virtual subsidy case where the virtual subsidy is
implemented.
                                                                                                           g
      The final step to our application is based on hypothetical frictionless trade. pij is the
factory gate price and q           ^ij is the frictionless level quantity when all trade costs are zero.
The distance from the (negative) quantity qij                 associated with the break-even-price to the

quantity q      ^ij for the frictionless price is the latent quantity bias. Since the trade share is
our econometric variable of interest, we further define Latent Trade Bias in terms of the
expenditure share of the latent quantity bias of the product. Specifically,

                                                                
                                                     ^ij (z) - qij
                                 LTBij (z) = pij (z)(q             (z))/ Ej ,                                (37)

where qij ( z ), the latent value of quantity demand, is negative. We use this full distance to

measure how far from frictionless is the implied demand, i.e., how far from the maximum
is the trade of product z. This trade bias definition has the advantage of applying equally
to positive trade flows, for which predicted latent trade qij (z) in equation (37) is replaced
by the predicted positive value of trade. LTB captures the effects of trade costs, as well as
the effects of price elasticity  i and income elasticity i .
  38 The  virtual price developed by Neary and Roberts (1980) is the price that would induce an initially
unconstrained consumer to demand the level of a good when under quantity control (rationing).
  39 Virtual quantity in the literature, e.g., Neary (1985) and Squires (2016), is the quantity of a good that the

initially quantity-constrained consumer would demand once unconstrained, given that quantity control's
market or accounting price. It is q ~ij on the diagram. Latent resistance in our paper is distinct.




                                                       27
5.2       Latent Trade Bias Decomposition
This section quantitatively projects the latent trade bias associated with zeros and per-
forms a variance decomposition to measure the extent to which zero trade flows are ex-
plained by variable cost, fixed cost, and income effect respectively.40
      Equation (37) implies that the latent trade bias of a product could be expressed as
the difference between the frictionless ( pij (z)q^ij (z)/ Ej ) and the latent expenditure shares
          
( pij (z)qij (z)/ Ej ). Using the estimated model we measure the aggregate latent trade bias
(LTB) as
                                             Y
                                      LTBij  i / Ni - Sij / Ni ,                             (38)
                                              Y
where Sij is the latent trade share when the actual trade share is zero, i.e., the latent value
of trade share in the Tobit regression. The LTB can be predicted by the AI gravity equation
(20) with all the gravity parameters estimated by the Tobit regression in equation (32), i.e.

                                                  Yi        ^ij / Ni .
                                      LTBij =        / Ni - S                                         (39)
                                                  Y

An advantage of the AI gravity equation (20) is that the LTB can be decomposed into three
effects
                                    tij
                   LTBij = i ln(           )+^ ( f ij - ^ i ) -             ^ ),
                                                               ^ i ln(r j / R        (40)
                                              i
                                   ^ iP ^j
                                                             f            r
                                                                         Xij
                                         t
                                                           Xij
                                        Xij

                              f
                       t , X , and X r are the effects of variable cost, fixed cost, and income.
where components Xij        ij       ij
All of them can be computed with the parameters estimated. Then we can decompose the
LTB variation across country pairs into three margins by the regression method following
the literature.41 Specifically, we regress each component in equation (40) on the LTB and
estimate the simultaneous equations

                                           t                     t
                                          Xij = t LTBij +        ij ,                                 (41)

                                              f                  f
                                         Xij =  f LTBij +        ij ,                                 (42)
                                           r                     r
                                          Xij = r LTBij +        ij ,                                 (43)
  40 We   also add a complementary analysis of how decreases in trade costs raise the chance of trade rela-
tionships with the reduced-form Tobit estimates (see Appendix Section C).
   41 See Eaton et al. (2004), Hottman et al. (2016), and Bernard et al. (2019).




                                                    28
with the constraint
                                         t +  f + r = 1.                                          (44)

By the properties of OLS, the coefficients t ,  f , and r provide us with a measure of
how much of the variation in the LTB can be attributed to the effect of variable cost, fixed
cost, and income, respectively. This helps us to identify which of the components is the
more important one to cause non-partner relationships. Replacing the aggregate LTB and
its three components with the corresponding sectoral variables, we can determine the
variance decomposition for each sector.
    The results are reported in Table 4. Row (1) shows the LTB decomposition for the
aggregate trade. Variable cost (distance) explains 53%, fixed cost (entry cost) explains
24%, and income effect explains 23% of the zero flows. We report the results by sectors in
row (2)-(26). The coefficients in all sectors are significantly positive and between zero and
one. On average, variable cost explains 52%, Fixed cost explains 24%, and income effect
explains 24% of the zero flows.
    We find that the variable cost effect is larger than both fixed cost effect and income
effect for all sectors except machines. Variable cost is strongest in affecting zeros in the
other chemical, tobacco and petroleum sectors, and is weakest in the machine, rubber,
and chemical sectors. Fixed cost impedes the occurrence of trade most in the iron steel
and textile sectors, and least in the apparel and other chemical sectors. The income effect
is the strongest in affecting zeros in the machinery and rubber sectors, and is weakest in
the iron steel and non-ferrous metal sectors. The possible reason is that products in the
former sectors are mainly exported from rich countries (e.g., machinery from Japan) and
the zero flows are usually by poor importers. In contrast, the products in the latter sectors
are produced by countries with all income levels and thus the income effect is limited for
the zero flows.


6      Counterfactuals
The extensive margin effects of export promoting counterfactual reductions of trade costs
are measured by the proportions of zeros that turn positive.42 There are two sets of pro-
motion policies. One is proportional to the export volume and acts as a negative variable
cost, e.g., subsidy, tax and financial benefits, duty drawback, export insurance, and ex-
    42 We
        focus on the extensive margin change with the AIDS structure. See Novy (2013) for discussion on
the intensive margin changes with the translog gravity.




                                                  29
Table 4: Latent Trade Bias Decomposition

 Latent trade bias   Distance   Entry cost   Income
  (1) Aggregate      0.533***    0.237***    0.230***
                      (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)

  (2)   OthChem      0.641***    0.182***    0.177***
                      (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
  (3)   Tobacco      0.634***    0.196***    0.170***
                      (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
  (4)   Petroleum    0.615***    0.218***    0.167***
                      (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
  (5)   Footwear     0.595***    0.215***    0.190***
                      (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
  (6)   NonMetal     0.581***    0.225***    0.194***
                      (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
  (7)   Beverages    0.577***    0.237***    0.186***
                      (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
  (8)   Paper        0.576***    0.191***    0.233***
                      (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
  (9)   Plastic      0.561***    0.234***    0.205***
                      (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
 (10)   Wood         0.553***    0.235***    0.212***
                      (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
 (11)   Apparel      0.542***    0.176***    0.282***
                      (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
 (12)   Food         0.540***    0.244***    0.216***
                      (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
 (13)   Textiles     0.519***    0.312***    0.169***
                      (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
 (14)   Furniture    0.512***    0.247***    0.241***
                      (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
 (15)   Printing     0.503***    0.262***    0.235***
                      (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
 (16)   IronSteel    0.501***    0.335***    0.163***
                      (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
 (17)   Leather      0.500***    0.210***    0.291***
                      (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
 (18)   ProfSci      0.496***    0.261***    0.243***
                      (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
 (19)   Transport    0.491***    0.253***    0.256***
                      (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.01)
 (20)   NfMetals     0.475***    0.362***    0.163***
                      (0.00)      (0.01)      (0.00)
 (21)   MetalProd    0.462***    0.202***    0.336***
                      (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
 (22)   Electrics    0.462***    0.263***    0.276***
                      (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
 (23)   Glass        0.450***    0.217***    0.333***
                      (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.01)
 (24)   IndChem      0.439***    0.263***    0.298***
                      (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
 (25)   Rubber       0.430***    0.199***    0.371***
                      (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
 (26)   Machines     0.375***    0.185***    0.440***
                      (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.01)

        Mean           .521        .237       .242
        St. d.         .067        .046       .072
 Notes: Table reports the latent trade bias decompo-
sition by estimating equation system (41)-(43) with
constraint (44). Robust standard errors in paren-
theses. Significance * .10, ** .05, *** .01.


                         30
change rate management.43 The other set works as a negative fixed cost, e.g., providing
information, facilitating links, helping with licensing and regulation requirements, and
negotiating bilateral fair treatment in the application of regulations. The estimated model
permits measurement of the effects of the two types of promotion policies on zero trade
flows.
   First of all, we calculate the latent values of the trade shares with zero flows by the AI
gravity equation (20), i.e.,

                              Yi               tij
                 Sij / Ni =      / Ni - i ln(         )-^ ( f ij - ^ i) +              ^ ),
                                                                          ^ i ln(r j / R               (45)
                                                         i
                              Y               ^ iP ^j

and then check the signs of those values. If a latent value is negative, the corresponding
country pair is predicted as a zero relationship. The majority of the zero relationships are
successfully predicted by our model (See Appendix Figure B.5).
     In addition, the latent trade measured by the predicted latent value of trade share
implies how far the current relationship is from trade. For example, The U.K. does not
export tobacco to Lithuania, but the absolute value of the latent trade is much smaller
than to other markets, suggesting that the U.K.'s potential tobacco export to Lithuania is
closer becoming actual than with other potential partners (See Appendix Figure B.6 for
more examples).
     Now we turn to our first question, namely, what proportion of zeros turn positive if
we reduce the bilateral cost by 10%, 50%, and 100%, respectively? The answer to this
question is important because it tells us the effectiveness of the promotion policy, i.e.,
the probability of building a new relationship given a country pair not trading with each
other yet. Specifically, for any zero flow, we calculate the bilateral cost direct effect as
well as its indirect effect(s) through the multilateral resistance(s). According to equations
(21) and (23), when country i reduces trade cost to partner j by  ln t, ln i decreases by
( Ej /Y ) ln t, and ln Pj decreases by Ni  i (1 - Ej /Y ) ln t. 44 Then we predict the new
latent value of the trade share of that country pair using the AI gravity equation (20). If
the predicted latent share becomes positive, the country pair switches to trade (zero-to-
one transition). If the predicted latent share remains negative, the flow remains zero.
     Table 5 reports the proportions of zero to positive trade flow transitions for all sectors.
All numbers are positive, which implies cutting trade cost decreases the number of zeros
in sectoral trade. On average, zeros in sectoral trade decrease by 80% due to variable trade
  43 Most of this set of policies are not permissible under WTO rules with some exceptions, e.g., improving
the transportation infrastructure to reduce freight costs or managing exchange rates.
  44 The indirect effects are usually limited because the weights on the bilateral costs, the importer's GDP

shares, are usually very small. See equations (21) and (23).

                                                     31
Table 5: Zero-to-One Transitions from Reducing Bilateral Costs

                           reducing VC by        reducing FC by

                          10%    50%    100%   10%    50%    100%

        (1)   Footwear    0.78   0.99   1.00   0.29   0.31   0.36

        (2)   OthChem     0.76   0.98   0.99   0.25   0.27   0.35

        (3)   Petroleum   0.78   0.98   0.98   0.33   0.35   0.42

        (4)   NonMetal    0.50   0.81   0.96   0.15   0.17   0.21

        (5)   Food        0.42   0.78   0.95   0.11   0.14   0.22

        (6)   ProfSci     0.55   0.89   0.95   0.19   0.24   0.37

        (7)   Tobacco     0.61   0.84   0.90   0.24   0.26   0.30

        (8)   Electrics   0.61   0.83   0.86   0.26   0.28   0.35

        (9)   Printing    0.49   0.81   0.86   0.16   0.18   0.37

       (10)   Textiles    0.31   0.69   0.85   0.10   0.12   0.25

       (11)   MetalProd   0.57   0.76   0.78   0.36   0.39   0.42

       (12)   Wood        0.45   0.69   0.78   0.15   0.19   0.25

       (13)   Machines    0.49   0.69   0.78   0.36   0.43   0.55

       (14)   Rubber      0.54   0.73   0.75   0.33   0.36   0.40

       (15)   Paper       0.51   0.70   0.74   0.19   0.22   0.27

       (16)   IronSteel   0.39   0.69   0.74   0.12   0.15   0.25

       (17)   Transport   0.42   0.63   0.70   0.20   0.26   0.41

       (18)   Beverages   0.43   0.65   0.70   0.13   0.16   0.21

       (19)   IndChem     0.36   0.59   0.69   0.18   0.24   0.36

       (20)   Plastic     0.40   0.65   0.69   0.14   0.17   0.25

       (21)   Glass       0.40   0.60   0.67   0.24   0.28   0.35

       (22)   Leather     0.44   0.61   0.66   0.25   0.29   0.37

       (23)   NfMetals    0.36   0.58   0.65   0.15   0.18   0.31

       (24)   Apparel     0.42   0.60   0.65   0.24   0.30   0.39

       (25)   Furniture   0.40   0.58   0.64   0.18   0.24   0.33



              Mean        0.50   0.73   0.80   0.21   0.25   0.33

              St. d.      0.13   0.13   0.12   0.08   0.08   0.08

      Notes: Table reports the decrease (%) in number of zeros if
      bilateral trade costs are reduced.

                                   32
cost (VC) elimination, while by 33% only due to fixed trade cost (FC) elimination. Similar
patterns are found for 10% and 50% trade cost cut. The greater the trade cost cut is, the
more zero-to-one transitions we get. Furthermore, the return in terms of building new
trading partners is increasing faster for VC cut than FC cut. Comparison of the results for
10%, 50%, and 100% shows that the marginal return of VC cut is decreasing. Lastly, elim-
inating VC reduces the trade zeros most in footwear and other chemical sectors, while
least in furniture and apparel sectors. Eliminating FC reduces the trade zeros most in ma-
chinery, metal and petroleum sectors, while least in the beverage and non-metal sectors.
But the effects of FC cut are less dispersed than those of VC cut. More importantly, the de-
creases in zero trade frequency due to VC cut are larger than due to FC cut for all sectors,
implying that variable cost is more important than fixed cost in trade policy adjustments
aiming to encourage the occurrence of trade.
    There are different effects across exporters with different trade (price) elasticities. In-
tuitively, rich exporters export more inelastic products and thus are less affected by VC
cut, while poor exporters increase their (latent) trade shares a lot. Specifically, we divide
all exporters into two groups in terms of their GDP per capita and check the difference
across groups. Table 6 reports the zero-to-one transitions resulting from reducing bilat-
eral variable costs by 10%. The first and the last three columns outline the transitions
for poorer and richer exporters, respectively. On average, a poor exporter has 33 non-
partners out of 74. A rich exporter has 11 non-partners out of 74.45 The effect of a VC
(FC) cut is much larger for poor exporters than for rich exporters. The reason is that the
demand is more sensitive to the price change of price-elastic products produced by poor
exporters and thus the effect of VC (FC) cut for poor exporters is stronger.
    Individual cases of export promotion on the extensive margin are exemplified by our
headline case of Ethiopia's potential export of leather goods.46 The 10% cut in the variable
(fixed) cost produces 39 (21) new markets. The new partners are countries with middle to
high per capita incomes, e.g., Norway and Poland in Europe, and Canada and Mexico in
North America (See Table 7). For more context, The leather sector is explored in bilateral
detail as an example in Appendix Figure B.7-B.8.
    Now we turn to our second question, which is: what proportion of zeros turn positive
if exporters unilaterally reduce trade cost by 10%, 50%, and 100%, respectively? The
answer to this question is important because it indicates the effectiveness of the unilateral
  45 Thereare 75 countries in our sample and thus each exporter has 74 partners at most.
  46 Ethiopia in 2006 enjoyed robust GDP and trade growth in excess of 10%.   Its external trade goes through
the important port of neighbor Djibouti. Ethiopia was at peace with neighboring Eritrea but in conflict
with neighboring Somalia and also suffered from civil conflict internally. Its robust trade and GDP growth
suggest no effect of conflict on the extensive margin of trade.


                                                     33
Table 6: Zero-to-One Transitions with 10% Decrease in Bilateral Costs: by Income Groups

                                    poor exporter                               rich exporter

                       # of zeros   reducing VC     reducing FC   # of zeros   reducing VC      reducing FC

     (1)   Machines        21          0.71            0.53           3            0.02            0.00

     (2)   Electrics       21          0.85            0.38           3            0.06            0.00

     (3)   Textiles        21          0.52            0.13           6            0.11            0.07

     (4)   Food            22          0.74            0.19           6            0.05            0.02

     (5)   MetalProd       23          0.92            0.59           5            0.03            0.00

     (6)   Apparel         24          0.81            0.46           9            0.02            0.01

     (7)   OthChem         27          0.89            0.22           5            0.58            0.29

     (8)   Transport       28          0.69            0.34           6            0.02            0.00

     (9)   ProfSci         29          0.72            0.22           5            0.30            0.15

    (10)   Plastic         29          0.71            0.25           6            0.03            0.01

    (11)   Printing        29          0.64            0.15           6            0.27            0.17

    (12)   IndChem         30          0.64            0.32           7            0.04            0.02

    (13)   Leather         34          0.81            0.47          13            0.05            0.02

    (14)   Paper           35          0.89            0.34           8            0.08            0.02

    (15)   Rubber          37          0.90            0.57           8            0.07            0.03

    (16)   Footwear        38          0.83            0.24          18            0.72            0.33

    (17)   Glass           39          0.75            0.44          11            0.05            0.02

    (18)   Furniture       39          0.75            0.35          19            0.05            0.02

    (19)   IronSteel       39          0.63            0.18          13            0.14            0.07

    (20)   NfMetals        40          0.64            0.25          14            0.08            0.04

    (21)   NonMetal        40          0.80            0.23          13            0.20            0.07

    (22)   Wood            40          0.82            0.30          15            0.09            0.01

    (23)   Beverages       41          0.77            0.23          14            0.09            0.03

    (24)   Petroleum       49          0.84            0.20          21            0.72            0.45

    (25)   Tobacco         60          0.89            0.33          40            0.34            0.15



           Mean            33          0.77            0.32          11            0.17            0.08

           St. d.          10          0.10            0.13           8            0.21            0.12

    Notes: Table reports the decrease (%) in number of zeros of different types of exporters if bilateral
   trade costs are reduced by 10%.

                                                     34
Table 7: Ethiopia's New Markets of Leather Export with Trade Cost Reductions

                 Ethiopia's new markets with 10% cut in
                 variable cost                            fixed cost
                 Albania                                  Armenia
                 Armenia                                  Austria
                 Austria                                  Brazil
                 Azerbaijan                               Bulgaria
                 Brazil                                   Canada
                 Bulgaria                                 Chile
                 Canada                                   Jordan
                 Chile                                    Kazakstan
                 Colombia                                 Kyrgyzstan
                 Ecuador                                  Madagascar
                 Estonia                                  Mexico
                 Iceland                                  Moldova
                 Ireland                                  Mongolia
                 Jordan                                   New Zealand
                 Kazakstan                                Niger
                 Kyrgyzstan                               Norway
                 Latvia                                   Poland
                 Lithuania                                Portugal
                 Macedonia                                Tanzania
                 Madagascar                               Tunisia
                 Mexico                                   Yemen
                 Moldova
                 Mongolia
                 Morocco
                 New Zealand
                 Niger
                 Nigeria
                 Norway
                 Peru
                 Poland
                 Portugal
                 Slovenia
                 Sri Lanka
                 Tajikistan
                 Tanzania
                 Tunisia
                 Uruguay
                 Viet Nam
                 Yemen
                Notes: Table reports Ethiopia's new markets of leather
                export with trade cost reductions.




                                          35
Table 8: Zero-to-One Transitions from Reducing Unilateral Costs

                            reducing VC by        reducing FC by

                           10%    50%    100%   10%    50%    100%

         (1)   Footwear    0.29   0.34   0.55   0.29   0.31   0.34

         (2)   Petroleum   0.33   0.34   0.46   0.33   0.35   0.41

         (3)   MetalProd   0.36   0.40   0.46   0.36   0.39   0.42

         (4)   Electrics   0.26   0.33   0.44   0.26   0.28   0.35

         (5)   OthChem     0.25   0.27   0.43   0.25   0.27   0.34

         (6)   Machines    0.34   0.37   0.39   0.36   0.43   0.54

         (7)   Rubber      0.33   0.35   0.37   0.33   0.36   0.40

         (8)   Tobacco     0.24   0.25   0.33   0.24   0.26   0.29

         (9)   Leather     0.24   0.28   0.31   0.25   0.28   0.35

        (10)   Apparel     0.24   0.28   0.31   0.24   0.30   0.38

        (11)   Paper       0.19   0.23   0.30   0.19   0.22   0.27

        (12)   Glass       0.23   0.25   0.26   0.23   0.28   0.34

        (13)   Furniture   0.18   0.21   0.26   0.18   0.24   0.33

        (14)   Transport   0.20   0.24   0.26   0.20   0.26   0.40

        (15)   Wood        0.14   0.17   0.25   0.15   0.18   0.25

        (16)   Beverages   0.12   0.14   0.25   0.13   0.15   0.20

        (17)   Food        0.12   0.12   0.22   0.11   0.13   0.21

        (18)   NonMetal    0.14   0.14   0.21   0.15   0.17   0.20

        (19)   IndChem     0.18   0.19   0.21   0.18   0.23   0.35

        (20)   Plastic     0.13   0.15   0.19   0.14   0.17   0.25

        (21)   NfMetals    0.14   0.17   0.19   0.15   0.18   0.30

        (22)   Printing    0.15   0.14   0.19   0.16   0.18   0.34

        (23)   ProfSci     0.19   0.18   0.18   0.19   0.24   0.35

        (24)   IronSteel   0.12   0.12   0.16   0.12   0.15   0.23

        (25)   Textiles    0.10   0.09   0.12   0.10   0.12   0.21



               Mean        0.21   0.23   0.29   0.21   0.24   0.32

               St. d.      0.08   0.09   0.11   0.08   0.08   0.08

       Notes: Table reports the decrease (%) in number of zeros if
       unilateral trade costs are reduced.

                                    36
promotion policy, i.e., the probability of building new relationships given an exporter.
Appendix Table B.2 reports the number of non-partners for each exporter in each sector.
Specifically, for any zero flow, we calculate the bilateral cost direct effect as well as its
indirect effect(s) through the multilateral resistance(s). According to equations (21) and
(23), when country i reduces trade cost to all its partners by  ln t, ln i decreases by  ln t
too, and ln Pj does not change. The indirect effects are also important because multilateral
resistances change at the same speed as trade costs do. We predict the new latent value of
any trade share of that exporter using the AI gravity equation (20). If the predicted latent
share becomes positive, the destination country becomes a trading partner (a zero-to-one
transition). If the predicted latent share remains negative, the flow remains zero.
    The results are reported in Table 8. On average, zeros in sectoral trade decrease by 29%
due to VC elimination, and 32% due to FC elimination. No differences between variable
and fixed cost reductions are found in the case of a 10% cut, and little difference is found
for a 50% or a 100% cut. Furthermore, the return in terms of building new trading partners
is increasing slowly in the case of both VC cut and FC cut. Lastly, cutting VC unilaterally
reduces the trade zeros most in the footwear, metal and petroleum sectors, while least in
the textile and iron steel sectors. Cutting FC unilaterally reduces the trade zeros most in
the machinery, metal and petroleum sectors, while least in the beverage, food and textile
sectors. The dispersion of the effects of the VC cuts is larger than that of the FC cuts.


7     Robustness
In this section, we demonstrate the robustness of our baseline estimates in Section 4 to
alternative measures of the number of goods in Section 7.1, and to an alternative measure
of fixed costs in Section 7.2.


7.1   Alternative Measure of the Number of Goods
Our baseline estimation results are reasonably robust with changes in the particular mea-
sure of the number of goods Ni . We replace the extensive margin in the baseline estima-
tion with two alternative variables. The first one is the total number of firms for each
country sourced from CEPII, and the second one is the log GDP for each country. We nor-
malize each variable by dividing the sum across all countries to obtain a share measure.
    The results, together with our baseline estimates, are reported in Table 9. In column
(2), we use the number of firms to replace the extensive margin. The coefficient of distance
is significantly negative. The coefficient of the interaction term of distance and exporter


                                             37
              Table 9: Robustness: Alternative Measures of Number of Goods

                                              (1)                     (2)                (3)
         Import share per firm       Ni =Extensive Margin      Ni =No. of Firms     Ni =ln GDP
         Distance                         -1.1585                 -0.6438            -0.5786
                                           (0.0255)                (0.0271)           (0.0236)

         Distance × Income ex               0.1279                 0.0467             0.0412
                                             (0.0028)               (0.0029)           (0.0025)

         Entry cost                         -5.8054                -2.8016            -1.2624
                                             (0.8925)               (0.9317)          (0.8003)

         Entry cost × Income ex             0.5502                 0.2573              0.1020
                                             (0.0881)               (0.0920)          (0.0791)

         Income im × Income ex                0.0169                -0.0225           -0.0050
                                             (0.0214)               (0.0230)          (0.0199)

         Internal                           2.8290                 7.9230             7.9496
                                             (0.0803)               (0.0851)           (0.0740)
         Observations                          5625                   5625               5625
         R-squared                            0.5762                 0.7358             0.8166
      Notes: Table reports the estimates of the AI gravity in equation (32) with alternative measures
      of number of goods. Estimated exporter- and importer-specific fixed effects are dropped.
      Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance * .10, ** .05, *** .01.


income is significantly positive, implying that the distance reduces trade by less for richer
exporters. This suggests that there is a significant price elasticity heterogeneity across ex-
porters. Both coefficients are smaller in magnitude than the baseline results in column (1)
due to less variation in the number of firms compared to the extensive margin measure.
But the price elasticity heterogeneity pattern is consistent. Similar results are obtained
when we use log GDP in column (3). The coefficients of entry cost and its interaction
term are significant in column (2) but not in column (3). The coefficient of the income
interaction term is insignificantly different from zero in the last two regressions. This
suggests that there is little income elasticity heterogeneity across exporters for aggregate
manufacturing trade. The coefficients of the internal trade dummy are also significant,
implying the internal trade share is larger than foreign trade, given all else equal.


7.2   Alternative Measure of Fixed Cost
In this part, we examine another measure for the fixed cost to ensure that the coefficient
patterns in our baseline regression do not hinge on a particular measure.
    In Table 10, we replace entry cost with entry days & proc which is the sum of the num-
ber of days and the number of legal procedures necessary for an entrepreneur to legally

                                                    38
                           Table 10: Robustness: Alternative Fixed Cost

                         Distance   Dist.×Inc ex   Days & proc.   Days & proc.   Inc im×Inc ex   Internal   Obs.
 Import share per firm                ×Inc ex                       ×Inc ex         ×Inc ex
  (1) Aggregate          -1.12***      0.12***       -0.22***       0.03***           0.04*      2.77***    5625
                          (0.03)        (0.00)        (0.02)         (0.00)           (0.02)      (0.08)

  (2)   Beverages        -2.35***     0.25***        -0.61***       0.07***         0.11**       3.53***    5625
                          (0.06)       (0.01)          (0.06)        (0.01)          (0.05)       (0.18)
  (3)   Furniture        -2.42***     0.25***        -0.83***       0.09***         0.18***      4.30***    5625
                          (0.06)       (0.01)          (0.06)        (0.01)          (0.06)       (0.19)
  (4)   Tobacco          -2.64***     0.24***        -0.52***       0.06***          0.13*       0.95***    5625
                          (0.08)       (0.01)          (0.09)        (0.01)          (0.08)       (0.25)
  (5)   Petroleum        -2.28***     0.22***        -0.17***       0.02**            -0.02      1.33***    5625
                          (0.07)       (0.01)          (0.06)        (0.01)          (0.06)       (0.20)
  (6)   NonMetal         -2.05***     0.21***        -0.29***       0.03***           0.03       3.29***    5625
                          (0.06)       (0.01)          (0.05)        (0.01)          (0.05)       (0.18)
  (7)   Leather          -1.68***     0.18***        -0.35***       0.04***         0.13***      1.57***    5625
                          (0.05)       (0.01)          (0.05)        (0.01)          (0.05)       (0.16)
  (8)   Plastic          -1.61***     0.17***        -0.19***       0.02***           0.03       2.35***    5625
                          (0.04)       (0.00)          (0.04)        (0.00)          (0.04)       (0.13)
  (9)   Food             -1.61***     0.17***        -0.31***       0.04***           0.04       3.66***    5625
                          (0.04)       (0.00)          (0.04)        (0.00)          (0.04)       (0.13)
 (10)   NfMetals         -1.55***     0.16***        -0.56***       0.06***         0.09**       1.24***    5625
                          (0.04)       (0.00)          (0.04)        (0.01)          (0.04)       (0.13)
 (11)   Glass            -1.38***     0.14***        -0.34***       0.04***         0.13***      2.14***    5625
                          (0.04)       (0.00)          (0.04)        (0.00)          (0.04)       (0.13)
 (12)   Wood             -1.37***     0.14***        -0.17***       0.02***           0.03       1.96***    5625
                          (0.03)       (0.00)          (0.03)        (0.00)          (0.03)       (0.10)
 (13)   Printing         -1.35***     0.14***          -0.04          0.00          -0.07*       3.77***    5625
                          (0.04)       (0.00)          (0.04)        (0.00)          (0.04)       (0.13)
 (14)   Footwear         -1.16***     0.12***          -0.05          0.01            -0.01      1.11***    5625
                          (0.04)       (0.00)          (0.03)        (0.00)          (0.03)       (0.11)
 (15)   Paper            -1.08***     0.11***           0.00          0.00            0.02       1.49***    5625
                          (0.03)       (0.00)          (0.02)        (0.00)          (0.02)       (0.09)
 (16)   Apparel          -1.07***     0.11***        -0.30***       0.03***         0.08***      1.80***    5625
                          (0.02)       (0.00)          (0.02)        (0.00)          (0.02)       (0.08)
 (17)   OthChem          -0.95***     0.10***        -0.09***       0.01***           0.01       1.43***    5625
                          (0.02)       (0.00)          (0.02)        (0.00)          (0.02)       (0.07)
 (18)   Transport        -0.98***     0.10***        -0.45***       0.05***         0.10***      1.51***    5625
                          (0.02)       (0.00)          (0.02)        (0.00)          (0.02)       (0.07)
 (19)   IronSteel        -0.94***     0.09***        -0.39***       0.04***           0.04       1.64***    5625
                          (0.03)       (0.00)          (0.03)        (0.00)          (0.03)       (0.10)
 (20)   ProfSci          -0.81***     0.09***        -0.10***       0.01***           -0.01      1.22***    5625
                          (0.03)       (0.00)          (0.03)        (0.00)          (0.03)       (0.10)
 (21)   Textiles         -0.80***     0.08***        -0.42***       0.05***         0.04**       1.57***    5625
                          (0.02)       (0.00)          (0.02)        (0.00)          (0.02)       (0.07)
 (22)   Electrics        -0.66***     0.07***         -0.07**       0.01**            0.03       1.30***    5625
                          (0.03)       (0.00)          (0.03)        (0.00)          (0.03)       (0.10)
 (23)   IndChem          -0.56***     0.06***        -0.15***       0.02***         0.05**       1.56***    5625
                          (0.02)       (0.00)          (0.02)        (0.00)          (0.02)       (0.07)
 (24)   MetalProd        -0.63***     0.06***          -0.00          0.00          0.04**       1.80***    5625
                          (0.02)       (0.00)          (0.02)        (0.00)          (0.02)       (0.07)
 (25)   Rubber           -0.64***     0.06***        -0.12***       0.01***         0.09***      1.22***    5625
                          (0.03)       (0.00)          (0.03)        (0.00)          (0.03)       (0.09)
 (26)   Machines         -0.53***     0.05***        -0.28***       0.03***         0.10***      0.88***    5625
                          (0.02)       (0.00)          (0.02)        (0.00)          (0.02)       (0.07)
Notes: Table reports the estimates of the sectoral AI gravity in equation (34) with alternative fixed cost.
Estimated exporter- and importer-specific fixed effects are dropped. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Significance * .10, ** .05, *** .01.
                                                      39
start operating a business.47 It is a nonmonetary measure of fixed cost to supplement the
entry cost, which is a monetary measure. We take an average of these nonmonetary costs
from the exporter and importer sides as the bilateral measure. By construction, entry
days & proc. reflects regulation costs that should not depend on a firm's volume of ex-
ports to a particular country. The purpose of using the alternative fixed cost variable is to
check whether the distance coefficient patterns in Table 3 are driven by the measurement
of fixed costs. We find that the coefficients on distance and its interaction with exporter
income are very similar to the baseline table. This implies that the result regarding the
heterogeneity of the distance elasticity is robust. And the order of the sectoral results
is close to the baseline results also, suggesting that the relative degree of the elasticity
dispersion among sectors is also robust. The coefficients of entry days & proc. and its
interaction term with income are significant for most sectors. The results are robust.


8     Conclusion
This paper applies Almost Ideal Demand System (AIDS) preferences to the firm hetero-
geneity framework and derives an AI gravity equation that explains zero trade flows the-
oretically in a tractable form used for estimation. Latent trade inferred from the estimated
model is used to measure the distance from observed zeros to trade. Heterogeneous price
and income elasticities interact with variable and fixed cost heterogeneity to explain the
zeros. Variance decomposition of distance from trade apportions the relative importance
of fixed and variable cost variation.
     The predicted latent trade value has potentially important policy implications. Trade
promotion policies could be targeted toward potential markets on the margin that are
much closer to zero. The marginal effect of a fixed cost reduction in turning zero trade to
positive is smaller than that of a variable cost reduction, but still significant.
     Our empirical results are based on country-level ISIC3 trade flows, but our methods
naturally extend to applications using firm-level data to appropriately target export pro-
motion policies and to inform firm entry decisions independent of explicit promotion
policies. On the importer side, the estimated model could suggest potential sources of
inputs. Disaggregation to more finely delimited sectors will come closer to firm-level
activity and present some of the same opportunities.



   47 Helpman et al. (2008) also use the sum of these two measures of fixed costs to obtain sufficient varia-

tions.


                                                     40
References
Anderson, James (2011), "The gravity model." Annual Review of Economics, 3, 133­160.

Anderson, James and Eric van Wincoop (2003), "Gravity with gravitas: A solution to the
 border puzzle." American Economic Review, 93, 170­192.

Anderson, James and Yoto Yotov (2017), "Short run gravity." NBER Working Paper.

Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, and Andr´   es Rodriguez-Clare (2010), "Gains from
  trade under monopolistic competition: A simple example with translog expenditure
  functions and pareto distributions of firm-level productivity." Manuscript, available at
  http://economics. mit. edu/files/5876.

Armenter, Roc and Miklos ´ Koren (2014), "A balls-and-bins model of trade." American
  Economic Review, 104, 2127­51.

Atkin, David (2013), "Trade, tastes and nutrition in india." American Economic Review, 103,
  1629­1663.

Baldwin, Richard and James Harrigan (2011), "Zeros, quality, and space: Trade theory
  and trade evidence." American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 3, 60­88.

Bernard, Andrew B, Emmanuel Dhyne, Glenn Magerman, Kalina Manova, and Andreas
  Moxnes (2019), "The origins of firm heterogeneity: a production network approach."
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bernard, Andrew B, J Bradford Jensen, Stephen J Redding, and Peter K Schott (2007),
  "Firms in international trade." Journal of Economic perspectives, 21, 105­130.

Besedes, Tibor and Thomas Prusa (2006), "Product differentiation and duration of us im-
  port trade." Journal of International Economics, 70, 339­358.

Chaney, Thomas (2008), "The intensive and extensive margins of international trade."
 American Economic Review, 98, 1707­1721.

Costinot, Arnaud, Dave Donaldson, and Ivana Komunjer (2012), "What goods do coun-
 tries trade? a quantitative exploration of ricardo's ideas." The Review of economic studies,
 79, 581­608.

Deaton, Angus and John Muellbauer (1980), "An almost ideal demand system." American
 Economic Review, 70, 312­326.

                                             41
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer (2002),
  "The regulation of entry." The quarterly Journal of economics, 117, 1­37.

Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, and Francis Kramarz (2004), "Dissecting trade: Firms,
  industries, and export destinations." American Economic Review, 94, 150­154.

Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel S Kortum, and Sebastian Sotelo (2012), "International trade:
  Linking micro and macro." Technical report, National bureau of economic research.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo and Amit Khandelwal (2016), "Measuring the unequal gains from
  trade." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131, 1113­1180.

Feenstra, Robert and John Romalis (2014), "International prices and endogenous quality."
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129, 477­527.

Feenstra, Robert C (2003), "A homothetic utility function for monopolistic competition
  models." Economics Letters, 78, 79­86.

Feenstra, Robert C (2010), "New products with a symmetric aids expenditure function."
  Economics Letters, 106, 108­111.

Feenstra, Robert C and David E Weinstein (2017), "Globalization, markups, and us wel-
  fare." Journal of Political Economy, 125, 1040­1074.

Heckman, James J (1979), "Sample selection bias as a specification error." Econometrica:
 Journal of the econometric society, 153­161.

Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz, and Yona Rubinstein (2008), "Estimating trade flows:
 trading partners and trading volumes." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123, 441­487.

Hottman, Colin J, Stephen J Redding, and David E Weinstein (2016), "Quantifying the
 sources of firm heterogeneity." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131, 1291­1364.

Hummels, David and Peter Klenow (2005), "The variety and quality of a nation's ex-
 ports." American Economic Review, 95, 704­723.

Melitz, Marc (2003), "The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate
 industry productivity." Econometrica, 71, 1695­1725.

Melitz, Marc and Gianmarco Ottaviano (2008), "Market size, trade, and productivity."
 Review of Economic Studies, 75, 295­316.



                                           42
Neary, J Peter (1985), "International factor mobility, minimum wage rates, and factor-
 price equalization: A synthesis." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100, 551­570.

Neary, J Peter and Kevin WS Roberts (1980), "The theory of household behaviour under
 rationing." European economic review, 13, 25­42.

Novy, Dennis (2013), "International trade without ces: Estimating translog gravity." Jour-
 nal of International Economics, 89, 271­282.

Pollak, Robert A and Terence J Wales (1992), "Specification and estimation of dynamic
  demand systems." In Aggregation, Consumption and Trade, 99­119, Springer.

Ramondo, Natalia, Andr´   es Rodr´ iguez-Clare, and Milagro Sabor´   io-Rodr´iguez (2016),
  "Trade, domestic frictions, and scale effects." The American Economic Review, 106, 3159­
  3184.

Squires, Dale (2016), "Firm behavior under quantity controls: The theory of virtual quan-
  tities." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 79, 70­86.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M (2010), Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data. MIT press.

Zhang, Penglong (2020), "Home-biased gravity: The role of migrant tastes in international
  trade." World Development, 129, 104863.




                                              43
Appendix for:
"Latent Exports: Almost Ideal Gravity and Zeros"

A      Appendix to Model

A.1    Reservation Prices
Denote M as the maximum number of products in the world. We will allow for a subset
of goods to have zero shares. To be precise, suppose that s( ) > 0 for  = 1, ..., N , while
s( ) = 0 for  = N + 1, ..., M. Then for the latter goods, we set s( ) = 0 within the share
equation (4), and use these ( M - N ) equations to solve for the reservation prices p ~ (  ),
 = N + 1, ..., M, in terms of the observed prices p( ),  = 1, ..., N . Then these reser-
vation prices should appear in the expenditure equation (1) for the unavailable goods
 = N + 1, ..., M. Specifically,

                                                             N
                      0 = ( ) - ( ) ln p
                                       ~ ( ) + ( )                ( ) ln p( )
                                                             =1

                                   M
                       + ( )                      ~ (  );
                                           ( ) ln p          = N + 1, ..., M.                (46)
                                  = N +1

    Here we temporarily assume homotheticity for unavailable goods, i.e., ( ) = 0 for
the goods  = N + 1, ..., M, following Feenstra (2010).
                                                                  N
                                                         ¯ + = 
    Denote the sub-index for actively traded goods as ln p          =1  (  ) ln p (  ), and
                                                   -     M
the sub-index for inactively traded goods as ln p ¯ =  = N +1 ( ) ln p     ~ ( ). Then the
third and fourth terms on the right hand side of equation (46) comprise ( ) times the
                                    ¯ - ;  . Our procedure is to solve for ln p
                           ¯ + + ln p
                    ¯ = ln p
full price index ln p                                                         ¯ - from (46).
By summing equation (46) over  , we have

              M                                M                        M
       0=                       ¯- + 
                      ( ) -  ln p                            ¯+ + 
                                                      ( ) ln p                         ¯-.
                                                                                ( ) ln p
             = N +1                          = N +1                    = N +1

Then
                                     M               M
                                 -1                                   ¯+
                                      = N +1  (  ) +  = N +1  (  ) ln p
                          -
                          ¯ =
                       ln p                       M
                                                                                .            (47)
                                              1 -  = N +1  (  )




                                                   1
Substitute the right hand side of (47) into the full price index. The result is

                                                   M
                                        ¯ + +  -1  
                                     ln p           = N +1  (  )
                                ¯=
                             ln p            M
                                                                   .                         (48)
                                         1 -  = N +1  (  )

    Equation (53) holds for all destinations j and is basically a j-specific price index effect.
So it is presumably absorbed in the regressor with fixed effects for multilateral resistance.
    Our additional analytic concern is for counterfactual changes in variable cost and fixed
cost and their effect on the price index (53). The experiments we run are exemplified by a
scalar 0 <  < 1 that shrinks all tij proportionately. Thus a fall in  lowers tij . Consider a
fall in , d ln  < 0, a globally applied proportionate decrease in trade costs.
    Over some interval there may be no change in N , the extensive margin, hence ln p          ¯
                      M
falls by d ln /[1 -     = N +1  (  )]. The more important case for our counterfactual exper-
iments is where N rises as a result of  falling. It is now convenient to revert to continuous
 , hence sums become integrals. In the numerator of (53), a fall in  raises N and hence it
lowers the second term by -1 ( N ). In the first term of the numerator, ln p    ¯ + increases by
                                                                          M
( N ) ln p( N ). The denominator of (53) changes by - ( N )/[1 -  = N +1 ( )d ]2 . Our
procedure is focused on the direct N fixed impact, which intuitively suggests that cutting
all VC equiproportionately will keep decreasing ln p     ¯ , hence the direct impact effect may
well dominate the variable N effects. As for the variable N effects: the fall in the term
-1 ( N ) has the same sign as the N fixed impact.
    Finally, consider the non-homothetic case ( ) = 0 for the goods  = N + 1, ..., M.
Following Deaton and Muellbauer (1980), the Stone price index in equation (2) is approx-
imated by prices weighted by observed shares, i.e.,

                                             N
                                   ln Q =          s( ) ln p( )                              (49)
                                              =1

and the summation of the share equation is

           M                             M                               M
   0=                       ¯- + 
                  ( ) -  ln p                           ¯+ + 
                                                 ( ) ln p                               ¯-
                                                                                 ( ) ln p    (50)
         = N +1                         = N +1                          = N +1

                                         M
                                 +              ( ) ln(e/ Q)                                 (51)
                                       = N +1




                                                   2
Then

                M               M                           M
            -1                                   ¯ + +  -1  
                 = N +1  (  ) +  = N +1  (  ) ln p           = N +1  (  ) ln( e / Q )
       -
     ¯ =
  ln p                                        M
                                                                                             .
                                          1 -  = N +1  (  )
                                                                                           (52)
Substitute the right hand side of (52) into the full price index. The result is

                                  M                   M
                       ¯ + +  -1  
                    ln p           = N +1  (  ) + 
                                                   -1
                                                       = N +1  (  ) ln( e / Q )
               ¯=
            ln p                             M
                                                                                   .       (53)
                                         1 -  = N +1  (  )

    The evaluation of our counterfactual changes by adding another ambiguously signed
term as N rises. Note that ( ) is positive for luxury goods and negative for necessary
goods. So long as ( N ) > 0 the effect of raising N via income effects acts to raise ln p     ¯,
                                                             ¯ raises real income, hence raises
cet. par.. This arises because the incipient reduction in ln p
spending on the extensive margin goods and tends to offset the incipient reduction in ln p    ¯.
Continued fall in  continues to reduce ln p    ¯ on balance so long as the substitution effect
is large enough or the income effect is small enough. With this warning, our procedure in
the counterfactual is appropriate.




                                               3
A.2     Firm Aggregation
Equation (9) and (11) imply

                               H
             Sij = Ni                 sij ( a)dG ( a)
                                 
                             ln zij
                                                                  H                       H
        Sij / Ni = [i -  i ln(µi wi tij / p
                                          ¯ j ) + i ln r j ]              dG ( a) +  i            adG ( a)
                                                                     
                                                                 ln zij                      
                                                                                         ln zij
                                H
                       i                adG ( a)
                                   
                               ln zij
                                    
                     =  i ( H - ln zij )/ ln H
                     = (1/ ln H )[i -  i ln(µi wi tij / p
                                                        ¯ j ) + i ln r j ]
                         +( H / ln H ) i - (1/ ln H )µi /(µi - 1) f ij
                     = (1/ ln H )i + ( H / ln H ) i
                         -(1/ ln H ) i ln(µi wi tij / p
                                                      ¯ j)
                         -(1/ ln H )µi /(µi - 1) f ij
                         +(1/ ln H )i ln r j

          H
where        
         ln zij   dG ( a)  0 given only a very small fraction of firms export in every country.




                                                        4
A.3    AI Gravity
Plug equation (14) into equation (19),

         (Yi /Y )/ Ni =     (Ej /Y )[i - i ln(µi wi tij / p
                                                          ¯ j ) - i f ij + i ln r j ]
                             j

                       = [i -  i ln(µi wi ) +  i  Nk  k ln µk wk ]
                                                           k
                            - ( Ej /Y )[ i (ln tij -  Nk  k ln tkj ) + i f ij - i ln r j ]
                                 j                         k


Then

   Sij / Ni = [i -  i ln(µi wi ) +  i  Nk  k ln µk wk ]
                                               k
                -[ i (ln tij -  Nk ln tkj ) + i f ij - i ln r j ]
                                         k
            = (Yi /Y )/ Ni + ( Ej /Y )[ i (ln tij -  Nk  k ln tkj ) + i f ij - i ln r j ]
                                     j                         k

                -[ i (ln tij -  Nk  k ln tkj ) + i f ij - i ln r j ]
                                         k
            = (Yi /Y )/ Ni
                - i [ln tij - ( Ej /Y ) ln tij -  Nk  k ln tkj + ( Ej /Y )  Nk  k ln tkj ]
                                     j                 k               j          k

                -i [ f ij - ( Ej /Y ) f ij ]
                             j

                -i [ln r j - ( Ej /Y )r j ]
                                 j




                                                   5
B   Appendix to Tables and Figures

                       Table B.1: Country List by GDP

                   ISO     country                 ISO     country
               1   USA     United States      39   PHL     Philippines
               2   JPN     Japan              40   NGA     Nigeria
               3   DEU     Germany            41   HUN     Hungary
               4   CHN     China              42   UKR     Ukraine
               5   GBR     United Kingdom     43   NZL     New Zealand
               6   FRA     France             44   PER     Peru
               7   ITA     Italy              45   KAZ     Kazakstan
               8   CAN     Canada             46   VNM     Viet Nam
               9   ESP     Spain              47   MAR     Morocco
              10   BRA     Brazil             48   SVK     Slovakia
              11   RUS     Russia             49   ECU     Ecuador
              12   IND     India              50   SVN     Slovenia
              13   KOR     Korea              51   BGR     Bulgaria
              14   MEX     Mexico             52   TUN     Tunisia
              15   AUS     Australia          53   LTU     Lithuania
              16   NLD     Netherlands        54   LKA     Sri Lanka
              17   TUR     Turkey             55   KEN     Kenya
              18   SWE     Sweden             56   AZE     Azerbaijan
              19   CHE     Switzerland        57   LVA     Latvia
              20   IDN     Indonesia          58   URY     Uruguay
              21   POL     Poland             59   YEM     Yemen
              22   AUT     Austria            60   EST     Estonia
              23   NOR     Norway             61   ISL     Iceland
              24   DNK     Denmark            62   JOR     Jordan
              25   ZAF     South Africa       63   ETH     Ethiopia
              26   GRC     Greece             64   GHA     Ghana
              27   IRL     Ireland            65   TZA     Tanzania
              28   FIN     Finland            66   ALB     Albania
              29   THA     Thailand           67   GEO     Georgia
              30   PRT     Portugal           68   ARM     Armenia
              31   HKG     Hong Kong          69   MKD     Macedonia
              32   MYS     Malaysia           70   MDG     Madagascar
              33   CHL     Chile              71   NER     Niger
              34   CZE     Czech              72   MDA     Moldova
              35   COL     Colombia           73   TJK     Tajikistan
              36   SGP     Singapore          74   KGZ     Kyrgyzstan
              37   PAK     Pakistan           75   MNG     Mongolia
              38   ROM     Romania
              Notes: Table lists the sample of countries in our paper. The
             countries are sorted by GDP in descending order.




                                          6
                                               Machines
                                        Exporter ranked by GDP              CHN_ETH
                                                 RUS_NGA          JPN_AZE
                               10      20      30       40     50      60       70


                         10
Importer ranked by GDP




                         20


                         30


                         40


                         50


                         60
        BRA_TJK


                         70




                     Figure B.1: Zero Trade Flows by Country Pairs: Machines Sector




                                                    7
                                                  Tobacco
                          USA_RUS          Exporter ranked by GDP
            FRA_JPN                10      20      30       40     50      60      70


                         10
      SPA_CHN
Importer ranked by GDP




                         20


                         30


                         40


                         50


                         60


                         70




                         Figure B.2: Zero Trade Flows by Country Pairs: Tobacco Sector




                                                        8
Machines                     Electrics                     Textiles




 Food                        MetalProd                     OthChem




Apparel                       ProfSci                      Transport




 Plastic                      Printing                     IndChem




Figure B.3: Zero Trade Flows by Country Pairs: All Other Sectors I


                                 9
 Paper                        Rubber                         Glass




IronSteel                    NonMetal                       NfMetals




Beverages                      Wood                        Footwear




Furniture                    Petroleum                      Tobacco




Figure B.4: Zero Trade Flows by Country Pairs: All Other Sectors II


                                10
                                                                          Exporter ranked by GDP
                                                              10        20       30          40       50       60      70



                                                      10


                                                      20


                             Importer ranked by GDP   30


                                                      40


                                                      50


                                                      60


                                                      70


                      Figure B.5: Zero Flow Prediction: Leather Sector




  GBR, Tobacco                                                       CAN, Footwear                                   AUS, Leather
                                              Lithuania                                           Moldova                                  Yemen
                                              Georgia                                                                                      Tunisia
                                                                                                  Albania
                                              Peru                                                                                         Morocco
                                              Viet Nam                                            Azerbaijan
                                                                                                                                           Kyrgyzstan
                                              Macedonia                                           Uruguay
                                                                                                                                           Niger
                                              Uruguay                                             Sri Lanka
                                              Ghana                                                                                        Albania
                                                                                                  Niger                                    Nigeria
                                              Tajikistan
                                              Ecuador                                             Tajikistan                               Tajikistan

-.6       -.4    -.2     0                                          -.3    -.2     -.1    0                         -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0
      Latent trade share                                               Latent trade share                            Latent trade share


  MEX, IronSteel                                                      COL, Textile                                  MNG, Food
                                              Madagascar                                                                                 Moldova
                                                                                              Tajikistan                                 Latvia
                                                                                                                                         Armenia
                                              Macedonia                                                                                  Georgia
                                                                                              Mongolia                                   Greece
                                              Moldova                                                                                    Jordan
                                                                                                                                         Sri Lanka
                                                                                              Nigeria                                    Tanzania
                                              Armenia                                                                                    Slovenia
                                                                                                                                         Macedonia
                                              Albania                                                                                    Niger
                                                                                              Albania                                    Kenya
                                                                                                                                         Yemen
                                              Niger                                                                                      Albania
                                                                                              Yemen                                      Tunisia
                                              Ethiopia                                                                                   Nigeria
                                                                                                                                         Morocco
                                                                                                                                         Ecuador
                                              Tajikistan                                      Kyrgyzstan                                 Madagascar
                                                                                                                                         Ghana

-.3       -.2    -.1     0                                         -.15 -.1 -.05         0                      -.15 -.1 -.05        0
      Latent trade share                                              Latent trade share                           Latent trade share




                                                           Figure B.6: Latent Trade Examples


                                                                                    11
                                                                 Leather
                                                         Exporter ranked by GDP
                                                    10   20   30     40   50      60   70


                                               10


                      Importer ranked by GDP
                                               20


                                               30


                                               40


                                               50


                                               60


                                               70


Figure B.7: Zero-to-One Transitions from Removing Bilateral Variable Costs: Leather Sec-
tor




                                                                 Leather
                                                         Exporter ranked by GDP
                                                    10   20   30     40   50      60   70


                                               10
                      Importer ranked by GDP




                                               20


                                               30


                                               40


                                               50


                                               60


                                               70


Figure B.8: Zero-to-One Transitions from Removing Bilateral Fixed Costs: Leather Sector



                                                                12
                                                             Table B.2: Number of Zero Flows by Exporter and Sector (75 countries)
     Exporter   Tobacco   Petroleum   Furniture   Wood   Footwear   Beverages   NonMetal   NfMetals   IronSteel   Glass   Leather   Rubber   Paper   IndChem   Plastic   ProfSci   Printing   Transport   OthChem   Apparel   MetalProd   Food   Textiles   Machines   Electrics   Mean
     TJK          72          73         71        73       67         73          70        48          68        72       70        68      72        62       65        63         65         62          66       52         55        62      42         41          46        63
     YEM          70          61         72        71       72         69          61        57          64        70       61        65      61        55       54        46         50         41          53       57         40        31      56         39          37        57
     NER          70          56         65        69       64         67          61        65          62        64       62        58      54        49       52        47         54         45          52       50         49        48      50         39          31        55
     KGZ          65          49         65        67       56         61          60        58          56        69       58        66      57        46       57        52         58         43          49       49         42        49      40         44          39        54
     ETH          74          71         58        71       58         60          60        57          65        57       39        62      62        64       52        52         48         54          44       40         45        29      31         50          45        54
     MNG          67          62         60        56       53         57          63        66          63        63       48        57      61        62       53        49         48         43          54       31         43        55      27         41          41        53
     ARM          50          70         60        62       63         45          50        54          48        55       59        64      53        33       50        43         51         54          46       50         45        47      47         37          42        51
     ALB          71          64         58        60       41         62          62        53          57        60       59        56      52        53       51        44         45         44          42       30         37        52      40         30          36        50
     AZE          66          48         57        58       63         60          66        54          54        44       49        57      55        44       45        37         36         41          46       54         30        41      33         24          23        47
     MDG          69          54         38        53       58         63          47        63          54        59       43        59      46        55       47        51         55         50          37       18         37        34      15         40          34        47
     TZA          65          60         34        47       62         32          59        51          54        60       46        65      58        49       47        47         47         42          45       45         34        20      23         41          31        47
     NGA          70          53         55        39       53         56          61        51          50        61       48        38      55        46       49        39         37         41          43       42         42        34      42         26          31        46
     GHA          71          64         28        20       59         53          59        45          59        53       50        49      57        53       47        50         46         40          35       48         29        22      43         37          32        46
     MDA          55          67         60        48       37         32          65        59          54        55       55        62      46        56       39        40         41         44          41       25         44        29      27         27          32        46
     MKD          70          53         59        47       41         37          50        54          44        59       48        52      51        45       41        40         39         34          44       26         38        38      26         22          26        43
     URY          65          70         63        47       49         36          53        56          51        54       22        49      44        37       36        31         35         39          30       27         35        10      12         33          29        41
     KAZ          62          39         55        54       57         51          59        33          14        45       40        47      53        23       42        29         31         32          36       39         27        36      27         18          26        39
     JOR          49          72         58        66       60         61          47        43          54        44       52        47      37        12       25        27         28         29           9       13         16        31      18         12          21        37
     GEO          65          55         63        44       50         33          52        45          38        43       53        44      39        27       34        27         28         24          17       41         20        32      28         12          15        37
     KEN          68          59         28        44       40         40          33        49          50        46       32        54      42        37       34        40         29         26          31       25         28        11      20         23          24        37
     ECU          66          55         35        25       52         50          48        46          37        48       38        42      39        31       26        29         38         33          27       34         27         8      30         22          26        36
     ISL          73          31         61        53       56         52          52        45          41        39       36        34      41        32       20        21         20         28          17       31         20        12      25          9          16        35
     PER          67          55         35        38       45         39          38        22          46        38       27        45      36        15       33        34         24         36          26       14         20         8      11         20          27        32
     COL          55          55         42        46       38         42          45        48          46        33       21        37      19        19       19        26         20         25          18       17         18         4      15         18          15        30
     TUN          64          42         48        49       24         45          37        46          42        48       19        30      29        17       20        21         30         19          22        8         16        21      11         11           8        29
     LKA          70          68         22        39       35         48          46        47          54        32       19         9      18        30        8        24         10         21          17        6          9         6       6         13          16        27
     CHL          62          56         38        16       46          9          38        28          32        39       32        30      22        14       17        27         26         30          14       24         15         5      23         12          18        27
     MAR          72          58         29        34       17         39          25        41          38        18       20        24      35        26       19        25         27         24          19        8         14         5       4         16          10        26
     EST          59          30         32        22       37         38          34        31          32        29       30        23      15        12       16        17         21         13          13       22         15        17      15         12           8        24
     LVA          51          37         26        19       38         18          44        34          34        32       40        25      20        20       14        15         15         14          12       17         13        20      15          3           3        23
     LTU          43          33         32        23       39         37          36        33          30        27       32        15      17         7       15         8         12         13           9       15         12        17       9          5           6        21
     NZL          64          52         34        33       29         15          30        18          31        27       17        15      17        18        7         3          5          7           9       18          4         0      11          1           2        19
     PAK          65          58         21        37       10         34          14        32          30        18        6        6       13        11        5         2         11         12          8        1           3         4       0         10           6        17
     SVK          56          40         35        18       17         30          24        24          15        10       24         8       8         6        9         5         10          3           3       10          2        13       9          1           1        15
     PHL          42          43         11        27       14         26          18        34          24        15       13        16      16        20        8         9          7          8           5        6          4         2       6          4           1        15




13
     SVN          66          38         22        23       23         33          11        16          13        16       15         8       2         2        6         3          3          5           5       13          3        12       7          0           2        14
     VNM          57          47          8        18        3         27          14        33          21        13        7         9      14         9        2        16         13         10           7        2          0         0       1          3           4        14
     ROM          54          17         26        13       12         22          29        22           9         8       20         5      13         4        6         4          8          5           8       12          3        15       6          3           1        13
     MEX          37          29         21        28       24          8          19        26          19         7       19         9       9         7        5         3          4          6           3       10          3        12       8          1           1        13
     BGR          49          19         22        23       19         13          21        18          19        15       17        10      12         1        6         4          5          6           0        8          3         5       2          1           2        12
     UKR          52          22         33        19       30         14          12        17           2         8       17         6       9         1        2         5          9          2           4        9          3         6       6          0           4        12
     NOR          51          21         24        16       24         21          14        15          10        16       17         6       6         6        5         2          2          1           1       11          2         2       4          1           0        11
     IRL          39          26         24        23       29          4          13        18          17        11       13         4       9         4        2         1          2          4           1        9          3         2       5          0           0        11
     HUN          54          18         24        21       21         14          12        13          14        11       13         5       5         6        2         1          5          3           0        8          2         6       5          0           0        11
     PRT          49          38          6        10        8          7           5        23          20         7       15         7       6         8        3         5          8          2           2        6          2         5       3          1           2        10
     GRC          26          22         25        24       23          8           3         9          13        13       14         8      11         6        5         6          1          4           2        6          3         2       2          2           2        10
     SGP          45          21         23        17       16         17          14        13          12        11        5         3       4         5        2         1          1          4           2        4          2         2       3          1           1        9
     AUS          56          26         18        12       14          4           7         8           7         4       10         3       4         5        1         0          0          0           1        4          2         1       2          0           0        8
     IDN          35          33          5         5        4         23           9        16          16         4        5         1       1         3        2         3          3          6           3        2          1         0       1          0           1        7
     FIN          59          14         12         7       18         14           5         9           4         5        9         1       1         1        2         1          0          0           0        9          0         3       5          0           0        7
     HKG          24          32          4        10        3         30           7        13          11         3        2         5       4         6        1         1          2          5           2        2          1         6       0          0           0        7
     RUS          38          12         13        10       17         11           8         5           1         5       14         2       1         1        3         2          4          1           3        6          0         7       5          0           2        7
     ZAF          31          12         13        16       18          3           9        10           5        10        8         4       5         2        1         0          2          2           0        5          1         2       4          0           1        7
     MYS          21          19         22         5       10         11           8        15          12         7       12         1       4         3        3         1          0          3           1        2          1         1       1          0           0        7
     BRA          41          26         13         4        5          4           4         8           5         3        8         1       8         5        2         1          5          3           1        6          1         0       3          1           1        6
     CZE          45          18         12        10       14          7           4         6           3         1        9         0       2         1        0         0          2          0           1        6          1         6       3          0           0        6
     THA          56          23          3         7        2         12           5        12           8         3        3         1       1         2        1         2          2          2           1        1          1         0       0          1           0        6
     POL          29          18         13         6       16         10           2         6           3         3        7         0       3         2        1         0          1          1           0        6          0         2       1          0           0        5
     JPN          40           4          6        17        9         15           2         1           4         1        1         1       1         1        1         0          1          0           1        2          1         2       1          0           0        4
     KOR          38           5          9        15        6         13           3         4           1         2        4         0       1         0        0         0          1          0           0        1          0         2       0          0           0        4
     SWE          37           4         10         6       11          3           3         4           0         4        6         0       0         1        1         0          0          0           1        4          0         2       2          0           0        4
     CAN          55           4          6         3        7          5           2         3           2         1        1         0       2         1        1         0          0          0           0        2          0         0       2          0           0        4
     DNK          22          10          9        10        7          6           4         7           4         1        6         0       2         0        0         0          0          0           0        2          0         0       1          0           0        4
     TUR          42           6          7         7        5         14           1         1           0         0        1         0       3         0        0         0          1          0           0        0          0         0       0          0           0        4
     AUT          39           7          7         4        8          2           3         4           5         3        1         0       0         2        0         0          0          0           0        0          0         1       0          0           0        3
     IND          24          15          2         4        2          4           0         4           1         0        1         0       0         0        0         0          0          0           0        0          0         0       0          0           0        2
     ITA          44           2          2         1        0          1           0         0           0         0        1         0       0         0        0         0          0          0           0        0          0         0       0          0           0        2
     ESP          22           4          2         2        1          1           0         1           2         0        2         1       0         1        1         1          1          1           0        1          0         0       1          0           0        2
     NLD           8           0          7         6        3          1           3         2           2         2        2         0       1         0        0         0          0          0           0        2          0         0       1          0           0        2
     CHE           8           1          2         3        1          5           1         2           1         1        0         1       1         0        1         0          0          0           0        1          0         0       1          0           0        1
     CHN          29           0          0         0        0          1           0         0           0         0        0         0       0         0        0         0          0          0           0        0          0         0       0          0           0        1
     GBR          10           1          2         6        0          1           0         3           0         0        1         0       1         0        0         0          0          1           0        0          0         1       1          0           0        1
     FRA          11           1          5         2        1          0           2         1           0         1        0         0       0         1        0         0          0          0           0        0          0         0       0          0           0        1
     USA           7           1          2         1        1          1           1         1           1         0        1         1       1         0        0         0          0          0           0        1          0         0       1          0           0        1
     DEU           3           1          0         0        1          0           0         0           0         0        0         0       0         0        0         0          0          0           0        0          0         0       0          0           0        0
C     Appendix to Trade Probability: Reduced Form
It is also useful to analyze the marginal effect of a change in trade costs on the probability
that a given country pair trade with each other with the reduced-form gravity equation.
In order to compare the marginal effect of variable cost and fixed cost on trade probability,
we standardize both trade costs, and then investigate the change in trade probability due
to a one-standard-deviation decrease in variable and fixed cost, respectively. First we
construct VC =  ln distij and FC = f ij where  = 0.117, and VC and FC denote the
variable and fixed costs, respectively. Then we standardize them by subtracting their
means and divided by their standard deviations, resulting in variables of zero sample
mean and unit sample variance. In order to get an average marginal effect of variable cost
across exporters with heterogeneous price elasticities, we shut down the interaction terms
ln ri × ln distij and ln Pj × ln ri in equation (32). Then the specification of the symmetric
AI gravity equation becomes

        Sij / Ni = -bv VCij - b f FCij + c ln ri × ln r j +  Internalij + f ei + f e j +  ij ,   (54)

and the observed trade share

                                ~ij / Ni =    Sij / Ni , if Sij  0,
                                S
                                              0,         if Sij < 0,

where Sij is the latent value of the systematic trade share. f ei and f e j are exporter- and
importer-specific fixed effects, respectively. The dummy variable Internalij is zero for
import and one for the internal trade, capturing all the other unobserved trade cost across
borders. We assume the error term   Normal (0, 2 ). Then the probability that a given
country pair trade with each other is

                        Prob(S > 0) = Prob( > -Xb) = (Xb/ ),                                     (55)

where matrix X is the vector of all independent variables, b is the vector of all their coeffi-
cients in equation (54) and (.) is the standard normal cumulative distribution function.
Thus the marginal changes in trade probability due to trade costs are computed by

                                 Prob(S > 0)  ^ v (X
                                                   ¯b^ /
                                             =b         ^ )/^,                                   (56)
                                    VC

and
                                 Prob(S > 0)  ^ f (X
                                                   ¯b^ /
                                             =b         ^ )/^,                                   (57)
                                     FC

                                                 14
where (.) is the standard normal probability density function, and X    ¯ denotes the vector
of mean values.
    The results are reported in Table C.3. Row (1) shows the marginal changes in trade
probability for the aggregate trade. One standard deviation decrease in VC improves the
trade probability by 5 percentage points, while one standard deviation decrease in FC
improves the trade probability by 3 percentage points. Since there are many fewer zeros
in aggregate trade, we further report the results by sectors in row (2)-(26). All numbers
are positive which implies lowering trade cost increases the trade probability. On average,
one standard deviation decrease in VC improves the trade probability by 10 percentage
points, while one standard deviation decrease in FC improves the trade probability by 2
percentage points. To visualize the results, Figure C.9 plots the results of marginal effects
of VC and FC on trade probability respectively, as well as their 95% confidence intervals.
VC raises the trade probability most in the petroleum, wood, and tobacco sectors, while
least in the professional and scientific equipment, electric, and printing sectors. FC raises
the trade probability most in the transport, textile, and machinery sectors, while least in
the electric, paper, and professional and scientific equipment sectors. More importantly,
marginal changes in trade probability due to VC are larger than to FC for all sectors,
implying that variable cost is more important than fixed cost in trade policy adjustment
to make trade to occur.




                                             15
Table C.3: Marginal Effect on Trade Probability

                      Variable cost        Fixed cost

    (1)   Aggregate   .046     (.0119)   .0282   (.0088)



    (2)   Petroleum   .149     (.0116)   .0143   (.0089)

    (3)   Wood        .1471    (.012)     .03    (.0101)

    (4)   Tobacco     .145     (.0097)   .0224   (.0084)

    (5)   Paper       .1327    (.0121)   .0049   (.0093)

    (6)   NfMetals    .1238    (.012)    .0339   (.0095)

    (7)   IronSteel   .1208    (.0121)   .0352   (.0095)

    (8)   OthChem     .1201    (.0122)   .0053   (.009)

    (9)   Footwear    .1179    (.0119)   .0072   (.0094)

   (10)   MetalProd   .1044    (.0122)   .0073   (.0091)

   (11)   Apparel     .1038    (.0122)   .0267   (.0094)

   (12)   Rubber      .1016    (.0121)   .0141   (.0092)

   (13)   IndChem     .1004    (.0122)   .032    (.0094)

   (14)   NonMetal    .0979    (.012)    .0166   (.0092)

   (15)   Glass       .0971    (.0121)   .0307   (.0094)

   (16)   Beverages   .0884    (.012)    .0275   (.0094)

   (17)   Textiles    .0879    (.0121)   .0407   (.0092)

   (18)   Plastic     .0853    (.0121)   .0184   (.0092)

   (19)   Transport   .0848    (.0122)   .0507   (.0092)

   (20)   Leather     .0829    (.012)    .0146   (.0096)

   (21)   Machines    .0826    (.0121)   .0346   (.009)

   (22)   Furniture   .0811    (.012)    .0325   (.0099)

   (23)   Food        .0605    (.0121)   .0294   (.009)

   (24)   Printing    .0579    (.0122)   .0226   (.0091)

   (25)   Electrics   .057     (.0121)   .0049   (.009)

   (26)   ProfSci     .0563    (.0121)   .0062   (.0092)



          Mean        .0995              .0225

          St. d.      .0276              .0127

   Notes: Table reports the marginal effect of one-
  standard-deviation decrease in trade costs on trade
  probability by estimating equation (54). Robust
  standard errors in parentheses.


                          16
                                                                                         0   .05   .1   .15   .2
                                                                           Petroleum
                                                                               Wood
                                                                             Tobacco
                                                                               Paper
                                                                             NfMetals
                                                                            IronSteel
                                                                            OthChem
                                                                            Footwear




                                                        FC
                                                        VC
                                                                           MetalProd
                                                                              Apparel
                                                                              Rubber
                                                                            IndChem




17
                                                                            NonMetal
                                                                                Glass
                                                                           Beverages
                                                                              Textiles
                                                                               Plastic
                                                                            Transport
                                                                              Leather




                                                        FC 2.5%/FC 97.5%
                                                        VC 2.5%/VC 97.5%
                                                                            Machines
                                                                            Furniture




     Figure C.9: Marginal Effect on Trade Probability
                                                                                Food
                                                                              Printing
                                                                             Electrics
                                                                              ProfSci
                                                                           Aggregate
