                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                SPECIALIZATION, MARKET ACCESS AND REAL INCOME

                                       Dominick Bartelme
                                           Ting Lan
                                      Andrei A. Levchenko

                                      Working Paper 28274
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28274


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




We thank Christian Hansen, Kalina Manova, Fernando Parro, John Ries, Andrés Rodríguez-
Clare, Sebastian Sotelo, Dan Trefler, and workshop participants at Berkeley, CEPR MG, NBER
ITI, the Rocky Mountain Empirical Trade Conference, Sciences Po Summer Workshop, Texas,
Toronto, the Trade Integration and Growth Conference (Bogota), Western Ontario, and Yale for
helpful suggestions. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and should not be
attributed to the International Monetary Fund, its Executive Board, or its management. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Dominick Bartelme, Ting Lan, and Andrei A. Levchenko. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Specialization, Market Access and Real Income
Dominick Bartelme, Ting Lan, and Andrei A. Levchenko
NBER Working Paper No. 28274
December 2020
JEL No. F43,F62

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper estimates the impact of external demand shocks on real income. Our empirical
strategy is based on a first order approximation to a wide class of small open economy models
that feature sector-level gravity in trade flows. The framework allows us to measure foreign
shocks and characterize their impact on income in terms of reduced-form elasticities. We use
machine learning techniques to group 4-digit manufacturing sectors into a smaller number of
clusters, and show that the cluster-level elasticities of income with respect to foreign shocks can
be estimated using high-dimensional statistical techniques. We find clear evidence of
heterogeneity in the income responses to different foreign shocks. Foreign demand shocks in
complex intermediate and capital goods have large positive impacts on real income, whereas
impacts in other sectors are negligible. The estimates imply that the pattern of sectoral
specialization plays a quantitatively large role in how foreign shocks affect real income, while
geographic position plays a smaller role. Finally, a calibrated multi-sector production and trade
model can rationalize both the average and the heterogeneity in real income elasticities to foreign
shocks under reasonable values of structural parameters.

Dominick Bartelme                                Andrei A. Levchenko
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
University of Michigan                           University of Michigan
238 Lorch Hall                                   611 Tappan Street
611 Tappan Avenue                                Ann Arbor, MI 48109
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                              and CEPR
dbartelm@umich.edu                               and also NBER
                                                 alev@umich.edu
Ting Lan
International Monetary Fund
700 19th St NW
Washington, DC 20431
tlan@imf.org
                                             1. I
The notion that the wealth of nations is shaped in part by international trade opportunities dates
back to the origins of international economics. The size and sectoral composition of foreign demand
varies substantially across countries due to trade costs and the uneven geography of development.
How important is the variation in external demand for understanding the cross-country income
distribution? A rich theoretical literature studies how foreign demand shocks affect real income and
welfare, often emphasizing the role of a country's comparative advantage. An enduring theme is that
the real income impacts of foreign shocks are heterogeneous across industries, and their signs and
magnitudes depend crucially on the strength of the various mechanisms at play. The goal of this
paper is to empirically estimate the effects of external demand shocks in different industries on real
income.
    Empirical work on this question faces a number of challenges. There are many sectors and
theories, but relatively few real income observations in the data. Econometric issues of endogeneity
and omitted variable bias loom large. Faced with these challenges, the existing literature has coalesced
around three basic approaches. One abstracts from sectoral heterogeneity altogether and focuses on
the relationship between real income and the overall size of the external market, as determined by
geography (e.g. Frankel and Romer, 1999; Redding and Venables, 2004). Another examines whether
certain features of comparative advantage are associated with growth (e.g. Prebisch, 1959; Humphreys
et al., eds, 2007). This approach abstracts from cross-country variation in external demand, and lacks
a common theoretical foundation. The third calibrates fully specified general equilibrium models
and conducts counterfactuals (e.g. Whalley, 1985; Eaton and Kortum, 2002). These methods deliver
precise and interpretable answers, but depend heavily on the assumed theoretical framework and
structural parameter values.
    This paper develops a unified approach to quantifying the impact of foreign shocks in different
sectors that strikes a balance between the clarity and rigor of the structural tradition and more
model-robust statistical methods that "let the data speak." We begin by analyzing a class of small
open economy models with many sectors that satisfy four key assumptions: i) sector-level gravity in
bilateral trade flows, ii) a homothetic upper-tier utility aggregator, iii) competitive goods and factor
markets, and iv) a unique and smooth equilibrium mapping from the primitives to the endogenous
outcomes. The production side of the economy is quite general, allowing for any number of factors,
intermediate goods linkages, and external effects within and across sectors. This class contains small
open economy versions of most of the quantitative trade models in the literature as special cases,
including isomorphisms with settings featuring monopolistic competition.
    Handbook chapters by Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare (2014) and Ventura (2005) review and quantify the impact of
changes in openness on income levels and growth rates, respectively, under various assumptions on the structure of the
economy. Rodríguez and Rodrik (2001) and Harrison and Rodríguez-Clare (2010) provide critical reviews of the empirical
work on openness and income. Lederman and Maloney (2012) summarize the theoretical and empirical literature on trade
patterns and income.



                                                          1
    The framework delivers natural measures of sector-level foreign demand shocks, which we label
external firm market access. These variables contain all relevant information about foreign demand
for a country's exports, and are easily estimated from the trade data using standard techniques. We
employ a first order approximation to express a log change in a country's real income in terms of
export share-weighted averages of external firm market access, along with domestic demand and
supply shocks. The elasticities of real income with respect to external firm market access reflect
how different foreign demand shocks generate different general equilibrium income impacts, thus
providing a direct answer to the question posed at the outset of the paper.
    We implement our approach on UN COMTRADE trade data and decadal real income changes
from the Penn World Table 9.0 over 1965-2015, with a sample of 127 countries and 268 sectors spanning
manufacturing, agriculture, and mining. Estimation of the model-derived equation must confront
two primary challenges.
    The first is that there are hundreds of traded sectors and thus potentially hundreds of elasticities
of income to foreign shocks that can be estimated. This is clearly not feasible given the relatively
small sample of available GDP per capita data. To reduce the number of parameters to be estimated,
we employ a machine learning technique to group sectors into a small number of clusters based on
their characteristics. Theory predicts that a sector's income impact depends on its features, such as
position in the production network, factor intensities, and so on. Clustering industries with similar
characteristics thus has the dual benefits of minimizing within-cluster heterogeneity in the income
impacts of foreign shocks, and identifying the key sectoral properties that explain the heterogeneous
impacts. We use the k-means clustering algorithm (MacQueen et al., 1967) along with 7 sectoral
characteristics measured from US data to group 233 manufacturing industries into 4 clusters. It turns
out that this procedure results in clusters with features that are easy to verbalize: i) processing of
raw materials, ii) complex intermediate inputs, iii) capital goods, and iv) consumer goods. We group
agriculture and mining sectors into their own clusters for a total of 6 clusters and therefore 6 cluster-
level foreign demand shocks. We then estimate the much smaller number of cluster-level income
elasticities.
    The second challenge is the common one in cross-country growth regressions: omitted variables
and endogeneity. We first provide formal conditions under which the average within-cluster in-
come elasticities are identified by an OLS regression that fully conditions on the initial equilibrium
observables. The result exploits the typical invertibility properties of gravity models as well as an
orthogonality assumption on unobserved contemporaneous domestic shocks. We rely on the fact that
most countries are small in foreign markets, and measure the foreign shocks in such a way as to min-
imize any direct effect of domestic shocks on foreign variables. To deal with the high dimensionality
    As will become clear below, a country will also be affected by foreign supply shocks, which are reflected in its import
prices. It turns out that there is much less variation across countries and time in the identifiable foreign supply shocks,
and their estimated income impacts are quite noisy and rarely significant. For these reasons, the paper focuses on foreign
demand shocks, while controlling for foreign supply shocks in the estimation. See Sections 3 and 4 as well as Appendix B.5
for more detail.


                                                            2
of the control vector we employ the Post-Double-Selection method of Belloni et al. (2014b, 2017) to
select a lower-dimensional set of "important" controls while maintaining consistency and uniformly
valid inference.
   Our main finding is that the average impact of foreign shocks on real income differs significantly
across clusters. Foreign demand shocks to capital goods and complex intermediate sectors have the
largest income impacts, with the capital goods elasticity being somewhat less precisely estimated.
Foreign demand shocks in all other sectors have small and insignificant income impacts.
   We subject our specification to robustness checks along a number of dimensions including the
number of clusters, the tuning parameter used for selecting controls, measurement error in the cluster
characteristics, and dropping important trading partners. The most robust result is that demand
shocks in complex intermediate goods have high income elasticities and non-intermediate, non-
capital goods sectors have small elasticities. The capital goods cluster always has the highest income
elasticity point estimate, but with relatively large standard errors. Interestingly, when we split the
sample into developed and developing countries, we obtain more precise estimates as well as a much
higher capital goods elasticity for developing countries across all specifications. This suggests that
the large standard error in the full sample may be partly due to differences in the income impact of
foreign demand shocks for capital goods in different groups of countries. While the finding that the
capital goods elasticity is higher for poor countries is intriguing, its practical importance is limited by
the low shares of capital goods in developing countries' export baskets.
   We examine the quantitative implications of our estimates through the lens of both data and
theory. First, given our estimated cluster-level elasticities, the real income impacts of foreign shocks
in individual countries are determined by the size and pattern of external demand ("geography")
interacted with the initial sectoral specialization. To isolate the role of the specialization pattern, we
hold geography constant and compute the total elasticity of income with respect to a uniform foreign
demand shock for each country in our sample. There is substantial cross-country heterogeneity in
the impacts, ranging from 0 in many of the poorest countries to 0.5 in upper-middle income countries
such as Hungary, Slovakia, Malaysia, and Taiwan. We illustrate the role of geography by holding
sectoral specialization constant and subjecting each country to the foreign shocks experienced by
different countries in the same time period. We find that geography plays a modest but noticeable
role in determining the growth experiences of different countries. For example, East Asian countries
benefited by about half a percentage point of growth over the 2005-2015 decade (relative to the
median country) from the rapid growth of surrounding countries, while Western European countries
lost roughly 1 percentage point of growth over the same decade due to slow overall growth in the
region.
   Second, we ask whether our empirical estimates can be rationalized by theory. To that end, we set
up a quantitative trade model of a small open economy with intermediate input linkages, endogenous
capital accumulation and industry-level scale effects that are external to the firm (Bartelme et al., 2019;



                                                    3
Kucheryavyy et al., 2020). We calibrate the model using standard data on intermediate, final, and
trade shares. We show that a parsimonious parameterization with only two structural elasticities ­
substitution and scale ­ can successfully match both the average level of estimated coefficients and
their variation across clusters. Importantly, the model is quantitatively successful under a fairly broad
range of these structural parameters, and for values that are reasonable in light of existing estimates.
The model matches the heterogeneity in estimated coefficients purely through internal propagation of
foreign demand shocks within the home economy, rather than different structural parameters across
clusters. We show that input linkages in both intermediate and capital goods as well as the presence
of substantial scale economies are quantitatively important for matching our econometric estimates.
    We stress that this quantification is a "proof-of-concept" exercise, rather than a strong stand on
the precise economic mechanisms behind the empirical estimates. There might be many theoretical
models, and potentially infinitely many parameter combinations within each model, that could match
the income elasticities in the data. The objective of this exercise is to highlight a set of economic
mechanisms that can be quantitatively successful at matching the econometric estimates.

Related literature.      Our paper contributes to the literature on trade and income, which would be
impractical to review comprehensively here. A number of influential papers estimate the impact of
overall openness on real income (e.g. Sachs and Warner, 1995; Frankel and Romer, 1999; Rodríguez and
Rodrik, 2001; Redding and Venables, 2004; Rodrik et al., 2004; Feyrer, 2009; Pascali, 2017; Feyrer, 2019).
Our paper is closer to the literature on export patterns and income. Most of this literature considers
only one characteristic of trade patterns at a time. Some examples include the natural resource curse
(e.g. Sachs and Warner, 1999; Humphreys et al., eds, 2007; Sala-i-Martin and Subramanian, 2013),
specialization in primary goods (Prebisch, 1959; Hadass and Williamson, 2003; Williamson, 2008),
"high-income goods" (Hausmann et al., 2007; Jarreau and Poncet, 2012), the location in the product
space (Hidalgo et al., 2007; Hidalgo and Hausmann, 2009; Hausmann et al., 2014), or skill intensity
(Atkin, 2016; Blanchard and Olney, 2017).               We make two contributions to the empirics of trade
patterns and income. First, we consider multiple dimensions of trade patterns simultaneously, and
let the data tell us which characteristics of exports matter. Second, we focus on exogenous foreign
demand shocks, rather than the potentially endogenous specialization patterns themselves.
    In a sense, all of international trade theory is about the relationship between openness and
income. Many mechanisms have been proposed for how the pattern of sectoral specialization can
affect the income level, ranging from market failures (Haberler, 1950; Hagen, 1958; Bhagwati and
Ramaswami, 1963; Krugman and Venables, 1995), to static (Graham, 1923; Chipman, 1970; Ethier,
1982; Kucheryavyy et al., 2020) and dynamic (Bardhan, 1971; Young, 1991; Melitz, 2005) externalities,
and to political economy (Tornell and Lane, 1999; Levchenko, 2013; Berman et al., 2017; Dippel et al.,
2020), to name a few. The wealth of potential theoretical mechanisms motivates the more data-driven
    The literature also considered variation on the import side, such as capital goods (Eaton and Kortum, 2001; Caselli and
Wilson, 2004), skill-intensive goods (e.g. Nunn and Trefler, 2010), or intermediate inputs (e.g. Amiti and Konings, 2007;
Kasahara and Rodrigue, 2008).


                                                            4
approach in our paper.
   Our use of theory makes contact with the general equilibrium quantitative trade tradition (e.g.
Whalley, 1985; Deardorff and Stern, 1990; Eaton and Kortum, 2002, and the large literature that
followed). Most closely related are quantifications of multi-sector models (e.g. Chor, 2010; Costinot
et al., 2012; Caliendo and Parro, 2015; Hsieh and Ossa, 2016; Levchenko and Zhang, 2016), as well as
recent work on trade counterfactuals that apply across families of models (e.g. Arkolakis et al., 2012;
Adão et al., 2017; Bartelme, 2018; Baqaee and Farhi, 2019; Allen et al., 2020; Kleinman et al., 2020). Our
approach is rooted in theory but is centered on econometric estimation of the general equilibrium
effects of trade shocks. Section 2.1 discusses in detail the relationship between our approach and the
quantitative trade literature.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the model, while Section 3 discusses
identification and estimation. Section 4 describes the data and Section 5 presents the results. Section
6 discusses the quantitative implications. The details of the derivations, data construction and
manipulation, and additional empirical results are collected in the Appendices.


                                  2. T                         F
Economic environment. We consider the steady state of a small open economy Home (H ) in a
world with N other countries (indexed by i and n ), K sectors indexed by k , and J factors of production
indexed by j . Home is "small" in the sense that Home variables do not affect foreign aggregates, but
it may be large in its own domestic market and will face downward sloping demand for its products
in international markets (as in Armington, 1969).

Technology and market structure. Each sector within each country produces a homogeneous good.
Primary factors L H, j are in fixed supply and mobile across sectors. Input and output markets are
competitive. Firms are infinitesimal and perceive a production technology that is constant returns to
scale in their own inputs, but may feature external economies of scale both within and across sectors.
We summarize the production technology in each sector by the unit cost function

                                       c H, k   c H, k (wH , PH , LH ; TH, k ) ,

where wH and PH are vectors of primary factor prices and intermediate goods prices, LH is the matrix
of primary factor allocations, and TH, k is an exogenous productivity shifter. We assume the unit cost
function is continuously differentiable in all of its arguments. Trade across countries is subject to
iceberg bilateral trade barriers in , k to ship from from i to n in sector k .




                                                          5
Demand. The sector k composite good in country n is an Armington aggregate of varieties coming
from different source countries,
                                                                                                k
                                                         1         k -1                k -1     k -1
                                                         k         k                   k
                                         Q n ,k        z n , k · q nn , k +         q in , k           ,                (2.1)
                                                                              i n


where q in , k is the quantity of sector k exported from country i to country n , and z n , k is an exogenous
demand shifter that controls the degree of home bias in consumption. We assume that Q n , k can be
used as both a final good and an intermediate input in country n . This assumption plus equation
(2.1) implies that foreign demand for Home's exports in sector k takes the form

                                                                                                En ,k
                                      p Hn , k · q Hn , k      ( c H, k · Hn , k )1-k ·          1-k
                                                                                                           ,            (2.2)
                                                                                               Pn , k

where p Hn , k      c H, k · Hn , k is the price of the good in destination n , and E n , k and Pn , k are total
expenditure and the CES price index associated with equation (2.1) in country n .
    All factor income in Home accrues to a representative consumer, who has homothetic preferences
over sectoral quantity bundles Q H, k .

Foreign shocks.       We now define the key object underlying our analysis. By summing export revenues
across foreign export destinations, we get total foreign revenues as a function of Home costs and
External Firm Market Access (FMA),

                                                                  1-                  1-         En ,k
                                           p Hn , k q Hn , k     c H, k k ·         Hn ,k
                                                                                        k
                                                                                          ·        1-k
                                                                                                               .        (2.3)
                                     n H                                      n H               Pn , k

                                                                                      FMA H, k


    External firm market access has three key features. First, FMA H, k is an exogenous demand shifter
for sector k from Home's perspective, since it depends only on foreign variables when Home is a
small open economy. To interpret it, note that an x % change in FMA H, k implies an x % change in
the quantity that foreigners demand holding the price fixed. Second, any change in foreign demand
affects the Home equilibrium only through its effects on FMA H, k . Importantly, FMA H, k has no
bilateral dimension, and varies at the exporter and sector level. Third, FMA H, k can be estimated from
trade data using conventional techniques, as described in Section 4.
    To complete our description, we define External Consumer Market Access (CMA) by summing Home
   Homotheticity allows us to utilize price indices from national accounts in the empirical section.
   This concept differs from other definitions of market access (e.g. Redding and Venables, 2004) in that it excludes domestic
demand.




                                                                     6
imports across source countries:

                                                             EH, k
                                         p nH, k · q nH, k    1-
                                                                        ·         (c n , k · nH, k )1-k .                   (2.4)
                                   n H                       PH , k k       n H

                                                                                      CMA H, k


From Home's perspective, CMA H, k is an exogenous supply shifter. An x % change in CMA H, k causes
an x % change in Home's expenditure on foreign goods, holding total sectoral expenditure fixed. What
drives this shift in expenditure is an exogenous change in import prices c n , k · nH, k , modulated by
the demand elasticity. As with FMA H, k , CMA H, k summarizes all relevant information about foreign
supply.
    Our paper focuses on estimating the general equilibrium impact of foreign demand shocks, but in
principle the same techniques could also be used to estimate the impact of foreign supply shocks. In
practice, limited statistical power due to the lower variability of the foreign component of CMA H, k in
the trade data precludes reliable estimation of these effects. As will become clear below, the CMA H, k
will serve as important elements of the control set during estimation, but their impacts themselves will
not be reported in the baseline analysis. Appendix B.5 provides a fuller discussion of the CMA H, k ,
and reports estimates of their impact on income.

Competitive Equilibrium.             We define a static competitive equilibrium as a set of goods and factor
prices and allocations such that firms and consumers optimize taking prices as given, factor and output
markets clear and trade balances. Under our assumptions, we can characterize the equilibrium set as
the set of solutions to a system of simultaneous equations in the unit cost and expenditure functions,
factor prices and allocations, and trade balance (all derivations are in Appendix A). The equilibria are
completely determined by the cost functions c H, k (·), utility function U (·), the substitution elasticities k
and the exogenous variables (productivity and demand shifters, external firm and consumer market
access, and primary factor supplies).
    Our first order approach to estimation and counterfactual welfare analysis requires a unique and
smooth mapping from the exogenous variables to equilibrium outcomes, at least locally. Without
uniqueness the data would contain little or no information on how different foreign shocks system-
atically affect real income. There are no general results available on the equilibrium properties of
this class of models, and we do not pursue them here. We assume a unique and smooth equilibrium
mapping for the rest of the paper.
    To be precise, the nH, k component of CMA H, k may have elements that are controlled by the Home country, such as
import tariffs or other inward trade barriers that may be endogenous. In principle this applies to FMA H , k as well, although
most countries do not intentionally impose barriers to exports. While the component of CMA H, k that depends only on
foreign variables can be extracted from the trade data, it has very low cross-country variability relative to the strictly foreign
component of FMA H, k .
    Our framework does allow small differences in either domestic fundamentals or foreign market access to have large
impacts on long-run real income, a feature that many models with multiple equilibria are designed to capture.
    See Kucheryavyy et al. (2020) and Allen et al. (2020) for some results that apply to special cases of our framework.



                                                                  7
2.1    First Order Welfare Approximation

We now drop the H subscript. Using our assumption of homothetic preferences to equate real expen-
diture with welfare and the assumption of trade balance to equate nominal GDP with expenditure,
we can write Home's welfare as

                                                          1-k            Ek
                                               k K   µk ck      · zk     1- k   + FMA k
                                                                        Pk
                                       y                                                  .                              (2.5)
                                                                    P

Welfare thus corresponds to the real income of primary factors, computed as the nominal income
divided by the aggregate price index P. Nominal primary factor income is in turn the value of gross
output times the share of value added in gross output µ k .
      Equation (2.5) highlights the two ways that changes in FMA k affect Home's welfare. There are
direct effects through changes in foreign sales when FMA k changes. There are also indirect effects
on domestic prices and quantities as Home producers and factor owners alter their production plans
and consumers alter their consumption patterns in response to these external shocks. A unique and
smooth mapping from domestic and foreign shocks to equilibrium quantities implies that, to a first
order, the total effect of a set of log changes in foreign demand on log welfare is approximately

                                           d ln y         e
                                                          k ·  k d ln FMA k ,
                                                            x  ex
                                                                                                                         (2.6)
                                                      k


where  ex
       k
          is the initial share of total sales accounted for by exports in sector k .

Discussion.       The elasticities  ex
                                    k
                                       encapsulate the general equilibrium response of real income to small
exogenous changes in foreign demand in different industries. The main goal of this paper is to estimate
them. As evident from (2.3), foreign demand shocks in this environment can come from a variety of
sources, such as foreign taste or productivity shocks and changes in aggregate foreign expenditure,
iceberg trade costs, or foreign trade policy. To interpret these elasticities, consider the following
thought experiment. Two small open economies, initially identical in every respect, experience a
different pattern of foreign demand shocks. Specifically, suppose economy A sees a 1% increase in
foreign demand in industry 1 while economy B sees a 1% increase in foreign demand in industry
2. Which economy will experience a greater change in real income? Assuming both industries have
the same initial export sales shares, the answer is the economy that gets the shock to the industry
with the highest  ex
                  k
                     . These elasticities are thus directly relevant to understanding how the evolution
and cross-country variation in foreign demand have shaped the level and distribution of income
across countries. They are also closely related to the welfare impact of changes in iceberg trade costs
and foreign tariffs, and thus map to counterfactual experiments common in the quantitative trade
    The foreign sales shares  e k
                                  x serve to weight the foreign demand shocks by the importance of foreign sales by sector.

A valid alternative approximation absorbs these foreign sales shares into the coefficients  e
                                                                                            k
                                                                                              x . The expression in the text is
preferable for both interpretation and estimation: see the discussion below and in Section 3.


                                                                8
literature.
    From here, there are several ways to proceed. The dominant approach in the quantitative trade
literature would be to complete the description of the model, which here would amount to specifying
functional forms for c H, k and the utility function U (·). Having done that, the model will feature well-
defined propagation mechanisms, and can be disciplined with data. Quantification can take the form
of estimating structural parameters using the partial equilibrium relationships implied by the model.
General equilibrium responses to shocks are then computed using these estimated parameters, the
initial shares and the model structure, but are not themselves directly disciplined by the data. A
very incomplete list of recent examples includes Eaton and Kortum (2002), Caliendo and Parro (2015),
Bartelme et al. (2019) and Fajgelbaum et al. (2020). Alternatively, another strand of the literature
recovers structural parameters by computing or simulating the general equilibrium response of the
model to shocks, and comparing model moments with data. By construction, this method produces
parameter estimates that give the best in-sample fit of the chosen model to the (targeted) moments
of the endogenous variables in general equilibrium. Examples in the international trade literature
include Yi (2003), Fieler et al. (2018), Allen et al. (2020), Adão et al. (2020a), and Adão et al. (2020b).
Crucially, both approaches impose a fully specified model on the data.
    Instead, this paper estimates  ex
                                   k
                                      econometrically. As such, for us  ex
                                                                        k
                                                                           are not generally structural
parameters. While our strategy has more in common with the latter quantification approach than
the former, we impose less structure than would be required to use a fully specified model for
estimation. Rather than explicitly modeling and quantifying each aspect of the underlying structure
of the economy, we recover the reduced form elasticities that are directly relevant to the relationship
between foreign demand shocks and welfare. One clear advantage over methods that require a more
complete specification of the model is that our estimates are robust to model uncertainty within the
wide class of trade models encompassed by our framework. On the other hand, compared to the
reduced-form empirical literature on trade patterns and income (summarized in, e.g. Lederman and
Maloney, 2012) we provide enough structure to enable clear interpretation, precise conditions for
identification in terms of model primitives, and local counterfactuals.
    There are some costs to achieving robustness to model uncertainty. First, completely specifying
a (correct) model permits more efficient estimation of the relevant parameters. Second, a structural
model reveals the economic mechanisms that generate the results. Third, a fully specified model can
be solved in its nonlinear form, which enables more accurate counterfactuals with respect to large
shocks. We view our strategy as a complement to the fully structural approach. In particular, our
    The first order welfare impact of a change in iceberg export trade barriers or foreign tariffs is given by

                                                    ln y
                                                       ex     ( k - 1) ·  e x
                                                                              .
                                                    ln k                  k


    By "partial equilibrium" we mean estimation approaches that utilize a strict subset of the model equations to estimate
any given parameter. An example would be the estimation of trade elasticities in a gravity model using only the implied
relationship between relative trade costs and relative trade shares.



                                                              9
estimates can be used as moments to be targeted by models, either for estimation or as out-of-sample
validation. Section 6 implements one example of such an exercise, by evaluating the ability of a series
of quantitative trade models to match our estimates under different parameter values.
      While there are some simple theoretical environments in which the  e
                                                                         k
                                                                           x
                                                                             do not vary by sector,
most quantitative trade models imply that they do.                    In an efficient economy the  e
                                                                                                   k
                                                                                                     x
                                                                                                       are completely
determined by the direct impact of foreign demand shocks on the terms of trade, which varies across
sectors inversely with the trade elasticity. However, the laissez-faire competitive equilibrium of an
Armington economy is not generally welfare-maximizing from the individual country perspective
due to its unexploited international market power and domestic distortions (such as industry-level
external economies of scale). The size and industry variation in the  e
                                                                      k
                                                                        x
                                                                          are determined by the
interaction of these factors with other sector characteristics, such as openness to trade, the position in
the input-output network, and the final use of the industry (consumption vs. investment). Appendix
A.3 presents some simple examples and a fuller discussion, while Section 6 and Appendix A.4
detail a more realistic quantitative environment featuring scale economies, intermediate goods and
endogenous capital accumulation, and present an analytical solution for  ex
                                                                         k
                                                                            . The formula for  ex
                                                                                               k
                                                                                                  in
the more full-fledged model makes it clear that the  ex
                                                     k
                                                        generically differ across sectors, and depend on
the full structure of the economy in ways that are increasingly complex and sensitive to assumptions.
This very complexity provides one of the primary motivations for our more agnostic, data-driven
approach to quantification.
      We briefly discuss some isomorphisms and extensions. We use the competitive Armington envi-
ronment in the theoretical framework to maximize clarity. The truly crucial assumptions are gravity
in trade flows, homothetic upper tier preferences and the unique and smooth equilibrium mapping.
Models with alternative micro-foundations for gravity, such as those based on Eaton and Kortum
(2002), Krugman (1980), or Melitz (2003) with a Pareto distribution for productivity, will be isomor-
phic to our model in the sense that they have a first order approximation of the same form as equation
(2.6) and the same interpretation of the market access elasticities  ex
                                                                     k
                                                                        . In addition, while the model
described above is static, equation (2.6) is also valid for small shocks in the steady state of a dynamic
economy with some reproducible factors of production. One example of a dynamic model with such
a steady state representation is described in Section 6.


                                   3. I                                     E

3.1    Identification

We now consider identification of the market access elasticities  ex
                                                                  k
                                                                     in equation (2.6). We will view
data as a collection of small open economies (indexed by i ) observed over a number of steady states
    Note that the null hypothesis that the  e
                                            k
                                              x are the same across sectors is testable. Section 5 reports statistical tests of this
null, which is rejected by our estimates.



                                                                10
indexed by t . For each economy and point in time, we observe real income y i , t and a set of additional
equilibrium outcomes { x ik , t } (e.g. factor prices, trade shares, foreign demand and supply shifters,
expenditure shares, etc). While foreign demand and supply shifters (FMA ik , t and CMA ik , t ) are not
directly observable, they can be consistently estimated from trade data (see Section 4) and we will
treat them as observable for the rest of this section.
     For a given small economy, and suppressing i , t subscripts, the log change in real income between
two steady states can be written as a function of the trade-share-weighted log changes in FMA k , other
changes in exogenous variables { d ln a k }, and the initial fundamentals of the economy { Z k }:

                              d ln y     F {  ex
                                              k d ln FMA k } , { d ln a k } , { Z k } ,                                 (3.1)
                          { d ln a k }   {{  im
                                             k ln CMA k } , { d ln Tk } , { d ln z k } , { d ln L j }} ,

                               {Zk }     {{Tk } , { z k } , { L } , { FMA k } , { CMA k }} .

We proceed in several steps. First, we assume that the equilibrium mapping G({ Z k })  ({ x k })
between all relevant exogenous variables and observable equilibrium outcomes is locally smoothly
invertible; this implies that the observables "reveal" all relevant aspects of the initial state of the
economy.      Using this assumption, we can rewrite (after redefining F ) the log change in real income
as
                                    d ln y      F {  ex
                                                     k d ln FMA k } , { d ln a k } , { x k } .                          (3.2)

Second, we consider the joint distribution of the domestic shocks ({ d ln Tk }, { d ln z k }, and { d ln L }),
which may depend on the initial state of the economy. We decompose each domestic shock into its
conditional expectation with respect to the initial state and a residual term that satisfies E [ k |{ x k }]
0 , k , which allows us to write (again redefining F )

                                d ln y       F {  ex
                                                  k d ln FMA k } , { d ln a k } , { x k } , {  k } ,
                                                                          ~                                             (3.3)

        ~ k } is a set of observable shocks (e.g. {  im
where { a                                            k
                                                        d ln CMA k }). Finally, we apply Taylor's Theorem
to all variables in equation (3.3) and re-introduce the i , t subscripts to derive our log-linear estimating
equation
                      d ln y i , t   +          ex
                                                k ·  ik , t d ln FMA ik , t +  d ln a it + x i , t +  i , t ,
                                                     ex
                                                                                    ~                                   (3.4)
                                         k

where  reflects the initial point of approximation, d ln a
                                                         ~ it is a vector of observable shocks, xi , t is
the vector of initial observables and  i , t combines the first-order effects of domestic shocks with the
approximation error.
     In order to interpret the OLS estimates ^ ex as the causal effect of foreign demand shocks on real
                                               k

    This is a typical property of quantitative trade models, that justifies the widespread use of "hat algebra" (Dekle et al.,
2008) to conduct counterfactual analysis. Not every exogenous variable needs to be identified, only the combinations of
parameters that are sufficient to compute counterfactual changes.



                                                                 11
income, we need the additional assumption that

                                        E [ |{  e
                                                k d ln FMA k } , d ln a , x]
                                                  x
                                                                      ~                0.                      (3.5)

Recalling that E [ | x]    0 by construction, assumption (3.5) thus states that adding foreign shocks to
the information set does not help predict the component of the unobserved domestic innovations that
are orthogonal to the initial state.
      There are three principal ways this assumption might be violated. First, domestic shocks in a
large country will affect foreign incomes and prices in international general equilibrium, creating a
structural correlation between domestic shocks and foreign demand and supply shocks. Our small
open economy assumption formally rules out this possibility, and quantitative trade models typically
find this channel to be quite weak (Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare, 2014). We also conduct a number of
robustness checks in Section 5 designed to address this potential source of bias. A second concern is
that domestic policies (e.g. tariffs) affect foreign market access and may respond to domestic shocks.
We address this issue by estimating foreign shocks using a leave-one-out estimation strategy that uses
only foreign data. Finally, exogenous spatial correlation in domestic shocks could lead to violations
of (3.5), with the potential for bias in either direction. We conduct several exercises in Section 5 to
address this issue.


3.2     Estimation

Estimation of equation (3.4) by OLS is consistent for the  ex
                                                           k
                                                              under the assumptions of smooth invert-
ibility plus the exogeneity condition (3.5). However, in practice estimation must confront the scarcity
of medium- or long-run country growth rates relative to the number of distinct industries that are
observed in the trade data. This imbalance raises two related but distinct issues: i) the large number
of parameters of interest {  ex
                             k
                                }, and ii) the large number of controls. We discuss our methods for
handling each of these challenges below.
      We lack sufficient data to precisely estimate each  ex
                                                          k
                                                             separately for highly disaggregated industries.
We reduce the number of parameters by grouping industries into a smaller number mutually exclusive
clusters, and estimating a single elasticity per cluster. Formally, we group industries into G clusters
and estimate the equation

                    d ln y i , t   +          ex
                                              g ·  i g , t d ln FMA i g , t +  d ln a
                                                   ex
                                                                                    ~ it + xi , t +  i , t ,   (3.6)
                                       g G


where
                                   ex
                                   i g , t d ln FMA i g , t            ex
                                                                       ik , t d ln FMA ik , t .                (3.7)
                                                                k g

The cluster-level elasticities  ex
                                g can be interpreted as weighted averages of the industry-level elastic-
ities, with the weights reflecting the variance of the industry-level shocks and their covariance with

                                                               12
one another. Note that we do not assume that the industries within each cluster are identical to one
another; each industry maintains its separate foreign demand shock and initial export sales share.
    While it is possible to estimate and interpret cluster-level elasticities for any grouping scheme,
both estimation and interpretation are facilitated by choosing clusters of industries that share similar
characteristics. As discussed in Section 2, theory predicts that the  ex
                                                                      k
                                                                         are determined by sectoral
characteristics such as position in the production network, factor intensities, and so on. Clustering
industries with similar characteristics thus has the benefit of minimizing intra-cluster heterogeneity in
the  ex
     k
        , which increases efficiency in estimation. It also helps locate the ultimate sources of variation
in the cluster-level elasticities in terms of the shared characteristics of industries in each cluster. The
lower-digit groupings of conventional industrial classification schemes (e.g. SIC, NAICS) are not
generally constructed based on the relevant industry features, so we construct our own groups based
on a number of potentially relevant characteristics using machine learning techniques. Section 4
describes the clustering procedure in detail.
    The second issue we need to address is the large set of control variables, which includes the
variables from the initial state (e.g. trade shares) as well as contemporaneous foreign supply shocks.
We deal with this problem by using the Post-Double-Selection estimator developed by Belloni et al.
(2014b, 2017). This approach involves selecting a subset of "important" controls by regressing each
dependent and independent variable on the full set of potential controls using an estimator that sets
some or all of the coefficients to zero (e.g. LASSO). The selection is "double" in that the controls are
selected based on their correlations with both the dependent and independent variables. The union
of the sets of controls that are thus selected (i.e. have non-zero coefficients) in each regression then
form the control set for an OLS regression of the dependent variable on the independent variables,
including the selected controls.
    Belloni et al. (2014b) show that this estimator is consistent and asymptotically normal, with the
usual standard errors generating uniformly valid confidence intervals, under conditions that are
quite plausible in our setting. The most important condition is that the true control vector admits an
approximately sparse representation in the sense that the true control function can be well-approximated
by a function of a subset of the controls.            This condition does not require that the control function
exhibit true sparsity, only some combination of true sparsity, many small coefficients, and high
correlation between controls. These conditions seem reasonable in our application. We discuss our
implementation of the Post-Double-Selection estimator in detail in Section 5 and in Appendix B.4.
    Note that simply aggregating the control variables into clusters in the same way as we do the foreign demand shocks
would not, in general, lead to consistent estimates of the group-level elasticities.
    We refer the reader to Belloni et al. (2014a), Belloni et al. (2014b) and Belloni et al. (2017) for additional details and
regularity conditions.




                                                             13
                4. D      ,C                        F            S         E
This section briefly summarizes our data sources and measurement strategy. Appendix B collects the
detailed descriptions of all steps.


4.1     Data

Our empirical implementation requires data on (i) real income per capita, (ii) sectoral bilateral trade
flows and trade barriers, and (iii) sectoral characteristics. Income per capita is sourced from the Penn
World Tables 9.0, computed as the real GDP at constant national prices divided by population. We
drop countries with population less than 2 million from our sample. Per capita income growth is
computed at 10-year intervals for a maximum of 5 10-year growth rates per country (there are some
missing values).
      The bilateral trade flow data at the 4-digit SITC Rev 2 level come from the UN COMTRADE
Database. We convert the trade data from the SITC to the 1997 NAICS classification. Appendix B.1
describes the construction of the concordance in detail. All in all, the 784 4-digit SITC items are
matched to 268 NAICS sectors. Among them are 233 manufacturing, 26 agricultural, and 9 mining
sectors. Geographic variables (bilateral distance and contiguity measures) come from CEPII. The final
sample covers 127 countries, 268 sectors and 5 decades from 1965 to 2015, with a total of 548 10-year
GDP growth rate observations.
      A machine learning algorithm groups 233 manufacturing sectors into clusters based on their
sectoral characteristics. While our set of sectoral characteristics is to some extent dictated by data
availability, we assemble a collection of indicators tied to mechanisms prominent in the economic
growth literature, such as physical (Solow, 1956) and human (Becker, 1975) capital, position in the
input network (Jones, 2011), and contracting institutions (Acemoglu et al., 2005). We use data from
the United States to measure the sectoral characteristics, since data at a comparable 4-digit level
of disaggregation are not available for a large sample of countries. We collect data on 7 features:
investment sales shares, intermediates using shares, intermediates sales shares, 4-firm concentration
ratios, skilled worker shares, physical capital intensities, and the contract intensity of inputs. Sectoral
characteristic variables are collected from various data sources with similar but not always identical
industry classifications. We convert all of them to the 1997 NAICS classification.
      Our measures of the investment sales shares, intermediates sales shares and intermediate using
shares are based on data from the 1997 Benchmark Detailed Make and Use Tables. The investment
sales share is computed as the ratio of spending on sector k for investment purposes to the the total
gross output of sector k . Thus, this variable captures in a continuous way the extent to which sector
k produces capital goods. Similarly, intermediates sales and using shares of gross output capture the
extent to which sector k is a large producer or user of intermediate goods, respectively. The four-firm
concentration ratios are sourced from the 2002 Economic Census. The skilled worker shares are


                                                    14
calculated as the share of workers in sector k that have a bachelor degree or higher, and are computed
based on data from the 2000 American Community Survey. The capital intensity variable is measured
as 1 minus the labor share of value added (payroll), based on the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry
Database. The contract intensity of a sector is measured as the fraction of a sector's inputs that need
relationship-specific investments, and comes from Nunn (2007). We use the version of this variable
that measures the fraction of inputs not sold on organized exchanges and not reference priced to
capture the importance of relationship-specific investments in a sector.


4.2    K-means Clustering

We use the k-means clustering algorithm (MacQueen et al., 1967) to group sectors into clusters based
on the 7 characteristics described above. Sectors are assigned to clusters based on their characteristics
so as to minimize the within-cluster sum of squared deviations from the cluster mean. The k-means
algorithm works as follows: given M manufacturing sectors, each with a vector of N different sectoral
characteristics, x ( k )  RN , k         1 , . . . , M , assign the M sectors into G clusters. The G clusters are
indexed by g          1, 2, . . . , G.

   1. Initialize cluster centroids m 1 , m 2 , . . . , m G  RN for each cluster.

   2. Assign each sector k to the cluster whose centroid is closest to x ( k ). The cluster assignment is
        c (k )  {1, 2, . . . , G },
                                               c (k )   argmin || x ( k ) - m g || 2 .
                                                        g {1 ,..., G }


   3. Replace cluster centroid m g by the coordinate-wise average of all points (sectors) in the g th
       cluster,
                                                          M
                                                          k 1 1( c ( k )    g)   · x (k )
                                               ^g
                                               m             M
                                                                                            .
                                                             k 1 1( c ( k )      g)

   4. Iterate on steps 2 and 3 until convergence.

We use the "k-means ++" algorithm proposed by Arthur and Vassilvitskii (2007) to choose the initial
values for the k-means clustering algorithm, and do extensive checks using alternative starting points.
Following standard practice, we normalize the values of each characteristic to have zero mean and
unit variance.
      The algorithm above requires a choice of the number of clusters. There is no unambiguously
optimal method for choosing the number of clusters, although there are a number of conceptually
similar approaches based on maximizing various measures of cluster fit. We use the silhouette width
(Rousseeuw, 1987) as our measure of cluster fit. Loosely speaking, the silhouette width measures the
    This step is prudent because k-means clustering is not invariant to the scale used to measure the characteristics. If a
particular characteristic takes on a broader range of values than the others, it will be given higher weight when assigning
industries to clusters.



                                                              15
similarity of industries within a cluster relative to industries in the nearest cluster. A good clustering
scheme will maximize the average silhouette width while minimizing the number of sectors near the
boundaries. The silhouette analysis suggests that either 4 or 5 are good values for the number of
clusters. Appendix B.2 reports the results of the silhouette analysis along with a fuller discussion. In
the interest of parsimony we choose to group the 233 manufacturing industries into 4 clusters in our
baseline analysis, and show that our results are insensitive to this choice.
      Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of the 4 clusters. Since each cluster has some salient features
that distinguish it from others, we name the clusters based on these key features. It is important to
stress that the clustering procedure does not produce these cluster labels, nor does our identification
strategy hinge upon them. We use the cluster names, shown in the last row of Table 1, purely for
expositional purposes. Note also that there is no information contained in cluster numbers (1, 2, ...).
      The sectors in cluster 1 have the highest intermediate sales and using shares, and lowest contract
intensity. We label these sectors "raw materials processing" sectors. These sectors typically involve
the first stage of turning raw materials into manufactured goods. Cluster 2 has the second-highest
intermediate sales shares (after cluster 1), but considerably higher contract intensity than cluster 1.
We thus label it "complex intermediates." Cluster 3 stands out most clearly as capital goods, with
an average investment sales share of 0.52 compared to investment shares ranging from 0.00 to 0.05 in
the other clusters. Cluster 4 has a low intermediate sales share and a negligible average investment
sales share. Thus we label it "consumer goods." Table 2 lists the 3 most representative sectors in each
cluster, defined as those closest to the cluster centroid.
      As we do not have information on these characteristics for non-manufacturing sectors, we group
all agricultural sectors into cluster 5, and all mining sectors into cluster 6. In total, the 268 sectors are
grouped into 6 clusters.


4.3     Estimation Strategy for FMA ik , t

To obtain FMA ik , t for country i sector k at time t , we estimate structural sector-specific gravity
equations using the matrix of sectoral bilateral trade flows at decadal intervals.            For a given sector k
at time t , the gravity equation (2.2) can be rewritten as

                                                      1-          -1        1-
                                           ink , t                  k
                                                     c ik , t k · Pnk ,t
                                                                         · ink ,k
                                                                                t
                                                                                  ,                            (4.1)

where  ink , t denotes the share of n 's expenditure on sector k that is sourced from country i . Since
we do not observe domestic trade flows, we calculate  ink , t as the share of import expenditure. We
                                           1- 
model the bilateral resistance term ink ,k
                                         t
                                           as a function of geographic distance and contiguity with

  To reduce measurement error, we use three-year averages of the trade flows. For instance, to estimate the vector of
FMA ik , t for t 1965, we use the average trade flows for 1964, 1965, and 1966.




                                                           16
                           Table 1: Summary Statistics of Clusters in Manufacturing

                                                              Cluster
                                           1                  2              3               4      Mean     Std. Dev.
       Investment Share                  0.00                0.05           0.52           0.04     0.13       0.22
       Intermediates, Using              0.78                0.58           0.65           0.66     0.66       0.16
       Intermediates, Sales              0.84                0.70           0.27           0.28     0.57       0.31
       Concentration Ratio               0.47                0.27           0.38           0.56     0.40       0.21
       Skill Intensity                   0.32                0.28           0.35           0.36     0.32       0.13
       Capital Intensity                 0.68                0.55           0.54           0.70     0.61       0.10
       Contract Intensity                0.26                0.56           0.73           0.52     0.51       0.22

       Number of industries               60                  84             47             42
       Trade share                       0.33                0.26           0.23           0.11
       Label                        Raw Materials        Complex          Capital     Consumer
                                     Processing        Intermediates      Goods        Goods
       Abbreviation                    RAW                  INT            CAP         CONS

 Notes: This table reports the summary statistics of the sectoral characteristics among the sectors selected into each
 cluster. The last two columns report the mean and standard deviations of those characteristics among all manufacturing
 sectors. The row "Number of industries" reports the number of sectors in each cluster, and "Trade share" reports the
 fraction of world trade accounted for by sectors in that cluster. The bottom panel lists the intuitive labels of the clusters,
 as well as 3-letter abbreviations. Both are heuristic and assigned by the authors.


                          Table 2: The 3 Most Representative Sectors in Each Cluster


          Cluster     Label                                    Representative Sectors
                                       Naics       Description
                      Raw              324199      All Other Petroleum and Coal Products Manufacturing
               1      Materials        31131       Sugar Manufacturing
                      Processing       32419       Other Petroleum and Coal Products Manufacturing

                                    33512          Lighting Fixture Manufacturing
                      Complex
               2                    33531          Electrical Equipment Manufacturing
                      Intermediates
                                    339994         Broom, Brush, and Mop Manufacturing

                                       333911      Pump and Pumping Equipment Manufacturing
                      Capital
               3                       333994      Industrial Process Furnace and Oven Manufacturing
                      Goods
                                       333992      Welding and Soldering Equipment Manufacturing

                                       312130      Wineries
                      Consumer
               4                       335211      Electric Housewares and Household Fan Manufacturing
                      Goods
                                       33521       Small Electrical Appliance Manufacturing

 Notes: This table lists the 3 sectors closest to the cluster centroid for each cluster.



sector-time-specific coefficients, leading to our empirical specification

                                                                
                          ink , t    ex
                                     ik , t ·  nk , t · Distance in · exp  kt · Conti g in ·  ink , t ,
                                               im                 kt
                                                                                                                           (4.2)



                                                               17
where  ex
       ik , t
              is the exporter fixed effect,  im
                                             nk , t
                                                    is the importer fixed effect, and  kt and  kt are the
distance and common border coefficients. We estimate the non-linear equation (4.2) using the Poisson
Pseudo-Maximum Likelihood (PPML) method proposed by Silva and Tenreyro (2006) and Eaton et
al. (2012), separately for 268 sectors and each of the 5 decades spanning 1965-2015.
      We use our estimates from equation (4.2) to construct the external market access terms as follows:

                                                                              
                        FMA ik , t             E nk , t ( i ) ·  im
                                                                 nk , t · Distance in · exp  kt · Conti g in
                                                                                    kt
                                                                                                               (4.3)
                                         n i


where E nk , t ( i )    i   n ,i   E i nk , t is total importer n expenditure in k at time t when leaving country i
out.
      In practice, we add two wrinkles to the method described above. First, we employ the leave-
one-out strategy to remove any direct effect of a country's exports and imports on the fixed effects of
their trading partners. That is, we estimate equation (4.2) N times for each sector and time period,
each time leaving out the trade flows from a particular country i . We then construct each country
i 's foreign shocks using the estimates from the regression that omitted its data. Second, as is well
known,  ex
        ik , t
               and  im
                    nk , t
                           are identified only up to a sector-time-specific multiplicative constant and
require normalization. Rather than the usual practice of designating a particular numéraire country,
we restrict the sum of the logged importer effects to be zero. This normalization ensures that the
relative growth rates of the foreign shocks across industries are not driven by fluctuations in the trade
flows of the numéraire country, minimizing measurement error. Appendix B.3 provides a detailed
discussion.
      This procedure uses only foreign data to construct external market access and projects bilateral
flows onto a small number of variables (distance and contiguity). By construction, it excludes domestic
factors that act as country-specific average export taxes that apply to all destinations. It also excludes
idiosyncratic bilateral factors that affect trade flows. This tends to minimize concerns about domestic
policies or shocks influencing measured market access.


                                                  5. E                   R

5.1     Summary of Empirical Procedure

Because the estimation strategy involves several distinct components, before reporting the main
estimation results we provide a compact summary of the estimation steps:

   1. Leave-one-out gravity equation estimation with PPML to recover the foreign component of
        FMA ik , t and CMA ik , t by country and decade for 268 sectors.

   2. K-means clustering algorithm to group manufacturing sectors into 4 clusters. Agriculture and
        mining are separate clusters.


                                                                   18
   3. Construct cluster-level d ln FMA i g , t and d ln CMA i g , t .

                                                         ~ it and xi , t to select the set of controls.
   4. LASSO of d ln y i , t and d ln FMA i g , t on d ln a

   5. OLS regression of d ln y i , t on d ln FMA i g , t and selected controls to obtain estimates of  e x
                                                                                                       g .


5.2     Baseline Estimates

Figure 1 presents the estimation results graphically by displaying the coefficients on the foreign
demand shocks for each cluster. All specifications include (i) time effects; and (ii) the natural log of
initial GDP per capita, to control for conditional convergence (Barro and Sala-i-Martin, 1992). Clusters
1-4 are manufacturing clusters obtained by the k-means algorithm, cluster 5 is agriculture, and cluster
6 mining and quarrying. The darker/lighter bars depict 90%/95% confidence intervals obtained with
standard errors clustered at the country level.
      The coefficients in the left panel come from OLS estimation. The right panel displays the Post-
Double-Selection estimation results (Belloni et al., 2014b). The Post-Double-Selection model augments
the OLS specification with the controls that were selected by the procedure described in detail in
Appendix B.4. The first apparent feature of the results is the considerable heterogeneity in the
coefficients. Indeed, the F -tests reject the equality of these coefficients at the 1% level of significance.
Foreign demand shocks in the complex intermediates (INT), and the capital goods (CAP) clusters
have positive estimated real income effects that are notably larger than the other clusters, although
the confidence interval on CAP is fairly wide. In contrast, all other clusters have estimated elasticities
that are close to zero (although mostly positive) and that are relatively precisely estimated.
      The LASSO model includes a full set of potential controls, namely the full vector of d ln CMA g 's,
the industry-level initial equilibrium variables (initial import and export shares, and weighted initial
firm and consumer market access levels), initial population, initial capital, and initial per capita
income squared. In total, 1106 potential control variables are included and 6 of them are selected in
the double-selection procedure via LASSO. Appendix Table A4 lists the potential and the selected
controls in the Post-Double-Selection estimation.               Substantively the results are quite similar to the
OLS specification, although some confidence intervals widen.


5.3     Robustness

Assignment of sectors to clusters.           One concern with our approach is that clusters may be fragile
due to some sectors being on the margins between clusters. If those sectors are particularly influential,
then the results could be sensitive to the assignment of specific sectors to clusters. To assess the role
     We follow Belloni et al. (2014a) and choose the tuning parameter for the double-LASSO procedure through K-fold cross
validation: see Appendix B.4.3. The statistics literature often chooses the tuning parameter to be one standard deviation
above the minimizing value in order to select a more parsimonious model. Our baseline specification uses the minimizing
value, which results in more controls being selected. We also check robustness to using a smaller tuning parameter for
different specifications in Appendix Figures A5 and A7.



                                                           19
                                               Figure 1: Cluster-Specific Coefficients and Confidence Intervals

                   7.5




                                                                                                                          7.5
                                                                                      F(5,126)=5.05                                                                                          F(5,126)=3.81
                                                                                             p=0.00                                                                                                 p=0.00
      Elasticity of real income




                                                                                                             Elasticity of real income
                              5




                                                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                                                                                   2.97
                  2.5




                                                                                                                         2.5
                                                            2.08
                                                1.27                                                                                                   1.32

                                    0.20                                              0.08       0.07                                      0.17                                              0.11       0.05
      0




                                                                                                             0
                                                                          -0.47                                                                                                  -0.52
                   -2.5




                                                                                                                          -2.5
                                  RAW         INT        CAP          CONS         AG         MIN                                        RAW         INT        CAP          CONS         AG         MIN
                                                               Clusters                                                                                               Clusters

                                           95% confidence bands               90% confidence bands                                                95% confidence bands               90% confidence bands



                                                (a) OLS Estimates                                                                                   (b) LASSO Estimates

 Notes: This figure reports estimates of the  e x
                                              g coefficients in equation (3.6). All specifications control for (i) time effects
 and (ii) log initial GDP per capita. The left panel displays the baseline OLS estimates. The right panel displays the
 Post Double-LASSO estimates. 6 control variables are selected in the double-selection step. The bars display the 90%
 and 95% confidence bands, that use standard errors clustered by country. The boxes display the results of an F -test for
 equality of the coefficients in each plot.




of marginal sectors in our results, we perform two exercises. First, we add a 5th manufacturing
cluster. The results of re-clustering on 5 clusters are presented in Appendix Table A5. The basic
characteristics of the original 4 clusters and the labels we attach to them remain the same. When
given the opportunity to isolate a 5th cluster, the k-means procedure creates a cluster of skill-intensive
industries.                             The income regression results with 5 clusters are presented in Appendix Figure A6.
The 5th cluster itself does not have a positive impact on income, indeed the coefficients are relatively
precisely estimated zeros. The main findings regarding the income impacts of the other clusters are
preserved.
    In the second cluster robustness exercise, we assess the importance of sectors at the margins of
the cluster classification. We add noise (standard deviation of 10% of the actual variability) to each
characteristic of each sector, re-cluster sectors, and perform the full double-LASSO estimation using
the new clusters. We repeat this procedure 1000 times. The goal is to see how the cluster-specific
income-impact coefficients are affected by switching a small number of marginal sectors from one
cluster to another.
    Panel (b) of Appendix Figure A5 reports the results. The dots indicate our baseline coefficient
estimates, whereas the dashed bars indicate the 95% range of outcomes across simulations (not
confidence intervals). The figure reveals that many of the coefficient estimates are quite stable: the
range of estimates across simulations for raw materials processing, agriculture, and mining clusters
is very small. On the other hand, reclassification tends to boost the coefficients on consumption
    The mean skilled labor share of this cluster, 0.54, is 21 percentage points higher than the skilled labor share of the
second-most skill-intensive cluster.


                                                                                                        20
goods and to a lesser extent complex intermediates, at the expense of instability (in both directions)
in coefficient on capital goods. These results indicate that our most robust findings are that foreign
demand shocks in raw materials processing, consumption goods, agriculture, and mining have small
income impacts and those in complex intermediates have significant and large income impacts, while
the results for the the capital goods sector are less robust to this type of classification error.

Dropping large and contiguous trading partners.               We next assess the sensitivity of the results to
possible violations of the small country assumption. Country i can be a large trading partner of
country n , such that the fixed effects estimated for country n are affected by the shocks to country
i itself. Note that this concern is mitigated by the fact that the fixed effects are extracted from the
gravity equations using the leave-one-out approach, whereby country i is dropped from the gravity
sample when estimating the fixed effects that go into building country i 's FMA's. Nonetheless, we
check the robustness of the results by dropping the countries for whom i is a large trading partner
from the computation of the foreign demand shocks.
      Specifically, when constructing the country i 's FMA in sector k , we drop importer n from the
summation in equation (4.3) if more than 25% of its imports in sector k are from country i , i.e.
 ink , t > 0.25. The results are reported in panel (c) of Appendix Figure A5. The results are broadly
similar to the baseline specification.
      Our identification strategy relies on the assumption that country i 's unobserved productivity
shocks are uncorrelated with the foreign demand shocks. This assumption could be violated if
productivity shocks are spatially correlated, so that nearby countries are subject to similar productivity
shocks. To address this concern, we omit contiguous countries from the calculation of the FMA terms
and re-estimate the model. The results are reported in panel (d) of Appendix Figure A5, and reveal
very little change relative to the baseline.


5.4     Developed vs. Developing Countries

Our main specification pools all countries and time periods together and clusters on the industry
dimension alone. It is also interesting to consider clustering along the country dimension, i.e. whether
the impact of foreign shocks exhibits heterogeneity across different groups of countries.               One of the
more intriguing possibilities is that rich and poor countries systematically differ in the income impact
of foreign shocks to different sectors. To investigate this hypothesis, we split the sample into two
groups based on the World Bank's 2016 country classification by income. Developing countries are
those assigned by the World Bank to "low income" and "lower middle income" categories, and the
developed countries the remaining group. According to this classification, 70 countries belong to the
developed group, and 57 to the developing group. We then estimate elasticities of real income with
respect to foreign shocks for the two country groups separately.
   This heterogeneity could come from a combination of differences in underlying parameter values and in the point of
approximation.



                                                         21
Figure 2: Developed vs. Developing Countries: Cluster-Specific Coefficients and Confidence Intervals

                   7.5




                                                                                                                          15
                                                                                      F(5,69)=7.05                                                                                           F(5,56)=14.33
                                                                                            p=0.00                                                                                                  p=0.00
      Elasticity of real income




                                                                                                             Elasticity of real income
                              5




                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                                                   9.25
                  2.5




                                                                                                                         5
                                                            2.24
                                                1.56


                                    0.27                                                                                                               0.73                                  0.55
                                                                          -0.01                  0.05
      0




                                                                                                                                           0.06




                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                        -0.46

                                                                                      -1.13                                                                                      -1.86
                   -2.5




                                                                                                                          -5
                                  RAW         INT        CAP          CONS         AG         MIN                                        RAW         INT        CAP          CONS         AG         MIN
                                                               Clusters                                                                                               Clusters

                                           95% confidence bands               90% confidence bands                                                95% confidence bands               90% confidence bands



                                           (a) Developed Countries                                                                                (b) Developing Countries

 Notes: This figure reports estimates of the  e      x
                                                    g coefficients in equation (3.6) via the Post Double-LASSO. All specifications
 control for (i) time effects and (ii) log initial GDP per capita. The left panel displays the results for the sample of developed
 countries. 3 control variables are selected in the double-selection step. The right panel displays the results for developing
 countries. 3 control variables are selected in the double-selection step. The bars display the 90% and 95% confidence
 bands, that use standard errors clustered by country. The boxes display the results of an F -test for equality of the
 coefficients in each plot.




   Figure 2 reports the results of the baseline specifications for the developed and developing groups.
For both groups, the coefficients on demand shocks in complex intermediates are positive and pre-
cisely estimated, although the magnitude is larger for the developed country group. On the other
hand, the capital goods coefficient behaves very differently in the two samples: it is slightly smaller
than the baseline coefficient in the developed country sample, but much larger in the developing
country sample. The standard error on the capital goods coefficient is actually smaller for the devel-
oped country sample that the full sample case, while it is larger for the developing country sample.
We repeat each of the robustness checks described above for the rich and poor country sample split,
with the results reported in Appendix Figures A7-A9. The main results are robust to these different
specifications. Interestingly, the measurement error simulation for the split sample indicates much
more stability across simulations that the baseline case. Taken together, these results suggest that
the relatively large standard errors and sensitivity to classification errors observed for the capital
coefficient in the full sample may be in part due to the heterogeneity across the country subsamples.


                                                                     6. Q                                        I
We assess the economic significance of the estimated coefficients in two ways. The first is data-
driven. We combine our estimated elasticities with information on countries' trade patterns and
geographic location to quantify the heterogeneous impact of foreign demand shocks on real income
across countries. The second is model-based. We set up a quantitative small open economy model


                                                                                                        22
of production and trade featuring an input-output matrix, endogenous capital accumulation, and
sector-level scale economies, and explore whether it can reproduce the magnitude and pattern of the
empirically estimated elasticities.


6.1     Data: Observed Cross-Country Heterogeneity

Sectoral specialization.        In this exercise, we compute the elasticity of each country's income to a
worldwide uniform log-change in FMA, that is the same in every foreign sector and every foreign
country. Above, we found that foreign shocks in certain sectors have a higher income impact than in
others. As a result, even a foreign shock that is completely uniform across sectors would be predicted
to change real income differently across countries, depending on their initial trade shares. A simple
transformation of our estimating equation leads to the following expression for this elasticity:

                                               d ln y i , t
                                                                     e
                                                                     g  i g ,t .
                                                                       x ex
                                                                                                                    (6.1)
                                              d ln FMA
                                                               g G


By imposing uniform foreign shocks across all countries and sectors, this counterfactual allows us to
focus purely on the role of industrial specialization, as reflected in the  e x
                                                                            i g ,t
                                                                                   's. Countries that have
high export shares in clusters with a high estimated income impact will have a larger positive real
income response.
      We compute the elasticities (6.1) based on the 2015 trade shares and the double-LASSO estimates
from the right panel of Figure 1. Figure 3 plots them against log PPP-adjusted income per capita.
There is indeed a great deal of heterogeneity in the country impact of foreign shocks. The real income
elasticity with respect to foreign demand shocks ranges from essentially zero for countries chiefly
in Sub-Saharan Africa, to around 0.5 for some Central European and East Asian countries such as
Hungary, Slovakia, Malaysia, and Taiwan. The elasticities are positively correlated with real GDP per
capita, but there is still substantial heterogeneity for middle and high-income countries. This exercise
suggests that a country's trade patterns matter quantitatively in how foreign shocks translate into
domestic income levels.

Geography.       Having illustrated how the heterogeneity in countries' sectoral specialization affects
their real income response to foreign demand shocks, our next counterfactual is designed to illustrate
the role of geography. The same vector of worldwide demand shocks for a particular sector (which in
our model manifest themselves as changes in each country's sector-specific importer effect) translates
into different changes in the external firm market access faced by each exporter due to its geographic
position. As an example, suppose that in a particular period the importer effects reveal that China
    As a robustness check, Appendix Figure A10 plots the same elasticities using the  e   x
                                                                                         g estimates from Figure 2, which
vary across countries according to income. Despite large differences in the estimated elasticities for capital goods, the
resulting real income elasticities with respect to the uniform shock are quite similar for most countries. This is because
while the capital goods foreign demand shocks have a large coefficients among developing countries, capital goods exports
are quantitatively small for most poor countries (2.5% of exports on average).



                                                              23
              Figure 3: Elasticity of Real Income with Respect to a Uniform Foreign Shock




                               .6
                                                                                                              SVK
                                                                                                                HUN
                                                                                                                         TWN
                                                                                                             MYS

                                                                                                                   CZE
                 Elascity of the Growth Rate

                                                                                VNM
                                                                                                      THA
                                                                    KHM
                                                                    LSO
                                      .4



                                                                                                                      KOR   DEU

                                                                                                                   SVN
                                                                                                                                  IRL
                                                                                                    CRI                      SWE
                                                                                                                             AUT
                                                                                                                              NLD
                                                                                                                            BEL
                                                                                       PHL            BWA
                                                                                                          MEX
                                                                                                   TUN   ROM
                     .2




                                                                                 HND                        POL             FIN
                                                                                 NIC                   BGR LTU                  CHE
                                                                                                   MKD BLR            ISR
                                                                                                                             DNK
                                                                                             CHN                         ITA
                                                                                                                        FRA                   ARE
                                                                                        MAR                        PRT ESP
                                                                                                                        GBRCAN
                                                                          MRT    MDA       ALB
                                                                                           NAM                 HRV      JPN             NOR
                                                                                      COG          JOR
                                                                   HTI BGD                  SLV UKR
                                                                                          AGO      ZAF      TUR
                                                                                          LKA   DOM
                                                             TGO                KGZ
                                                                               IND
                                                                              LAO    UZB   IDN   IRQ
                                                                                               ECU
                                                                                                 TKM                          USA
                                                     MOZ      SLE                                                           OMN          KWT
                                                               MDG       ZMB                   AZE        CHL
                                                                                                        ARGRUS               SAU
                                                                TCD SEN
                                                               GIN                 PAK PRY
                                                                                   NGA   GTM         URY KAZ                                        QAT
                                                        CAF               GHA
                                                                     TZA KEN
                                                                         CMR              MNG
                                                                                    BOL GEO          BRA                NZL
                                                                                                                      GRC
                                                                          TJK               PER       LBN
                                               BDI
                                                      NERMWI BFAMLI
                                                                 UGABEN    CIV
                                                                                    YEM
                                                                                          ARM
                                                                                        SYR      COL DZA VEN
                                                                                                EGY                         AUS
                                                      ETH RWA       NPL        SDN
                               0




                                               6                             8                    10                                                  12
                                                                             Log Real GDP Per Capita


 Notes: This figure presents the scatterplot of the elasticity of real income with respect to a uniform foreign demand
 shock (6.1) against real GDP per capita. It is calculated using the baseline estimated  e x
                                                                                         g coefficients in equation (3.6)
 and the sectoral trade shares in 2015.



has a much larger demand shock for capital goods than does Germany. This pair of importer-
specific shocks will affect Belgium and Vietnam quite differently, as Vietnam is closer to China than
to Germany, and the opposite is true for Belgium. We would like to understand the size of this
heterogeneity induced by countries' geographic positions. We thus construct counterfactual real
income changes that would occur if Belgium experienced Vietnam's market access shocks. This
counterfactual answers the following question: how much would Belgium's real income change if
in a particular time period if it were picked up and moved to the place on the globe occupied by
Vietnam? We do this for every pair of countries and in each decade.
   To begin getting a sense of the magnitudes involved, Table 3 reports the results for a set of
prominent countries, namely the G7 and the BRICS. The first column reports the difference between
the country's actual decennial growth over 2005-2015 and the growth that would obtain if the country
were moved to the position of the median country, where "median" means the median difference
among all the possible counterfactual geographic positions. So, a value of 1 in the first column implies
that the country grew 1 percentage point faster over the course of the 2005-2015 decade in its actual
geographic position, relative to being moved to the median position in the world. The second and
third columns report the counterfactual growth differences due to being moved to the 25th and the
75th percentile geographic position for that country.


                                                                                             24
                        Table 3: Predicted Decennial Growth Difference, 2005-2015

                                                 Growth difference, actual vs:
                                                Median 25th pctile 75th pctile
                             G7
                             Canada              -3.25         -4.45           -1.24
                             France              -1.88         -2.52           -1.02
                             Germany             -3.78         -5.14           -1.60
                             Italy               -0.59         -1.19           0.12
                             Japan               5.59          5.12            6.30
                             UK                  -0.85         -1.40           -0.10
                             US                  -0.26         -0.49           0.00

                             BRICS
                             Brazil              0.34          0.09            0.79
                             China               -8.53         -9.19           -7.85
                             India               -0.10         -0.35           0.29
                             Russia              0.30          -0.19           0.91
                             South Africa        0.19          -0.30           1.03
 Notes: This table reports the differences in real income growth, in percent per decade, between the actual growth and
 the counterfactual growth that the country would experience if it were moved to the median (resp. 25th and 75th
 percentile) geographic position.



   These countries' geographic positions had a modest but noticeable impact on income. Among the
G7, Japan's income is nearly 6% higher at the end of the decade in its actual geographic position relative
to the hypothetical median location. By contrast, European G7 countries' income is 1-4 percentage
points lower in their actual geographic position when compared to the median. The picture for the
BRICS is less clear, with medians closer to zero. The exception is China, which would have been
substantially better off locating in the median position.
   Table 4 reports the summary statistics from the same exercise using all countries, by region and
decade. Most medians are between -1% and 1% over a decade. Interestingly, within the same
region the signs often flip from decade to decade. For instance, Western Europe/North American
countries' income in their actual geographic locations is 0.8% lower in 2005-2015, but 0.9% higher in
1995-2005, relative to the median location. The opposite is true for East Asia and Pacific. Note that
these comparisons capture the impact of changes in foreign demand on economic growth rates. So
the negative growth differentials are perfectly consistent with West European or East Asian countries
having high market access levels. What these results reveal is that in the last decade, the wealthy
West European countries were located next to countries with relatively slow-growing demand in key
sectors, and thus foreign demand has expanded more slowly for them than they would have if they
had been located in faster-growing regions of the world.
   In other groups of countries, the growth impact of geographic location is somewhat smaller in
absolute terms, and switches sign over time. The absolute impact of geography on growth tends to


                                                          25
Table 4: Predicted Decennial Growth Difference Relative to Median Geographic Location, Medians
by Region and Time Period

     Region                                1975               1985                1995                2005                2015

     East Asia & Pacific                    0.27              0.35                0.56                -1.01                0.46
                                      [ -0.06 , 0.61 ]   [ 0.01 , 1.20 ]     [ 0.27 , 2.45 ]     [ -2.29 , 0.08 ]    [ -0.10 , 2.47 ]
                                             10                14                  14                  14                   14

     Eastern Europe & Central Asia          0.01               -0.39              0.32                0.98                 -0.87
                                      [ -0.02 , 0.03 ]   [ -2.42 , -0.21 ]   [ 0.00 , 0.64 ]     [ 0.28 , 1.94 ]     [ -1.56 , -0.29 ]
                                              2                  6                 6                   24                   24

     Latin America & Caribbean             -0.19               0.10               -0.21               -0.14               -0.27
                                      [ -0.45 , 0.05 ]   [ -0.26 , 0.49 ]    [ -0.58 , 0.07 ]    [ -0.40 , 0.12 ]    [ -1.41 , 0.12 ]
                                            18                  18                 18                  18                  18

     Middle East & North Africa             0.03              -0.08               -0.10               -0.10                0.33
                                      [ -0.17 , 0.24 ]   [ -1.74 , 0.96 ]    [ -0.66 , 0.37 ]    [ -0.91 , 0.55 ]    [ -0.04 , 0.75 ]
                                              7                14                  14                  15                   15

     South Asia                             0.04              0.13                -0.19                -0.79               0.07
                                      [ -0.81 , 0.23 ]   [ 0.05 , 0.34 ]     [ -0.25 , 0.10 ]    [ -1.49 , -0.29 ]   [ -0.10 , 0.10 ]
                                              4                5                    5                    5                   5

     Sub-Saharan Africa                     0.02               0.03                -0.25              -0.03                0.19
                                      [ -0.09 , 0.26 ]   [ -0.06 , 0.21 ]    [ -0.38 , -0.06 ]   [ -0.15 , 0.54 ]    [ -0.05 , 0.41 ]
                                             28                 30                  30                 30                   33

     West Europe/North America             1.05               -0.30               1.39                 0.92                -0.82
                                      [ 0.16 , 2.26 ]    [ -1.57 , 0.11 ]    [ 0.53 , 2.38 ]     [ -0.85 , 2.25 ]    [ -2.46 , -0.45 ]
                                            18                 18                  18                   18                  18

 Notes: This table reports the region- and period-specific differences in economic growth, in percent per decade, between
 the actual growth and the counterfactual growth that the country would experience if it were moved to the median
 geographic position. The numbers in square brackets are the interquartile range across countries in that region and
 time period. The bottom rows report the number of countries in each cell.




rise over time, as countries become more open overall. In the last decade, the Middle East, South
Asia, and Sub-Saharan Africa have enjoyed a modest benefit from their geographic position, whereas
location has had a modest cost for Latin America and Eastern Europe/Central Asia.
   Finally, we evaluate which geographic locations are most advantageous from each country's
perspective. Thus, instead of asking how countries would fare relative to being in the geographic
position of the median country in the world, we ask what would have happened if it were moved
to a particular region. Appendix Table A7 presents the results for the period 2005-2015. It reports
the per annum change in growth for the median country in the row region relative to its growth if it
were moved to the median geographic location in the column region. For the regions at the extremes,
the geographic (dis)advantage is quite pervasive. In this decade, East Asia/Pacific countries tend
to exhibit higher actual growth relative to being moved to almost any region. By contrast, Western
European/North American countries would grow faster in most other regions. For other regions the



                                                                26
picture is more nuanced, and the sign of the growth impact switches across counterfactual regions.
By and large, countries would experience higher growth if they moved to East and South Asia, and
slower growth if they moved to Western Europe.


6.2     Theory and Quantification: "Proof-of-Concept"

We now ask whether the average level and the variation across clusters of the estimated coefficients
can be generated by a quantitative trade model that embodies mechanisms that have been explored
in the previous literature. To that end, we return to the small open economy model of Section 2,
specify mechanisms and functional forms, calibrate it, and compare the real income elasticities with
respect to foreign demand shocks inside the model to those estimated above. We stress that this
is a "proof-of-concept" exercise, rather than a strong stand on the precise economic mechanisms
behind the empirical estimates. There are many models, and potentially infinitely many parameter
combinations within each model, that could in principle match our empirical estimates. The objective
of this exercise is to explore whether the coefficients that we estimated can be generated by a relatively
standard quantitative trade model.
      To complete the description of the model, we need to specify the unit cost functions c k (·) and the
upper-tier utility function U (·). The representative consumer supplies a constant quantity of labor
L inelastically, owns the capital stock Kt , and chooses a sequence of consumption and investment to
maximize the present discounted value of consumption:

                                                           
                                     max{ C t ,It }        t 0     t Ct
                                              s .t .

                                    t C t + Pt I t
                                   PC                              w t L + r t Kt
                                             I
                                                                                       t
                                            Kt +1                  I t + (1 -  )Kt ,

where I t is investment, w t is the wage, r t is the price of capital,  is the depreciation rate, and PC
                                                                                                       t and
PI
 t are the consumption and investment price indices, respectively. Note that the sequence of budget
constraints incorporates the assumption of no international borrowing and lending.
      Total consumption and investment are aggregates of goods coming from different sectors:

                                                       e                            
                                     Ct              k
                                                  C kt                It         I ktk ,
                                              k                              k


where C kt and I kt are quantities of sector k good used for consumption and investment, respectively.
The sectoral compositions of consumption and investment may differ. The total quantity of sector k
good available for consumption and investment is an Armington aggregate of domestic and foreign
varieties (equation 2.1). As described in Section 2, the gravity relationship holds within each sector.
      Production in sector k uses labor, capital, and intermediates from other sectors. The unit cost


                                                              27
function in sector k is

                                                 -        1- µ             
                                   c kt     Tk L kt k w t r t            Pltl ,k ,
                                                                     l


where Plt is the ideal price index of sector l goods associated with aggregation (2.1), L kt is the
amount of labor employed in sector k , and µ +           l    l ,k   1, k . The two most important features
of this cost function are that sectors use output from other sectors as intermediate inputs, and the
existence of scale effects: the unit cost is decreasing in total sectoral employment (Bartelme et al., 2019;
Kucheryavyy et al., 2020). The strength of the scale effect is governed by the parameter k .
   We analyze the steady state of this economy in which all the prices and quantities are constant over
time. The steady state has a representation as a solution to a static model in which intermediate input
shares reflect the fact that capital is also a produced input, with the steady state demand for capital
governed by the rate of depreciation. To the first order, this model admits an analytical solution for
the changes in output and real GDP following a shock to FMA. Since our  ex 's are estimated for the 6
tradeable sector clusters, with some abuse of notation in this section k indexes clusters, and the model
is calibrated to data at the cluster level. We introduce a non-tradeable service sector, and calibrate its
size and role in production to the data. We use the WIOD database (Timmer et al., 2015) to obtain
the factor, production, consumption, investment and trade shares. Appendix A.4 details the model
solution and calibration.
   Our objective is to assess whether a simple model economy characterized by the typical distribution
of sector sizes, trade shares, and the typical shape of the input-output matrix can produce the income
elasticities to foreign shocks estimated in the data. To do this, we treat the elasticities of substitution
and of scale as free parameters, and select them to best match the vector of  ex 's across clusters
estimated in the data. Since there are 6  ex coefficients and potentially 12 different k 's and k 's,
there are potentially infinitely many parameter combinations that will deliver a perfect fit to  ex . To
make the exercise non-trivial, we suppress heterogeneity in elasticities across sectors so that there is
a single  and a single  that apply to all sectors of the economy (including nontradeables). We then
select a pair (, ) to minimize the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) between the vector of cluster-level  ex
from the data and the same objects in the model. We stress that the  ex will generically differ across
sectors in this environment even if  and  do not (and indeed, even if                      0) due to cross-sector
differences in trade shares, intermediate input shares, expenditure shares and final use, as illustrated
by the analytical solution in Appendix A.4.
   Figure 4 displays the result. It plots, for each cluster, the  ex estimated from the data and those
implied by the model. The clusters are shown in increasing order of estimated  ex . The model is quite
successful at replicating the estimated coefficients; the correlation between the  ex implied by the
model and those estimated from the data is 0.94, and the average value across clusters produced by
the model, 0.73, is also quite close to the data average of 0.68. To achieve this performance, the MAE-
minimization procedure selects an elasticity of substitution                  3.2, and a scale elasticity    0.29.

                                                      28
                Figure 4: Income Elasticities of Foreign Demand Shocks: Model vs. Data




                    3
                    2
                 ex
                 1  0
                    -1




                     CONS             MIN              AG              RAW           INT            CAP
                                                            Clusters

                                                Data        Model (lowest MAE)



 Notes: This figure plots the  e x coefficients as estimated in the data, and generated by the model, selecting  and  to
 minimize the MAE between the data and model  e x 's.



The substitution elasticity is reasonable in light of existing estimates (e.g. Broda and Weinstein, 2006).
There are fewer estimates of  in the literature. Bartelme et al. (2019) find a somewhat lower average
value of about 0.13. Importantly, the model generates the variation in  ex observed in the data
purely through internal propagation mechanisms, without appealing to heterogeneity in the free
parameters ( and  ) across clusters. It is also reassuring to see that an important subset of the
sectoral characteristics upon which our clustering scheme is based, such as position in the input-
output network and final use (consumption vs capital goods), seem to generate large differences in
the elasticities within the model. We explore this point further below.
    Appendix Table A1 presents some diagnostics on the model performance. Appendix Figure A1
plots the MAE against .           While strictly speaking the minimum MAE criterion selects a relatively
high  of 0.29, the MAE is actually quite flat from about                     0.17 to 0.30. This suggests that the
variation in the    ex   coefficients can actually be accounted for fairly well by a wide range of reasonable
parameter values. The dashed line displays the average  ex across clusters (right axis) against , with
the horizontal line for data average. While the variation is about equally well-explained by a variety
of  's, one needs relatively higher values of  to get the average  ex right. Interestingly, the model
matches the  ex for the capital goods cluster ­ by far the highest  ex in the data ­ almost exactly for all
    Note that this is the lowest MAE across all possible values of  conditional on the value of  on the x-axis. As 
increases, the  that minimizes the MAE tends to decrease.


                                                            29
                                                       Figure 5: Model Performance: Mechanisms
                  3




                                                                                                 3
  ex
  Decomposition of 
                  2




                                                                                                 2
                                                                                            ex
                                                                                            
                  1




                                                                                                 1
                  0




                                                                                                 0
                  -1




                                                                                                     RAW            AG          CONS            MIN      INT           CAP
                         RAW      AG          CONS       MIN          INT        CAP                                                 Clusters
                                                  Clusters
                                                                                                           baseline                                     no intermediates
                                higher-order effects           first-order effects                         tradable service sector                      no capital
                                                                 ex
                                direct effects                  coefficients (model)                       consumption shares equal investment shares



                       (a) Direct, First-, and Higher-Order Effects                                                  (b) Alternative Models

 Notes: The left panel displays the decomposition of the overall model  e x into direct, first-order, and higher-order
 effects. The right panel displays model  e x under alternative production structures.



 between 0.13 and 0.3. Thus, the sensitivity of the average  e x to  in the model is driven by other
clusters.

Mechanisms.                       To better understand the mechanisms driving the results, we first separate the overall
impact of foreign shocks into direct, first-order, and higher-order effects. Appendix A.4 presents the
formulas and the more detailed discussion. Here, "first-" and "higher-order" are used in the input-
output sense of intermediates being used directly vs. indirectly, not to be confused with the first-order
Taylor approximation to the solution that is used throughout. Intuitively, the direct effect only applies
to the sector experiencing the foreign demand shock and reflects how an increase in foreign sales
translates into higher aggregate sales in partial equilibrium. The first-order effect reflects the fact
that the sector experiencing a foreign demand shock changes its purchases of intermediates, and the
change in its value added affects final demand inside the home economy. It also captures the changes
in unit costs, both through wages and scale effects. Finally, the higher-order effects propagate these
shocks further, as sectors affected by the initially shocked sector in turn change their demand for other
sectors' output as well as the relative costs.
            The left panel of Figure 5 decomposes the model-implied coefficients into the three effects. Both
the levels and the variation across clusters are driven by higher-order effects. For the two sectors with
the highest GDP impact ­ capital and complex intermediates ­ the higher-order effects account for the
large majority of the total. This suggests that the entire matrix of sectoral interconnections matters
quantitatively for the heterogeneity in the income elasticities to foreign shocks.
            To highlight which determinants of higher-order propagation are key, we examine a set of al-
    As clarified by the Appendix A.4 equations, direct effects are not exactly the same across clusters because they differ in
average size. Figure 5 shows that those differences in the direct effect are fairly minor.


                                                                                       30
ternative economies that feature different internal propagation mechanisms. In the first alternative,
we suppress intermediate good usage by setting  k , l                   0 k , l , µ     1. In the second, we abstract
from capital ­ setting           1 ­ and thus from the responses of capital accumulation to shocks. This is
essentially a static trade model with labor as the only primary factor. The third alternative assumes
that the composition of investment is the same as that of consumption: e k                         k . Finally, the fourth
alternative assumes there is no non-tradeable sector, and assigns to services the level of trade openness
in both imports and exports ( f and  ex ) equal to the average of the traded sectors. This alternative
economy is interesting because most of the GDP impact of the shocks to the capital and complex
intermediates sectors on GDP is accounted for by the resulting expansion of the service sector. That
is, the proximate reason for the high GDP impact of foreign demand shocks in these tradeable sectors
is that service sector output goes up, mostly through higher-order effects. The service sector is special
in the baseline model because of its non-tradeability (as well as its large size). This implies that an
expansion in the service sector output does not lead ­ at least directly ­ to negative terms-of-trade
effects. As a result, changes in service sector output have the largest impact on real GDP. Importantly,
all 4 alternative models keep both exports and imports as a fraction of sectoral gross output the same
as in the baseline. Thus, all 4 models feature the same level of external "openness" in the tradeable
sector (and the first 3 models, economywide).                 Only internal propagation mechanisms inside the
economy differ between the alternative models and the baseline.
    The right panel of Figure 5 displays the model-implied  ex coefficients in the baseline and the
alternative models. The last 4 columns of Appendix Table A1 report the averages of  ex in these
alternative models, as well as the MAE and correlations between these models and the data. Removing
the input-output linkages has the largest impact on the model-implied  ex . The average falls by some
60% relative to the baseline, and variation across clusters all but disappears. The capital cluster still
has the highest coefficient, but at 0.5 it is one-sixth of the value in the data and baseline model. A
model with no capital is somewhat more successful at matching the data than the model with no
intermediates. It generates larger average  ex and a coefficient of 1.8 in the capital sector, much closer
to the data. Nonetheless, its average  ex still falls about 30% short of both the baseline model and data.
By contrast, the differences in the composition between investment and consumption goods do not
matter as much quantitatively. What is important is the existence of capital as an input, rather than
the relative composition of capital investment. The existence of a non-tradeable service sector ends
up mattering quite a bit as well. If we make the service sector as tradeable as the other sectors, the
average  ex falls by more than 50%, and the model does not generate coefficients that closely match
the observed variation across sectors.
    Finally, Appendix A.4 explores how successful this model can be without scale effects. It can match
    As pointed out by Baqaee and Farhi (2019), there are multiple notions of "keeping trade openness constant" when going
from data with intermediate inputs to a model with no intermediates, because one needs to decide whether to keep trade
flows constant as a share of gross expenditure or of value added. In these experiments, when we change the input-output
structure we keep trade constant as a share of gross expenditure. This is the cleanest procedure in our context, as it involves
changing only one scalar parameter ( µ), and avoids the need to reshuffle the entire trade share vector.


                                                              31
the average  ex under          2.2, which is low relative to conventional wisdom, but cannot match the
observed dispersion across sectors. Selecting cluster-specific k 's to minimize the MAE with respect
to the data yields k 's in the range of 4-7, but implies average  ex about one-third of the data value,
low dispersion across sectors, and the complex intermediate and capital goods coefficients that are
too small. In the absence of scale effects, the calibrated model lacks sufficient internal propagation
mechanisms necessary to generate the observed amount of dispersion in  ex across sectors for any
values of  .
   The model with a positive but common scale elasticity generates large dispersion in the  e
                                                                                            k
                                                                                              x
                                                                                                because
the endogenous productivity increase that results from sectoral expansion is amplified for strongly
connected sectors, which (all else equal) are too small in the laissez-faire equilibrium (Bartelme et al.,
2019). These effects are further amplified when the sector is relatively upstream from the non-traded
sector, which (all else equal) is also too small due to the positive terms-of-trade effects associated with
its expansion.
   Our main conclusions from this exercise are as follows. First, a relatively standard and parsimo-
nious model calibrated to a representative sectoral production and trade structure can successfully
reproduce the estimated cluster-level real income responses to foreign demand shocks. Importantly,
the quantitative model achieves this via internal propagation within the home economy, without
appealing to sectoral heterogeneity in substitution and scale elasticities. Furthermore, the model suc-
ceeds under reasonable substitution and scale elasticities, and in fact it performs well under a range of
those rather than strongly preferring a narrow set of values. However, substantial scale effects appear
important for the current crop of quantitative trade models to match the long run general equilibrium
response of economies to foreign demand shocks.
   Second, the entire structure of sectoral linkages inside the economy is important for the success of
this particular model. Most of the overall effect of foreign shocks is due to higher-order propagation,
rather than direct or first-order effects. Intermediate input linkages, capital accumulation, and service
sector non-tradeability all matter individually, in the sense that the model becomes less successful
(under the same structural elasticities) at replicating the data when one of these features is suppressed.


                                              7. C
Using a theoretically grounded approach and employing new empirical techniques, we have shown
that positive foreign demand shocks in sectors producing complex intermediate and capital goods
have a significantly higher real income impact than shocks in other sectors. Our estimates imply
that the interaction between initial specialization and the pattern of foreign shocks is important for
understanding the variety of growth experiences across countries. Our quantification shows that
trade models with scale effects, intermediate goods and endogenous capital accumulation can match
the empirical estimates.
   When the non-traded sector expands the traded sectors contract, yielding improvements in the terms of trade.


                                                         32
   Questions surrounding the effect of the external environment on economic development have been
central in the great policy debates of the past 60 years, from import-substituting industrialization to
the Washington Consensus to the "Washington Confusion" (Rodrik, 2006). Our results speak to these
debates insofar as they affirm the importance of the external environment for economic development
and validate a focus on the sectoral dimensions of policy. At the same time, it is important to
stress that our results do not in and of themselves imply that countries should use government
policy to encourage specialization in certain sectors, or that productivity growth is more valuable in
some sectors relative to others. These propositions pertain to the impact of domestic policies and
productivity shocks, and our paper does not provide any direct evidence on these effects. Our findings
do imply that, all else equal, countries should pursue increased market access more vigorously in
some sectors relative to others. A fuller understanding of optimal sectoral policy requires considering
domestic policies as well, along with the ever-mysterious drivers of productivity growth.




                                                  33
                                            R
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson, "Institutions as a Fundamental Cause of
  Long-Run Growth," in Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth,
  Vol. 1, Elsevier, 2005, chapter 6, pp. 385­472.

Adão, Rodrigo, Arnaud Costinot, and Dave Donaldson, "Nonparametric counterfactual predictions
  in neoclassical models of international trade," American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (3), 633­89.

  , Costas Arkolakis, and Federico Esposito, "General equilibrium effects in space: Theory and
  measurement," 2020. mimeo, Chicago Booth, Yale, and Tufts University.

  , Paul Carrillo, Arnaud Costinot, Dave Donaldson, and Dina Pomeranz, "Exports, Imports, and
  Earnings Inequality: Micro-Data and Macro-Lessons from Ecuador," July 2020. mimeo, Chicago
  Booth, GWU, MIT, University of Zurich.

Allen, Treb, Costas Arkolakis, and Yuta Takahashi, "Universal gravity," Journal of Political Economy,
  2020, 128 (2), 393­433.

Amiti, Mary and Jozef Konings, "Trade Liberalization, Intermediate Inputs, and Productivity: Evi-
  dence from Indonesia," American Economic Review, December 2007, 97 (5), 1611­1638.

Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, "New trade models, same old
  gains?," American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (1), 94­130.

Armington, Paul S, "A theory of demand for products distinguished by place of production," IMF
  Staff Papers, 1969, 16 (1), 159­178.

Arthur, David and Sergei Vassilvitskii, "k-means++: The advantages of careful seeding," in "Pro-
  ceedings of the eighteenth annual ACM-SIAM symposium on Discrete algorithms" Society for
  Industrial and Applied Mathematics 2007, pp. 1027­1035.

Atkin, David, "Endogenous Skill Acquisition and Export Manufacturing in Mexico," American Eco-
  nomic Review, 2016, 106 (8), 2046­2085.

Baqaee, David Rezza and Emmanuel Farhi, "Networks, Barriers, and Trade," August 2019. mimeo,
  UCLA and Harvard.

Bardhan, Pranab K, "On Optimum Subsidy to a Learning Industry: An Aspect of the Theory of
  Infant-Industry Protection," International Economic Review, February 1971, 12 (1), 54­70.

Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, "Convergence," Journal of Political Economy, April 1992, 100
  (2), 223­251.



                                                    34
Bartelme, Dominick, "Trade costs and economic geography: evidence from the US," mimeo, University
  of Michigan, 2018.

  , Arnaud Costinot, Dave Donaldson, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, "The Textbook Case for Indus-
  trial Policy: Theory Meets Data," August 2019. NBER WP 26193.

Becker, Gary, Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with Special Reference to Education,
  NBER, 1975.

Belloni, Alexandre, Daniel Chen, Victor Chernozhukov, and Christian Hansen, "Sparse models and
  methods for optimal instruments with an application to eminent domain," Econometrica, 2012, 80
  (6), 2369­2429.

  , Victor Chernozhukov, and Christian Hansen, "High-dimensional methods and inference on struc-
  tural and treatment effects," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2014, 28 (2), 29­50.

  ,   , and   , "Inference on treatment effects after selection among high-dimensional controls," The
  Review of Economic Studies, 2014, 81 (2), 608­650.

  ,   , Ivan Fernández-Val, and Christian Hansen, "Program evaluation and causal inference with
  high-dimensional data," Econometrica, 2017, 85 (1), 233­298.

Berman, Nicolas, Mathieu Couttenier, Dominic Rohner, and Mathias Thoenig, "This Mine Is Mine!
  How Minerals Fuel Conflicts in Africa," American Economic Review, June 2017, 107 (6), 1564­1610.

Beshkar, Mostafa and Ahmad Lashkaripour, "Interdependence of trade policies in general equilib-
  rium," 2019. mimeo, Indiana University.

Bhagwati, Jagdish and V.K. Ramaswami, "Domestic Distortions, Tariffs and the Theory of Optimum
  Subsidy," Journal of Political Economy, 1963, 71 (44-50).

Blanchard, Emily J. and William W. Olney, "Globalization and human capital investment: Export
  composition drives educational attainment," Journal of International Economics, 2017, 106, 165 ­ 183.

Broda, Christian and David Weinstein, "Globalization and the Gains from Variety," Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, May 2006, 121 (2), 541­85.

Caliendo, Lorenzo and Fernando Parro, "Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of NAFTA," The
  Review of Economic Studies, 2015, 82 (1), 1­44.

Caselli, Francesco and Daniel J. Wilson, "Importing Technology," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2004,
  51 (1), 1­32.

Chipman, John S., "External Economies of Scale and Competitive Equilibrium," Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 1970, 84 (3), 347­385.

                                                    35
Chor, Davin, "Unpacking Sources of Comparative Advantage: A Quantitative Approach," Journal of
  International Economics, November 2010, 82 (2), 152­167.

Costinot, Arnaud and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, "Trade Theory with Numbers: Quantifying the
  Consequences of Globalization," Handbook of International Economics, 2014, 4, 197.

  , Dave Donaldson, and Ivana Komunjer, "What Goods Do Countries Trade? A Quantitative
  Exploration of Ricardo's Ideas," Review of Economic Studies, 2012, 79 (2), 581­608.

Deardorff, Alan V. and Robert M. Stern, Computational Analysis of Global Trading Arrangements, Ann
  Arbor: The University of Michigan Press, 1990.

Dekle, Robert, Jonathan Eaton, and Samuel Kortum, "Global Rebalancing with Gravity: Measuring
  the Burden of Adjustment," IMF Staff Papers, July 2008, 55 (3), 511­540.

Dippel, Christian, Avner Greif, and Daniel Trefler, "Outside Options, Coercion, and Wages: Removing
  the Sugar Coating," Economic Journal, August 2020, 130 (630), 1678­1714.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel S. Kortum, "Trade in capital goods," European Economic Review, 2001, 45
  (7), 1195 ­ 1235.

  and    , "Technology, geography, and trade," Econometrica, 2002, 70 (5), 1741­1779.

  ,   , and Sebastian Sotelo, "International Trade: Linking Micro and Macro," February 2012. NBER
  WP 17864.

Ethier, Wilfred J., "Decreasing Costs in International Trade and Frank Graham's Argument for Pro-
  tection," Econometrica, 1982, 50 (5), 1243­1268.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo D, Pinelopi K Goldberg, Patrick J Kennedy, and Amit K Khandelwal, "The return
  to protectionism," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2020, 135 (1), 1­55.

Feyrer, James, "Distance, Trade, and Income - The 1967 to 1975 Closing of the Suez Canal as a Natural
  Experiment," December 2009. NBER Working Paper 15557.

  , "Trade and Income ­ Exploiting Time Series in Geography," American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics, October 2019, 11 (4), 1­35.

Fieler, Ana Cecília, Marcela Eslava, and Daniel Yi Xu, "Trade, quality upgrading, and input linkages:
  Theory and evidence from Colombia," American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (1), 109­46.

Frankel, Jeffrey A. and David H. Romer, "Does Trade Cause Growth?," American Economic Review,
  June 1999, 89 (3), 379­399.

Graham, Frank D., "Some Aspects of Protection Further Considered," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  1923, 37 (2), 199­227.

                                                     36
Haberler, Gottfried, "Some Problems in the Pure Theory of International Trade," Economic Journal,
  1950, 60, 223­240.

Hadass, Yael S and Jeffrey G Williamson, "Terms-of-Trade Shocks and Economic Performance, 1870-
  1940: Prebisch and Singer Revisited," Economic Development and Cultural Change, April 2003, 51 (3),
  629­656.

Hagen, Everett, "An Economic Justification of Protectionism," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1958, 72,
  496­514.

Harrison, Ann and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, "Trade, Foreign Investment, and Industrial Policy for
  Developing Countries," in Dani Rodrik and Mark Rosenzweig, eds., Handbook of Development Eco-
  nomics, New York: North- Holland, 2010, chapter 63.

Hausmann, Ricardo, Cesar Hidalgo, Sebastian Bustos, Michele Coscia, Sarah Chung, Juan Jimenez,
  Alexander Simoes, and Muhammed A. Yildirim, The atlas of economic complexity: Mapping paths to
  prosperity, MIT Press, 2014.

  , Jason Hwang, and Dani Rodrik, "What You Export Matters," Journal of Economic Growth, 2007, 12,
  1­25.

Hidalgo, Cesar and Ricardo Hausmann, "The building blocks of economic complexity," Proceedings
  of the national academy of sciences, June 2009, 106 (26), 10570­10575.

  , Bailey Klinger, Albert-Laszlo Barabasi, and Ricardo Hausmann, "The Product Space Conditions
  the Development of Nations," Science, 2007, 371, 482­487.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Ralph Ossa, "A global view of productivity growth in China," Journal of
  international Economics, 2016, 102, 209­224.

Humphreys, Macartan, Jeffrey D. Sachs, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, eds, Escaping the Resource Curse,
  Columbia University Press, 2007.

Jarreau, Joachim and Sandra Poncet, "Export sophistication and economic growth: Evidence from
  China," Journal of Development Economics, March 2012, 97 (2), 281 ­ 292.

Jones, Charles I, "Intermediate Goods and Weak Links in the Theory of Economic Development,"
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, April 2011, 3 (2), 1­28.

Kasahara, Hiroyuki and Joel Rodrigue, "Does the use of imported intermediates increase productiv-
  ity? Plant-level evidence," Journal of Development Economics, August 2008, 87 (1), 106­118.

Kleinman, Benny, Ernest Liu, and Stephen J Redding, "International Friends and Enemies," July 2020.
  NBER Working Paper 27587.


                                                    37
Krugman, Paul, "Scale economies, product differentiation, and the pattern of trade," The American
  Economic Review, 1980, 70 (5), 950­959.

   and Anthony Venables, "Globalization and the Inequality of Nations," Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 1995, 110 (4), 857­880.

Kucheryavyy, Konstantin, Gary Lyn, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, "Grounded by gravity: A well-
  behaved trade model with industry-level economies of scale," March 2020. Mimeo.

Lederman, Daniel and William F. Maloney, Does What You Export Matter? In Search of Empirical
  Guidance for Industrial Policies, Washington, DC: The World Bank, 2012.

Levchenko, Andrei A., "International Trade and Institutional Change," Journal of Law, Economics, and
  Organization, October 2013, 29 (5), 1145­1181.

Levchenko, Andrei A and Jing Zhang, "The evolution of comparative advantage: Measurement and
  welfare implications," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2016, 78, 96­111.

MacQueen, James et al., "Some methods for classification and analysis of multivariate observations,"
  in "Proceedings of the fifth Berkeley symposium on mathematical statistics and probability," Vol.
  1(14) 1967, pp. 281­297.

Melitz, Marc, "When and How Should Infant Industries Be Protected?," Journal of International Eco-
  nomics, 2005, 66, 177­196.

Melitz, Marc J, "The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate industry produc-
  tivity," Econometrica, 2003, 71 (6), 1695­1725.

Nunn, Nathan, "Relationship-specificity, incomplete contracts, and the pattern of trade," Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (2), 569­600.

  and Daniel Trefler, "The Structure of Tariffs and Long-Term Growth," American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics, 2010, 2 (4), 158­194.

Pascali, Luigi, "The Wind of Change: Maritime Technology, Trade and Economic Development,"
  American Economic Review, September 2017, 107 (9), 2821­54.

Prebisch, Raúl, "Commercial Policy in the Underdeveloped Countries," American Economic Review,
  1959, 49, 251­273.

Redding, Stephen and Anthony J Venables, "Economic geography and international inequality,"
  Journal of International Economics, 2004, 62 (1), 53­82.

Rodríguez, Francisco and Dani Rodrik, "Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A Skeptic's Guide to the
  Cross-National Evidence," in "NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, Volume 15" NBER Chapters,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, November 2001, pp. 261­338.

                                                    38
Rodrik, Dani, "Goodbye Washington consensus, hello Washington confusion? A review of the World
  Bank's economic growth in the 1990s: learning from a decade of reform," Journal of Economic
  Literature, 2006, 44 (4), 973­987.

  , Arvind Subramanian, and Francesco Trebbi, "Institutions Rule: The Primacy of Institutions over
  Geography and Integration in Economic Development," Journal of Economic Growth, 2004, 9, 131­165.

Rousseeuw, Peter J, "Silhouettes: a graphical aid to the interpretation and validation of cluster
  analysis," Journal of computational and applied mathematics, 1987, 20, 53­65.

Sachs, Jeffrey D. and Andrew M. Warner, "The Big Rush, Natural Resource Booms And Growth,"
  Journal of Development Economics, June 1999, 59 (1), 43­76.

   and Andrew Warner, "Economic Reform and the Process of Global Integration," Brookings Papers
  on Economic Activity, 1995, 1, 1­118.

Sala-i-Martin, Xavier and Arvind Subramanian, "Addressing the Natural Resource Curse: An Illus-
  tration from Nigeria," Journal of African Economies, 2013, 22 (4), 570­615.

Silva, JMC Santos and Silvana Tenreyro, "The log of gravity," Review of Economics and Statistics, 2006,
  88 (4), 641­658.

Solow, Robert M., "A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  February 1956, 70 (1), 65­94.

Timmer, Marcel P., Erik Dietzenbacher, Bart Los, Robert Stehrer, and Gaaitzen J. de Vries, "An
  Illustrated User Guide to the World Input­Output Database: the Case of Global Automotive Pro-
  duction," Review of International Economics, 2015, 23 (3), 575­605.

Tornell, Aaron and Philip R. Lane, "The Voracity Effect," American Economic Review, March 1999, 89
  (1), 22­46.

Ventura, Jaume, "A Global View of Economic Growth," in Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf,
  eds., Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 1, Elsevier, 2005, chapter 22, pp. 1419 ­ 1497.

Whalley, John, Trade liberalization among major world trading areas, MIT Press, 1985.

Williamson, Jeffrey G., "Globalization and the Great Divergence: terms of trade booms, volatility
  and the poor periphery, 1782-1913," European Review of Economic History, December 2008, 12 (3),
  355­391.

Witten, Daniela M and Robert Tibshirani, "A framework for feature selection in clustering," Journal of
  the American Statistical Association, 2010, 105 (490), 713­726.



                                                    39
Yi, Kei-Mu, "Can vertical specialization explain the growth of world trade?," Journal of Political
  Economy, 2003, 111 (1), 52­102.

Young, Alwyn, "Learning by Doing and the Dynamic Effects of International Trade," Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 1991, 106 (2), 369­405.




                                                40
                                          A. T                                  A

A.1    Competitive Equilibrium

The competitive equilibrium of the economy can be represented as the set of solutions to the following
system of simultaneous equations:

                           w j L j, k     µ j, k · Yk ,  j  J, k  K                                          (A.1)
                                 L j, k   ¯ j, j  J
                                          L                                                                  (A.2)
                           k K

                                    E                 w j · L j, k                                           (A.3)
                                           k      j
                             1-                1-k
                            Pk k          zk ck        + CMA k , k  K                                        (A.4)

                                           1- k            ek · E +     l K    l , k Yl
                                  Yk      ck          zk              1-k
                                                                                          + FMA k    k  K.   (A.5)
                                                                     Pk

Here e k is the fraction of consumer expenditure devoted to industry k , µ j, k is the fraction of industry k 's
gross output devoted to purchasing factor input j , and  l , k is the fraction of industry l 's gross revenue
(Yl ) used to purchase intermediate inputs from sector k . By Shephard's lemma, these shares equal
the elasticities of the expenditure or cost functions with respect to the relevant price. Note that these
elasticities in principle depend on relative prices, of goods and/or factors. However, homotheticity
and (perceived) constant returns imply that they do not depend on total expenditure (E ) or industry
gross output.
   The first set of conditions (A.1) are the industry factor demand equations, which can be summed
to generate aggregate factor demand. The second set of conditions (A.2) equates factor demand with
fixed factor supply. The third condition equates total factor income and total expenditure, which also
ensures (along with the other conditions) that trade balance holds. The fourth set of conditions (A.4)
defines the price index, while the fifth set of equations (A.5) defines gross industry revenues as equal
to total industry sales.
   Notice that the last set of equations can be solved for Yk as a function of the factor prices and factor
allocations (as well as the exogenous market access terms) using matrix algebra. We can then plug
this solution into the other equations, and also plug in the definitions of total expenditure and the
price indices. We are then left with a set of equations in factor prices and factor allocations. If there
is a unique solution for factor allocations given factor prices, i.e. a unique solution L for the factor
demand equations (A.1) given a set of factor prices w, then clearly we can reduce this system to a
system of J equations setting factor demand equal to factor supply.
   In a closed economy, these J equilibrium conditions equating factor supply and demand are
homogeneous of degree 1, and hence a normalization is required. In the open economy these
equations are not homogeneous of degree 1 in factor prices due to the presence of fixed foreign prices,

                                                                      41
and no normalization is required.


A.2    First Order Welfare Approximation

A general expression for our first order welfare approximation is

                                                                 ek       f
               d ln y              ex
                                   k d ln FMA k +                     - d k d ln CMA k
                                                                k - 1   k
                            k K                          k K

                        +         d ln µ k +         d
                                                     k d ln E k +         (1 - k )( k -  d
                                                                                         k k ) - e k k d ln c k ,
                                                                                           d         d

                            k K                k K                  k K


where  ex
       k
          (resp.  d
                  k
                    ) is the share of total sales attributable to industry k 's export (resp. domestic)
                                                                                                                    f
sales,  k      d
               k
                 +  ex
                    k
                       , e k is the consumer expenditure share on industry k , and k
                                                                                   d
                                                                                     (resp. k ) is the
share of expenditure on industry k that is sourced domestically (resp. foreign).
    Since d ln µ k , d ln c k and d ln E k are all ultimately functions of the exogenous variables d ln FMA k ,
we can substitute in for these variables to arrive at equation (2.6) in the main text.
    We can also interpret the elasticities  ex
                                            k
                                               in terms of parameters more directly relevant to trade
policy as well as to the types of counterfactual experiments more often conducted in the literature.
Imagine that Home's trading partners lower their import tariffs on Home's exports in sector k . From
Home's perspective, this policy change is equivalent to a reduction in the iceberg costs of exporting
to the rest of the world. The general equilibrium impact of such a policy on Home's welfare will be
given by
                                                        ln y
                                                                    ( k - 1) ·  e
                                                                                k ,
                                                                                  x
                                                                                                                        (A.6)
                                                        ln k
                                                           ex


where the trade elasticity k - 1 scales the market access elasticity by the effect of the tariff change
on Home's market access. The object on the LHS of equation (A.6) is of crucial importance to
policymakers; given the trade elasticity, the  e
                                               k
                                                 x
                                                   capture all the remaining welfare effects of a trading
partner's import policy on a small economy.


A.3    The Determinants of  ex
                            k

We now discuss the factors that determine the size of the  e
                                                           k
                                                             x
                                                               and their variation across industries.

    The LHS of equation (A.6) is more directly relevant to trade policy. The primary reasons why we do not define it as
the object of interest are data availability and statistical power. Changes in tariffs are simply not widely observable enough
                                                                                        ln y
(across countries and time) nor large enough in magnitude to directly estimate  ln  e x . In contrast, our estimation approach
                                                                                      k
leverages variation in market access due to aggregate and sectoral demand and technology shocks in addition to variation
in tariffs, and utilizes sectoral trade data that are widely available from the 1960s onwards. See Sections 3 and 4 for more
details. In addition, understanding the consequences of the large variations in foreign demand over time and space is of
direct interest.




                                                                    42
Planner's Problem

Our starting point is an efficient economy in which a social planner directly chooses quantities and
factor allocations to maximize domestic welfare, taking the production technology, factor supplies
                                                       c ,d
and the trade balance constraint as given. Denote by q k    the quantity of final Home consumption of
                                          c, f
domestic goods, and by q n , k the quantity of final consumption of foreign goods from country n , and
use an m superscript to indicate the corresponding intermediate use. We denote the quantity exported
                                                                                                                                                     1-               1-
          ex
to n by q n ,k
               , and the production function in each sector by Fk . Define Dn , k  n , k k E n , k /Pn , k k .
    Using this notation, we can write the planner's problem as

                                                                       c ,d                   c, f
                               max                           ln U ({ q k    } , { q n , k })
                c ,d c , f m ,d m , f
               qk   , q n ,k , q k , q n ,k   ,qn
                                                ex , L
                                                  , k j, k

                                                                                 m ,d                     m, f           c ,d    m ,d
                                                     s . t . Fk { L j, k } , { q k    } , { q n ,k }                    qk    + qn ,k
                                                                                                                                      +                  ex
                                                                                                                                                        qn ,k , k
                                                                                                                                                n N

                                                                   L j, k          ¯ j, j
                                                                                   L
                                                              k
                                                                                                                                              k -1        1
                                                                               f            c, f          m, f                                            
                                                                             p n ,k q n ,k + q n ,k                                 ex
                                                                                                                                 (q n ,k )
                                                                                                                                              k
                                                                                                                                                     · Dn ,kk .
                                                              k        n                                                k    n


We first need to transform this into an expression involving FMA and CMA. Using the first order
conditions, it is easy to show that at the optimum for any two export markets n and i

                                                              ex
                                                             qn ,k           Dn , k
                                                                                     i , n  N , k  K,
                                                             q iex
                                                                 ,k
                                                                             Di , k

Likewise, from the first order conditions and our CES aggregator for both consumption and interme-
diate goods, we have
                                                     c, f         m, f               f        - k
                                                   q n ,k     q n ,k               p n ,k
                                                     c, f         m, f                f
                                                                                                          i , n  N , k  K.
                                                   q i ,k     q i ,k               p i ,k
                                                                                                                                                                       k -1    k
                                                ex                                                                       ex       c, f                       c, f      k
This implies that we can define new variables q k                                                                 n N   qn ,k
                                                                                                                              , qk             (      n N (q n ,k )           ) k -1 and

   Note that the iceberg trade cost assumption implies that the price received by the exporter is
                                                                                                              1
                                                                            ex          ex         - 1        
                                                                           pn ,k
                                                                                     (q n ,k
                                                                                             )       k   · Dn ,kk .




                                                                                            43
                             k -1    k
 m, f              m, f      k
qk      (   n N (q n ,k )           ) k -1 such that the problem above is equivalent to

                                                                          c ,d            c, f
                                    max                         ln U ({ q k    } , { q k })
                    c ,d    c, f
                               m ,d      m, f
                   qk    ,qk ,qk    ,qk         ,qk
                                                  ex , L
                                                         j, k

                                                                                   m ,d           m, f            c ,d    m ,d
                                                       s . t . Fk { L j, k } , { q k    }, {qk           }       qk    + qn ,k
                                                                                                                               + qk
                                                                                                                                  ex
                                                                                                                                     , k

                                                                    L j, k     ¯ j, j
                                                                               L
                                                                k
                                                                                                           1                      k -1       1
                                                                       c, f        m, f                  1-  k                               k
                                                                      qk      +   qk         CMA k                        ex
                                                                                                                       (q k  )    k
                                                                                                                                         FMA k .
                                                                k                                                k K


We now derive the formulas for  ex
                                k
                                   for an efficient economy. A simple application of the Envelope
Theorem gives
                                                                                            1
                                                                         e x
                                                                                    ·         ,
                                                                         k                  k
where  is the multiplier on the trade balance constraint. Our assumption of homotheticity allows us
to normalize this constant to equal 1.
     This result follows directly from our definition of d ln FMA k and the fact that, in an efficient
economy, reallocation has no first order effect on welfare. A percentage increase in FMA k causes a
horizontal displacement of the foreign demand curve by the same percentage, and the welfare effect
is given by the implied price increase (i.e. the vertical displacement) when quantity is held fixed. An
alternative intuition is available by defining the export price index as                                                   k K     e
                                                                                                                                   k
                                                                                                                                     x
                                                                                                                                       ln p k ; this result then
implies that the welfare effect of a foreign shock is captured entirely by its effect on the terms of trade,
with the factor 1/ k translating the demand shock into its implied effect on export prices.


Economy without Distortions

The competitive equilibrium of an Armington economy is not generally welfare-maximizing from an
individual country perspective, even when the economy is small and there are no domestic distortions.
The economy is a monopolist and faces downward-sloping demand for its products on international
markets whenever k < . A welfare-maximizing planner would export in each sector to the point
at which marginal revenue from exports equals marginal cost, while in the laissez-faire equilibrium
the economy exports at the point for which price equals marginal cost.                                                           In contrast to the welfare-
maximizing production allocation, the direct effect of a percentage increase in FMA k under laissez-faire
is an equal percentage increase in export quantity at fixed price, for any industry. This generates an
increase in factor demand, leading to general equilibrium effects through changes in factor prices,
goods prices and reallocation across industries that have first order welfare effects.
     In the special case of a single-factor (labor) economy, the percentage increase in labor demand is
    As k  , we approach the case of a small open economy that can sell any amount at a fixed foreign price. Since the
size of the market is already effectively infinite, the welfare effect of an increase in the size of the market tends to zero.
    See Bartelme et al. (2019) and Beshkar and Lashkaripour (2019) for optimal trade policy in this environment.


                                                                                   44
the same regardless of the industry receiving the shock, and hence the general equilibrium impact on
wages and domestic prices is the same. Since both the direct and indirect effects of shocks to FMA k
are identical for any two industries with the same initial export revenue share  e
                                                                                 k
                                                                                   x
                                                                                     , the market access
elasticities  ex
              k
                 are also common across industries.
    To see this most simply, assume upper tier Cobb-Douglas preferences with constant expenditure
share e k . The equilibrium conditions in this case specialize to

                                               1-k                                  ¯
                         ¯               w                                   ek · w L
                        wL                               · zk                  1-k
                                                                                                + FMA k .
                                         Tk
                                  k K                           zk     w
                                                                       Tk            + CMA k

Taking natural logs of both sides and applying Taylor's theorem with respect to FMA k , we get

                                                                  f
                  d ln w          k + (1 -  k )  k  k +  k
                                  d              d       ex
                                                                                     d ln w +          ex
                                                                                                       k d ln FMA k .
                            k K                                                                 k K


The first term captures the effect of changes in wages on both foreign and domestic sales, accounting
for both income and substitution effect, while the second term is the direct effect of changes in export
market access.
    Collecting terms and solving for d ln w , we get

                                                                       ex
                                                                       k
                                                                          d ln FMA k
                         d ln w                                                                             .
                                                                                                f
                                        k K   1-         k K    d
                                                                k
                                                                  + (1 -  k )  d  + e
                                                                               k k  k
                                                                                      x



To solve for the changes in real income, we need to consider the effect on the overall price index
             e
P     k K   Pk k . Using the Cobb-Douglas assumption and the results above, we can write

                                                                                     f
                                                                                k
                              d ln P                ek    k
                                                          d
                                                            d ln w         +             d ln CMA k .
                                                                               1 - k
                                              k K


Putting the two results together, we get

                       d ln y  d ln w -                  (e k -  im
                                                                 k ) d ln w
                                                k K

                                   d ln w
                                    im

                                                                            e
                                                                            k
                                                                              x
                                                                                d ln FMA k
                                   im ·
                                                                                                      f
                                          k K       1-      k K       d
                                                                      k
                                                                        + (1 - k )  d  + e
                                                                                    k k  k
                                                                                           x


                                   ex ·         e
                                                k d ln FMA k ,
                                                  x

                                          k K




                                                                      45
with
                                                                            im
                                     ex                                                           ,
                                                                                         f
                                           1-      k K      d
                                                            k
                                                              + (1 - k )  d  + e
                                                                          k k  k
                                                                                 x


where  im        k K    im
                        k
                           . Thus, in this environment  e
                                                        k
                                                          x
                                                            do not vary across sectors. This expression
simplifies further when we set the domestic sales share in each industry, k
                                                                          d
                                                                            , equal to zero:

                                                                          1
                                                  ex                                ex .
                                                         1-         k  K (1 -  k )  k


   For a general homothetic upper tier, the formula would have to be modified to account for changes
in industry expenditure shares, although the  e
                                              k
                                                x
                                                  would still be common across industries.
   In the presence of multiple factors with different intensities across sectors or general production
networks, foreign demand shocks in different sectors imply different changes in factor demand and
hence heterogeneous indirect effects. Section 6 and Appendix A.4 spell out one such economy, and
equations (A.12), (A.13) and (A.15) state an analytical solution for  ex
                                                                      k
                                                                         . Clearly, the  ex
                                                                                         k
                                                                                            generically
differ across sectors in this economy, even in the absence of any domestic distortions (                           0), and/or
differences in trade elasticities across sectors ( k                          k ). While the analytical solution is not suffi-
ciently transparent to see how individual parameters affect the  ex
                                                                 k
                                                                    of individual sectors, it is clear
that in general the  ex
                     k
                        's depend on the full structure of the economy.


External Economies

The second reason our economy might deviate from efficiency is the presence of domestic distortions.
These can take many forms in principle; we focus our discussion on external economies of scale in
production at the sector level, a feature of many quantitative trade models (Kucheryavyy et al., 2020).
The presence of external economies of scale implies that the laissez-faire equilibrium has some sectors
smaller and some larger than socially optimal, and the effect of foreign demand shocks differs across
sectors depending on which sectors ultimately expand or contract as a result.
   To illustrate, consider a single factor economy with upper tier Cobb-Douglas preferences (as
above), but with external economies of scale as in Kucheryavyy et al. (2020). The cost function in
each industry is c k       w
                                    , with the parameter k governing the scale economies in the sector. We
                         Tk L k k
specialize their model to the case with zero domestic sales in any industry. The equilibrium conditions
can be expressed as
                                                                              1-k
                                              ¯                     w
                                             wL                                     · FMA k
                                                        k K
                                                                  Tk L k k
                                                                   1-k
                                                         w
                                          wL k                             · FMA k , k  K.
                                                       Tk L k k

We assume that k ( k - 1) < 1 for all industries to ensure a unique equilibrium that will be interior (and


                                                                      46
hence exhibit smooth comparative statics). Due to the zero domestic sales assumption, production
and consumption are entirely distinct in this economy.
    Solving the individual factor demand equations for L k in terms of w and plugging them into the
aggregate factor market clearing equation, we get

                                                  (1+ k )(1-  k )                  1                    k -1
                                                                              1- k (  k -1)         1- k (  k -1)
                                  ¯
                                 wL           w    1-k (  k -1)
                                                                    · FMA k                   · Tk                  .
                                        k K


Using this expression, it is easy to see that

                                                                1
                                 d ln w                                   e x d ln FMA k
                                                          1 - k ( k - 1) k
                                              k K


where
                                                                          1
                                                                   (1+ k )(1- k ) ex
                                                                                                .
                                                   1-         k  K 1-k ( k -1)  k

    For a stable interior equilibrium (ensured if k (k - 1) < 1 , k ), the income elasticities to foreign
shocks are given by

                                        1                                        1
                            ex                  ·                                                             k  K.
                            k     1 - k ( k - 1) 1 -                       (1+ k )(1-k ) ex
                                                                      k  K 1-k (k -1)  k


All else equal, foreign demand shocks in sectors with larger external economies generate larger
welfare effects. The intuition for this result is simple: holding factor prices fixed, the supply curve is
downward sloping with elasticity k . An expansion of foreign demand results in a movement down
the supply curve, with the benefits of higher quantity sold moderated by the associated terms of trade
losses. Scale economies are more valuable in sectors with more elastic international demand; with
less elastic demand, achieving higher productivity comes at the expense of lower export prices.
    In more elaborate quantitative environments that feature multiple factors of production, input-
output networks and other mechanisms, the interaction between international and domestic distor-
tions that determine the values of the  ex
                                        k
                                           becomes increasingly complex and sensitive to assumptions.
We provide an example of this type of exercise in Section 6, with details in the appendix section below.


A.4     Quantitative Model Details

Equilibrium. A competitive equilibrium in this economy is a sequence of goods prices { Pkt } k , t ,
factor prices { w t , r t } t , factor allocations { L kt , Kkt } k , t , and goods market allocations such that (i)
consumers maximize utility; (ii) firms maximize profits; (iii) markets clear.
    Denote by Ykt the gross revenue of sector k . The market clearing condition for output of sector k
    The same fundamental intuition applies when there are positive domestic sales, although the formula must be modified
to account for the heterogeneous impact of foreign demand shocks on domestic prices.


                                                                     47
at time t is:
                                        1-k
                                   z k c kt                                                        1- k
                      Ykt            1-
                                                  Pkt C kt + Pkt I kt +              k , l Ylt + c kt     FMA kt .
                                    Pkt k                                     l K


The second term is the sector's exports at time t . The first term is domestic sales. The domestic sales
are a product of all final and intermediate expenditures on sector k products and the share of the total
sector k domestic absorption that is spent on domestically-produced goods, z k ( c kt /Pkt )1-k .

Steady state. We drop the time subscripts to denote steady state values. The price of installed capital
and the investment price index are proportional:

                                                        r   PI (-1 +  - 1).

Let Y       k   Yk denote the steady state aggregate gross revenue in this economy. The steady state
capital stock is:
                                                                              Y
                                                K       µ(1 -  )                      .
                                                                   PI (-1     +  - 1)
Since the capital stock is constant in steady state, investment is simply: I                                  K . Hence, investment
expenditure is a constant fraction of aggregate gross revenue:

                                                                  µ (1 -  )
                                                     PI I                    Y.
                                                                ( -1 +  - 1)

Since GDP is also a constant fraction of gross revenue (PC C + PI I                              µ Y ) it follows that consumption
expenditure is as well:

                                                                         (1 -  )
                                              PC C          µ 1-                    Y.
                                                                       ( -1 +  - 1)

The combined consumption and investment expenditure on sector k goods can then be expressed as:

                                                     Pk C k + Pk I k            f k µY,

                        (1-  )                 (1- ) 
where f k  e k 1 -    ( -1 + -1)
                                   + k (-1 +-1) is the constant steady state share of total final expenditure
going to sector k . Thus, the steady state of this economy is characterized by the following system of




                                                                   48
equations:

                                                1-k
                                           z k c kt                            1-
                                   Yk         1-k
                                                         f k µ +  k , l Yl + c k k FMA k   k                 (A.7)
                                            Pkt       l
                                  1-k          1-k
                             Pk            zk ck    + CMA k k                                                (A.8)
                                                -               +µ(1-  ) l
                                   ck      Tk L k k w µ      Pl l , k        k                               (A.9)
                                                        l

                               wL k        µ Yk k                                                           (A.10)
                                   Lk      L.                                                               (A.11)
                              k


Mapping to regression coefficients.               Note that while in the statement of equilibrium conditions (A.7),
FMA k enters by itself, in actual empirical estimation the regressor is weighted by the export share:
 ex
 k
    FMA k , see (2.6). Thus, we state the model solution directly in terms of export-share-weighted
firm market access: FMAW
                       k
                           ex
                           k
                              FMA k . This way, the model solution is directly comparable to the
regression coefficients.

Analytical solution.       To first order, the vectors of log changes in revenues and prices following a
vector of export-share-weighted firm market access shocks d ln FMAW are given by:

                                                                                 -1                           -1
  d ln Y      I - d + (I -  ) (I -  ex ) I -  d +  ex                  I - A d         (  1 - I) + µ   1

             ×dia g ()-1 d ln FMAW                                                                          (A.12)
                              -1
 d ln P       d I - A d              (  1 - I) + µ   1 d ln Y.                                              (A.13)

In these expressions, the matrices are defined as follows:

   · In d each row represents the domestic absorption shares by sectors in the column of the sector
      in the row:

                                                        d
                                                        1 ,1 1 ,2 · · · 1 , K
                                                              d         d          
                                                                                   
                                                        .         ..    .
                                                         .              .
                                                                                   
                                                d                     .            ,
                                                        .               .          
                                                                        K
                                                        d               d
                                                                                   
                                                        K,1 · · ·         ,K
                                                                                   
                                                                                   

                     k
                     d f µ+ 
                       (k    k , l )Yl
      where  k
             d
               ,l
                          Yk           .

   · A diagonal matrix of export absorption shares

                                                             e x · · · 0       
                                                             1                 
                                                             .   ..    .
                                                             .         .
                                                                               
                                                      ex             .         ,
                                                             .         .       
                                                             0 · · · e x
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                                                       K       

                                                              49
                      1- k
                     ck      FMA k
     where  k
            ex
                             Yk    .

   · Matrix A where each column represents the use of the sector in the column as an intermediate
     input by the sector in the row:

                    1 ,1 +             1 -  µ1       2,1 + 1 -  µ2               ···     K,1 + 1 -  µK 
                                                                                                       
                    1 ,2 +             1 -  µ1       2,2 + 1 -  µ2               ···     K,2 + 1 -  µK
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
               A                                                                                      .
                                        .
                                        .                                        ..             .
                                                                                                .
                                        .                                           .           .
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      
                    1, K +             1 -  µ1 2,K + 1 -  µ2                     · · ·  K,K + 1 -  µK 
                                                                                                      

   · A diagonal matrix of expenditure shares in each sector sourced from domestic producers:

                                                      
                                                          1d
                                                                  ···     
                                                                             0
                                                          .
                                                          .       ..      ,
                                                                             .
                                                                             .
                                               d          .          .       .
                                                                  · · · K 
                                                                        d 
                                                                          
                                                      
                                                          0

                          1- k
                    zk ck
     where k
           d
                      1-  k      .
                     Pk

   · Row vector of gross revenue shares:

                                                         1 · · ·  K              ,

                      Yk
     where  k                 is the gross revenue share of sector k , and dia g () is a diagonal matrix with
                      l Yl
     entries of .

   · Diagonal matrices collecting substitution and scale elasticities:

                                                  
                                                         1 · · ·             0   
                                                                                 
                                                         .
                                                         . ..                .
                                                                             .
                                                                                 
                                                         .     .             .   
                                                                                 
                                                                  · · · K
                                                                                 
                                                  
                                                          0                      
                                                                                 
                                                  
                                                         1 · · ·             0   
                                                                                 
                                                         .
                                                         . ..                .
                                                                             .
                                                                                 
                                                                                 .
                                                         .     .             .   
                                                                  · · · K
                                                                                 
                                                  
                                                          0                      
                                                                                 

Real GDP. Since in the empirical estimation our independent variable is real GDP, we need to
translate the changes in nominal revenue and prices (A.12)-(A.13) into changes in real GDP, which we
define as:

                                                        wL + r K
                                                 y                       ,
                                                              P

                                                        50
                                       (1- )                 (1-  ) 
where the price index P  1 -         ( -1 + -1)
                                                   PC +    ( -1 + -1)
                                                                      PI   is the share-weighted average of the con-
sumption and investment price indices. It is immediate that the log change in this price index is:

                                                  d ln P         f · d ln P,

where the 1 × K row vector f collects final shares. The real GDP change is thus

                                          d ln y       · d ln Y - f · d ln P.                                  (A.14)

   Plugging (A.12)-(A.13) into (A.14), we obtain the following model elasticities with respect to
foreign market access shocks:

               d ln y                                       -1                                   d ln Y
                                  - f ·  d I - A d                 (  1 - I) + µ  1                     ,      (A.15)
            d ln FMAW                                                                         d ln FMAW

           d ln Y
where   d ln FMAW
                    is given by (A.12).
   The term in parentheses translates gross revenue changes into real income changes, since gross
revenues affect both aggregate nominal value added (weighted according to sector size ), and
the price index, captured by the second term. The vector of elasticities in (A.15) is the theoretical
counterpart of the econometrically estimated elasticities of GDP with respect to foreign demand
shocks,  ex .

Calibration. We set the value added share in gross output µ                          0.5 and the labor share in value
added to        2/3. To calibrate the model, we need to parameterize the matrices and vectors , f,  d ,
A,  ex , and the vector  that collects investment expenditure shares k . All other objects comprising
the model solution are transformations of these. Since the coefficient estimates of the growth impacts
of foreign shocks are at the cluster level, we parameterize our model for the 6 tradeable sector clusters
from the econometric estimation, plus a seventh non-tradeable services sector. The matrices f,  d ,
and A describe domestic sectoral expenditure shares. Since this information is not available in the
COMTRADE and Penn World Tables datasets used in the econometric estimation, we obtain these
from the World Input-Output Database (Timmer et al., 2015, henceforth WIOD) as averages across
the 40 countries available in that database. The matrices  and  ex are constructed to be consistent
with the averages of import and export shares used in the econometric estimation. Overall, since this
calibration is for one "typical" country, it is not very data-intensive and the shares we feed into the
model are straightforward.

Direct, first-, and higher-order decomposition.                  To decompose the overall GDP elasticity to FMA
into different-order effects, define an "impact matrix":

                                                                                -1
           d + (I -  ) (I -  ex ) I -  d +  ex                       I - A d          (  1 - I) + µ   1 .      (A.16)



                                                            51
Then, the model solution can be stated as:

                        d ln Y
                                      {I - }-1 × dia g ()-1
                    d ln FMAW

                                          I      +                 + 2 + 3 + ... × dia g ()-1 ,
                                        direct       first-order      higher-order


where the second line writes the Leontief inverse as an infinite expansion. The first term is the direct
effect of a foreign demand in a sector. The matrix is diagonal, and thus the direct effect only applies to
the sector experiencing the foreign demand shock. The first-order effect is given by the impact matrix
. Examining (A.16), the first-order effect is in turn comprised of two terms. The first, d , reflects
the fact that the sector experiencing a foreign demand shock changes its purchases of intermediates,
and the change in its value added affects final demand inside the home economy. The second term
captures the change in unit costs that follows the change in foreign demand. It can be written more
compactly as (I -  ) (I -  ex ) I -  d +  ex              d ln c
                                                      d ln FMAW
                                                                 .   The unit costs will change both because of the
fact that factor reallocation affects production scale (captured by  (  1 - I)), and because of general
equilibrium impacts on economywide wages (captured by µ  1). The change in costs will in turn
change foreign sales (by (I -  )  ex ), as well as domestic sales (by (I -  ) (I -  e x ) I -  d ). Finally,
the higher-order effects propagate these shocks further, as sectors affected by the initially shocked
sector in turn change their demand for other sectors' output as well as the relative costs. The Leontief
inversion of the impact matrix captures these infinite-order effects.

No scale economies.     We end by evaluating how well this model can match estimated growth effects
of foreign shocks without appealing to external scale economies. Table A2 considers a range of models
with constant returns to scale (     0). We first report the model-implied  ex under a range of  from 1
to 10. The average  ex falls in the Armington elasticity. It is not difficult to get average growth effects
to be the same as estimated in the data, by simply lowering  . However, this leads to 2 problems:
first, lowering  leads to  ex that are much too high in 4 out of 6 clusters, where the data  ex are
near zero or negative. So just varying  can get the average level right at the expense of missing the
dispersion. This is made clear by the MAE's, which are 2-3 times higher in this table than under the
optimal combination of  and  in Table A1. Second, the  needed to match the average estimated
 ex , 2.2, is low relative to conventional wisdom.
   Perhaps we can do better by appealing to variation in  across sectors. The last two columns of
Table A2 report the results of 2 exercises. First, we use the k from Caliendo and Parro (2015). Second,
we ask the model to select 6 sector-specific k to minimize the MAE with respect to data. Interestingly,
in both cases, the average  ex 's are much too low, and the MAE is barely lower than simply using a
single  . We conclude that the constant-returns to scale version of this particular model can match the
average, but not the dispersion in  ex that we estimate in the data. We acknowledge that this should
not be interpreted as conclusive evidence in favor of scale effects, as many more constant-returns

                                                           52
models are possible than the one we consider here.
   A feature of Table A2 that stands out is that the correlation between the model and data  ex is
high throughout the table, at 0.91. What is interesting is that while all of these models miss on both
the level and the dispersion of  ex across sectors, they all obtain the correct ranking of the  ex .

                             Figure A1: Theory Diagnostics: MAE and Average  ex




                                                                                                  .8
                   .6




                                                                                                  .7
                                                                                                           ex
                   .5




                                                                                                          .6
                                                                                                  average 
                MAE




                                                                                                   .5
                   .4




                                                                                                  .4
                                                                                                  .3
                   .3




                        .1              .15               .2               .25               .3
                                                           

                                                MAE model vs. data
                                                        ex
                                                average  coefficient (model)
                                                        ex
                                                average  estimate (data)



 Notes: This figure plots the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) between model and data  e x (left axis) against the value of .
 For each value of  displayed,  is selected to minimize MAE. The figure also plots the average  e x in the model and
 the data (left axis).




                                                          53
                                 Table A1:  e x Coefficients: Data and Model


                                       ex data                    e x model (     0.29         3.19)
                                                   lowest        no inter-      no      vk     ek   tradeable
                                                    MAE          mediates    capital                 services
         RAW                             0.17       -0.13          0.22       -0.13      -0.13         -0.20
         INT                             1.32       0.82           0.32        0.34      0.78          0.43
         CAP                             2.97       2.97           0.54        1.76      2.59          1.73
         CONS                           -0.52       0.12           0.25        0.19      0.26          0.04
         AG                              0.11       0.10           0.26        0.14      0.21          0.05
         MIN                             0.05       0.51           0.14        0.21      0.43          0.16
         Average  ex                     0.68        0.73          0.29        0.42      0.69           0.42
         MAE model vs. data                         0.32           0.75        0.56      0.41          0.56
         Corr. model vs. data                       0.94           0.91        0.90      0.93          0.90

Notes: This table reports the econometric estimates of  e x (first column), and the model  e x under the values of  and 
that minimize Mean Absolute Error (MAE) between model and data (second column), and under the alternative model
structures (last four columns). The bottom panel reports the average  e x for each case, and for the theoretical models
reports the MAE and the correlation of  e x implied by the model and data.




                       Table A2:  ex Coefficients: Data and Model, No Scale Effects


                                   ex data                              e x model (       0)
                                                     1.01          3         10       k from           k lowest
                                                                                  Caliendo-Parro        MAE
     RAW                             0.17          1.27      0.36       0.10           0.09              0.17
     INT                             1.32          1.91      0.54       0.15           0.13              0.26
     CAP                             2.97          2.86      0.80       0.23           0.20              0.38
     CONS                           -0.52          1.64      0.46       0.13           0.11              0.22
     AG                              0.11          1.38      0.39       0.11           0.10              0.19
     MIN                             0.05          1.39      0.39       0.11           0.10              0.19

     Average  ex                     0.68          1.74      0.49       0.14            0.12               0.23
     MAE model vs. data                            1.10      0.79       0.78            0.79               0.77
     Corr. model vs. data                          0.91      0.91       0.91            0.91               0.91

Notes: This table reports the econometric estimates of  e x (first column), and the model  e x under the alternative
values of , in a constant returns to scale model (  0) throughout. In columns 2 through 4,  equals 1.01, 3 and 10
respectively. Column 5 uses sector-specific k estimates from Caliendo and Parro (2015), and the last column selects
sector-specific k 's that minimize the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) between model and data. The bottom panel reports
the average  e x for each case, and for the theoretical models reports the MAE and the correlation of  e x implied by the
model and data.




                                                            54
                               B. D            E               A

B.1     Matching the Trade Data to Industries

The international trade data from 1965 to 2015 are from the UN COMTRADE Database, which
reports bilateral trade flows at the 4-digit SITC Revision 2 level. To concord the trade data to the 1997
NAICS industry classification, we proceed as follows. First, we assign each 4-digit SITC item to its
corresponding 6-digit NAICS industries. For instance,           Typewriters cheque-writing machines are
matched to            Office machinery manufacturing. Second, for those items that are matched to more
than one 6-digit NAICS industry, we check whether it could be assigned to the upper-level 5-digit
industry. For example,          Footwear is matched to       Rubber and plastics footwear manufacturing,
          House slipper manufacturing and some other 6-digit NAICS industries with the first 5 digits
"31612." In this case, we aggregate these 6-digit NAICS industries to the 5-digit one ("31612"), and
concord the 4-digit SITC items to the 5-digit NAICS industry. Third, the same is done for the items
that are assigned to more than one 5-digit NAICS industry. We matched them to the corresponding
4-digit NAICS industries.
   Overall, the 784 4-digit SITC items are matched to 268 NAICS industries. Among them, 233
industries are in the manufacturing sector, 26 in agriculture, and 9 in mining.


B.2     K-means Clustering

B.2.1    Selecting the Number of Clusters with Silhouette Analysis

Rousseeuw (1987) introduces the silhouette plot as a means for selecting the number of clusters. With
this method, each cluster is represented by a silhouette displaying which points lie well within the
cluster and which ones are marginal to the cluster. The silhouette plot is based on the silhouette
width measure, which compares the similarity (cohesion) of a point to points in its own cluster with
the ones in neighboring clusters (separation).
   The silhouette width s k is measured as follows:

  1. (Measuring the cohesion) Denote by a k the average distance between point k and all other points
        in the same cluster.

  2. (Measuring the separation) Denote by b k the average distance between k and all points in the
        nearest cluster.
                                                                         b k -a k
  3. The silhouette width of the observation k is measured as s k      max ( a k , b k )
                                                                                         .

   The silhouette ranges from -1 to 1, where a high value indicates that the point is well assigned
to its own cluster and dissimilar to neighboring clusters. A value of 0 indicates that the point is on
or very close to the cluster boundary between two neighboring clusters and negative values indicate
that those points might have been assigned to the wrong cluster.

                                                    55
                                                        Figure A2: Silhouette Analysis



               1                                                                       1




                                                                                       2
    Clusters




                                                                            Clusters
               2



                                                                                       3

               3
                                                                                       4


               4
                                                                                       5

               -0.2      0     0.2         0.4          0.6       0.8   1              -0.2   0     0.2         0.4          0.6       0.8   1
                                     Silhouette Value                                                     Silhouette Value

                         (a) Number of Clusters               4                               (b) Number of Clusters               5

 Notes: This figure plots the silhouette values for each industry, when there are 4 clusters (left panel), and 5 clusters (left
 panel).




   The average silhouette width provides an evaluation of clustering validity, and can be used
as way to select an appropriate number of clusters. A high average silhouette width indicates a
strong clustering. The average silhouette method computes the average silhouette of observations
for different numbers of clusters G . The optimal number of clusters G is the one that maximizes the
average silhouette over a range of possible values for G .
   Figure A2 plots the silhouette width for industries in each cluster when there are 4 and 5 clusters,
and Figure A3 plots the average silhouette value over the range of cluster numbers from 2 to 8. The
silhouette analysis suggests that either 4 or 5 are good values for the number of clusters. While the
average silhouette value slightly prefers 5 clusters to 4, the silhouette analysis suggests that with 4
clusters fewer industries are near the boundary.


B.2.2              K-means Clustering Using a Subset of Characteristic Variables

The average silhouette value under 4 clusters is about 0.35, which indicates that the cluster structure
is somewhat weak. However, this could be due to the inclusion of irrelevant sectoral characteristics,
which tend to drag down the average silhouette value. We investigate this hypothesis by imple-
menting the algorithm on a subset of important characteristic variables: the investment sales share,
intermediates sales shares and contract intensity. These variables are identified as especially impor-
tant through inspection of the cluster structure as well as more formally using methods developed
in Witten and Tibshirani (2010). The average silhouette value is now about 0.65 (Figure A4), suggest-
ing a strong cluster structure. Table A3 reports the summary statistics for sectoral characteristics of


                                                                        56
                                                                    Figure A3: Average Silhouette Value

                                                         0.45




                                                         0.40




                              Average Silhouette Value   0.35




                                                         0.30




                                                         0.25
                                                                2        3      4            5           6   7   8
                                                                                    Number of Clusters


 Notes: This figure plots the average silhouette values across industries for the number of clusters on the x-axis.



             Figure A4: Average Silhouette Value, Using a Subset of Sector Characteristics

                                                         0.75



                                                         0.70
                              Average Silhouette Value




                                                         0.65



                                                         0.60



                                                         0.55



                                                         0.50



                                                         0.45
                                                                2        3      4            5           6   7   8
                                                                                    Number of Clusters

 Notes: This figure plots the average silhouette values across industries for the number of clusters on the x-axis, when
 using only a subset of sector characteristics for the clustering procedure.




each cluster. The 4 clusters based on these three characteristics closely replicate the baseline cluster
structure reported in Table 1.




                                                                                        57
Table A3: Summary Statistics of Clusters: K-means Clustering Using a Subset of Sector Characteristics

                                                                    cluster
                                                       1           2      3                      4            Mean         Std. Dev.
                    Investment Share                  0.01        0.07 0.56                     0.05          0.13           0.22
                    Intermediates, Using              0.70        0.63 0.65                     0.63          0.66           0.16
                    Intermediates, Sales              0.83        0.78 0.28                     0.25          0.57           0.31
                    Concentration Ratio               0.41        0.30 0.34                     0.48          0.40           0.21
                    Skill Intensity                   0.30        0.31 0.35                     0.33          0.32           0.13
                    Capital Intensity                 0.64        0.55 0.55                     0.64          0.61           0.10
                    Contract Intensity                0.29        0.65 0.72                     0.57          0.51           0.22

                    Number of industries               87          45             42             59
                    Trade share                       0.38        0.16           0.20           0.19

 Notes: This table reports the summary statistics of the sectoral characteristics among the sectors selected into each cluster,
 when only a subset of sectoral characteristics is used in the clustering procedure. The last two columns report the mean
 and standard deviations of those characteristics among all manufacturing sectors. The row "Number of industries"
 reports the number of sectors in each cluster, and "Trade share" reports the fraction of world trade accounted for by
 sectors in that cluster.



B.3   Estimation of FMA ik , t

The foreign demand shocks are estimated by using sectoral bilateral trade flow data and a structural
gravity equation. Equation (2.3) relates external Firm Market Access to the gravity equation. The
FMA ik , t for exporter i are expressed as follows:

                                                                            En ,k               1-
                                                FMA ik , t                 1-k
                                                                                         · in , k k .
                                                                      n i Pn , k


The gravity equation (2.2) can be rewritten as

                                                                              1-            E nk , t          1-
                                    E ink , t  p ink , t · q ink , t        c ik , t k ·     1-
                                                                                                        · ink ,k
                                                                                                               t
                                                                                                                 ,                     (B.1)
                                                                                            Pnk , tk

where E ink , t denotes country n 's total sector k expenditure on goods from country i . We do not
observe the domestic trade flows. We estimate the share version of this equation à la Eaton et al.
(2012). Dividing both sides by the total imports of country n , we get

                                     E ink , t           1-                          E nk , t                    1-
                                                       c ik , t k ·    1-
                                                                                                              · ink ,k
                                                                                                                     t
                                                                                                                       .
                                    i n E i nk , t                    Pnk , tk   ·      i    n   E i nk , t

It can be estimated by regressing bilateral trade flows on exporter and importer fixed effects and
bilateral geographic distance measures. The estimating equation is (4.2) in the main text.
   Shocks to large countries may affect their trading partners' estimated importer and exporter effects.



                                                                       58
In that case, those estimated fixed effects would not be pure measures of foreign shocks affecting the
large country, as they would pick up in part the large country's domestic shocks. To address this
potential endogeneity, we carry out the above gravity estimation using the leave-one-out approach.
For each country  , we estimate a set {  im
                                         nk , t
                                                ()  e x
                                                    ik , t
                                                           ( )  kt ( )  kt ( )} of country -specific importer
and exporter fixed effects and distance/contiguity coefficients by dropping country  from the gravity
sample on both the exporter and importer side. In this notation, indexing by  denotes estimates
when country  is left out of the sample. In practice this does not affect any of our conclusions. The
results are very similar if we extract the importer and exporter fixed effects from the simple gravity
regression with all countries included. This reflects the fundamental fact that most countries are
small in foreign markets.
   The fixed effects of log trade flows are identified only up to a sector-time-specific additive constant,
and thus we renormalize them by restricting the sum of the log importer fixed effects to be zero:

                                     im                                                z   ln  im
                                                                                               zk , t
                                                                                                      ()
                                 ln  nk , t ( )                  ln  im
                                                                     nk , t (  )   -
                                                                                           Nkt ( )

where Nkt ( ) is the total number of countries with positive imports for industry k and time t when 
is left out. In this way, what matters is the share of each country in the total imports across industries,
not the total imports of the numéraire country in the fixed effects estimation. The estimated FMA ik , t
is then be computed as in (4.3), where, with some abuse of notation,  im
                                                                      nk , t
                                                                             denote the renormalized
importer fixed effects when country  is omitted. These importer fixed effects are estimates of the
                                          E nk , t                                                         1-
destination-n demand shifter      1-                             . The iceberg bilateral components ink ,k
                                                                                                         t
                                                                                                           are estimated by
                                 Pnk , tk ·    i n   E ink , t
using the bilateral geographic distance and the common border dummy and corresponding distance
                                                                                          kt                           
and common border coefficients. The estimated bilateral component is proxied by Distance in  ·
exp  kt · Conti g in .


B.4     The Post-Double-Selection Method

B.4.1   Estimating Equation

The estimating equation is

                   d ln y i , t   +            ex
                                               g ·  i g , t d ln FMA i g , t +  d ln a
                                                    ex
                                                                                     ~ it + xi , t +  i , t ,
                                      g G


where the d ln FMA i g , t     k G     ex
                                       ik , t
                                              d ln FMA ik , t are the log-differenced market access terms aggre-
gated up to the cluster level. In describing the procedure, to streamline exposition we omit the fact
that time fixed effects and the log initial per capita income are "protected regressors," that are always
included and not subject to the control set selection procedure.
   The vector xi , t collects the industry-level initial equilibrium variables such as initial import and



                                                                         59
export shares ( im
                ik , t
                       and  ex
                            ik , t
                                   ), and weighted initial firm and consumer market access (  e x
                                                                                              ik , t
                                                                                                     · ln FMA ik , t
and  im
     ik , t
            · ln CMA ik , t ). The vector d ln a
                                               ~ it collects the observed contemporaneous foreign supply
shocks, i.e.  im
              i g ,t
                     d ln CMA i g , t .
    Since our estimating equation has a large number of controls relative to the sample size, the
OLS estimation is infeasible, and dimension reduction is necessary. We estimate the above growth
equation by implementing the "post-double-selection" method of Belloni et al. (2014b, 2017). We
describe our implementation of the estimator below.


B.4.2    Post-Double-Selection Method

The post-double-selection procedure works in two steps. In the double-selection step, LASSO is
applied to select control variables that are useful for predicting the dependent and independent
variables respectively. In the post-selection step, coefficients are estimated via an OLS regression of
dependent variables on the independent variables and the union of selected controls.
    First, let's rewrite the estimation equation as follows:

                                                 d ln y i , t        di , t  + xi , t  y + µ i , t ,

where di , t denotes the vector of treatment variables  ex
                                                        i g ,t
                                                               d ln FMA i g , t , and xi , t is the vector of control
                                                                   ~ it .
variables, that with some abuse of notation now also includes d ln a
    Applying LASSO directly to our estimation equation above might lead to the omitted-variable
bias if the LASSO procedure drops a control variable that is highly correlated with the treatment but
the coefficient associated with the control is nonzero. To learn about the relationship between the
treatment variables and the controls, let's introduce a reduced-form equation

                                                           di ,t        xi , t d + v i , t

for each element d i , t of the vector di , t .
    Substituting the reduced-form d i , t into the growth estimation equation we get

                                          d ln y i , t    xi , t (d  +  y ) + ( v i , t  + µ i , t )
                                                 di ,t    xi , t d + v i , t       di ,t .

    Both equations are used for variable selection. The first equation is used to select a set of variables
that are useful for predicting the dependent variable d ln y i , t and the second equation is used to select
a set of controls that are useful for predicting each of the treatment variables d i , t . The reduced form
system could be further rewritten as
                                                            zi , t      xi , t  +  i , t

where zi , t is the vector of dependent variable d ln y i , t and all treatment variables d i , t . A feasible


                                                                          60
double-selection procedure via LASSO is then defined as follows

                                                                                         
                                                      min E(zi , t - xi , t  )2 +          || L  ||1
                                                                                         n

where L          dia g ( l 1 , l 2 , . . . , l p ) is a diagonal matrix of penalty loadings and  is the penalty level.
The LASSO estimator is used for variable selection by simply selecting the controls with nonzero
estimated coefficients.
    The double-selection procedure first selects a set of controls that are useful for predicting the
independent variable d ln y i , t and treatment variables di , t . Then in the post-LASSO step, we estimate
 ex
 g by ordinary least squares regression of d ln y i , t on d i , t and the union of the variables selected for
predicting d ln y i , t and di , t .

B.4.3      K-fold Cross Validation

The penalty level  controls the degree of penalization. Practical choices for  to prevent overfitting
are provided in Belloni et al. (2012, 2014a,b). We follow the online appendix of Belloni et al. (2014a)
and choose  by K-fold cross validation.
    The K-fold cross-validation works as follows:

   1. Randomly split the data ( y i , t , xi , t , di , t ) into K subsets of equal size, S1 , S2 , . . . , SK

   2. Set the potential tuning parameter set to be [  RT - 100 : grid :  RT + 100], where  RT
         
      2.2 n (1 - /2 p ) is the rule of thumb tuning parameter suggested in Belloni et al. (2012, 2014b),
             0.1/ lo g ( p ), n is the number of observations, p the number of variables, and grid                         10.

   3. Given  , for k             1, 2, . . . , K :

         (a) (Training on ( y i , t , xi , t , di , t ), i   S k ) Leave the k th subset out, and implement the post-double-
               selection method with tuning parameter  on the K - 1 subsets. Denote the estimated
               coefficients as ^ -k (  ) and ^-
                                              y (  ).
                                                k


         (b) (Validating on ( y i , t , xi , t , di , t ), i  S k ) Given ^ -k (  ) and ^-
                                                                                         y (  ) compute the error in predicting
                                                                                           k

               the k th subset,
                                                  e k ()            (d ln y i , t - di , t ^ -k (  ) - xi , t ^-
                                                                                                               y (  )) .
                                                                                                                 k    2

                                                             i Sk

   4. This gives the cross-validation error

                                                                                     K
                                                                                 1
                                                               CV (  )                    e k (  ).
                                                                                 K
                                                                                     1


   5. For each value of the tuning parameter   [ RT - 100 ,  RT + 100], repeat steps 3-4 and choose
        the tuning parameter that minimizes the CV (  ).

                                                                            61
B.5     Foreign Supply: The Role of CMA ik , t

This appendix discusses the results of estimating the growth effects of foreign supply shocks, as
captured by the external Consumer Market Access terms CMA ik , t . Straightforward steps lead to an
extension of equation (2.6) to include foreign supply shocks.

                            d ln y            ex
                                              k ·  k d ln FMA k +
                                                   ex
                                                                                   k ·  k d ln CMA k .
                                                                                   im   im
                                                                                                                    (B.2)
                                       k                                      k


One can estimate the elasticities of real income with respect to foreign supply shocks by following
similar steps as we do in estimating the impact of foreign demand. From (2.4), the CMA nk , t are
expressed as follows:

                                                                        1-          1-
                                                  CMA nk , t           c ik , t k · ink ,k
                                                                                         t
                                                                                           ,
                                                                 i n

                                             1-
where n is importer. The (log) c ik , t k is recovered based on exporter fixed effects. After estimating the
gravity specification (4.2), the foreign supply shock can be constructed as:

                                                                         
                                CMA nk , t            ex
                                                      ik , t · Distance in · exp  kt · Conti g in ,
                                                                         kt
                                                                                                                    (B.3)
                                               i n


that are then aggregated into clusters exactly like foreign demand shocks.
     Figure A11 reports the results of estimating the impact of foreign supply shocks on income. The
left panel presents the OLS results, the right panel the double-LASSO results. Overall, the foreign
supply shocks have both much larger magnitudes and standard errors. The latter feature makes it
challenging to draw sharp conclusions about the impact of foreign supply shocks on income. The
one significant coefficient (on the Consumption goods cluster) does not survive reasonable robustness
checks. In practice, the variation in the FMA terms is an order of magnitude larger than the variation
in CMA terms. This is sensible from an economic standpoint: examination of the functional forms
for FMA and CMA in equations (4.3) and (B.3) reveals that foreign demand shocks are determined
by both changes in foreign prices/costs as well as changes in the overall foreign expenditure. On the
other hand, foreign supply shocks are driven purely by changes in foreign costs. As a result, the FMA
terms have much greater variation in the data. Statistically, it is thus not surprising that a regressor
with a smaller standard deviation has a higher point estimate. The large standard errors, however,
imply a relative lack of confidence in those estimates.
     Figure A12 reports the main results of the paper for foreign demand shocks when controlling for
the vector of d ln CMA's. Note that throughout, all double-LASSO estimation admits foreign supply
shocks as potential controls. In this robustness check, we make them "protected" controls, meaning
    External consumer market access enters into the welfare expression (2.5) implicitly through the sectoral price indices
                                1
             1-
Pk  (z H, k c H, k k + CMA k ) 1-k .


                                                                 62
that they are included as controls regardless of whether they are selected by the procedure. The main
findings of the paper are robust to this exercise.




                                                     63
                                 C. A                          A                      T                             F

Table A4: Control Variables Selected in the Double-Selection LASSO Procedure: Baseline Estimation

              Admissible                                                                Controls Selected
              Controls                                         Baseline               Developed Countries           Developing Countries
              e x
               ik , t
                                                                e  x
                                                                 i 104, t
                                                                                            e   x
                                                                                              i 178, t
                                                                                                                           e   x
                                                                                                                             i 65, t
                                                                e  x
                                                                 i 176, t

               im
               ik , t
                                                                                                                                  im
                                                                                                                                  i 263, t

              e x
              i g ,t


               im
               i g ,t

              e x · ln FMA
              ik , t       ik , t                      e  x
                                                        i 114 , t
                                                                  · ln FMA i 114, t    e x · ln FMA
                                                                                       i 92, t      i 92, t             e x
                                                                                                                        i 243, t
                                                                                                                                 · ln FMA i 243, t
                                                        i 143
                                                        e x
                                                              ,t
                                                                  · ln FMA i 143, t


               im
               ik , t
                      · ln CMA ik , t                   im
                                                        i 166, t
                                                                 · ln CMA i 166, t     im
                                                                                       i 205, t
                                                                                                · ln CMA i 205, t
                                                        im
                                                        i 176, t
                                                                 · ln CMA i 176, t



                 k g       e x · ln FMA
                           ik , t       ik , t


                 k g        im
                            ik , t
                                   · ln CMA ik , t

                 k g        im
                            ik , t
                                   · d ln CMA ik , t

              ln population i , t

              ln k i , t

              ln y i , t                                      included                       included                          included

                             2
               ln y i , t

              Time effects                                    included                       included                          included

              Number of Controls Selected                         6                              3                                3
              Estimates Figures                                Figure 1                       Figure 2                         Figure 2


 Notes: All specifications control for initial GDP per capita. Industries in our sample are relabeled by number from 1 to
 268 for coding purposes, i.e. k 1 , 2 , . . . , 268. The numbers in the subscripts refer to the corresponding industries.




                                                                               64
 Table A5: Summary Statistics of Clusters: Grouping the Manufacturing Industries to 5 Clusters

                                                      cluster
                             1                 2              3            4             5       Mean      Std. Dev.
   Inv. Share              0.00               0.05           0.57        0.03          0.16      0.13        0.22
   Int. Using              0.76               0.62           0.67        0.66          0.57      0.66        0.16
   Int. Sales              0.85               0.71           0.26        0.31          0.52      0.57        0.31
   Conc. Ratio             0.48               0.23           0.35        0.59          0.41      0.40        0.21
   Sk. Share               0.33               0.23           0.30        0.32          0.54      0.32        0.13
   Cap. Int.               0.69               0.55           0.54        0.69          0.55      0.61        0.10
   Con. Int.               0.25               0.52           0.71        0.49          0.74      0.51        0.22

   Num of ind.              54                 70             36          44            29
   Trade share             0.31               0.20           0.15        0.07          0.20
   Label             Raw Materials        Complex          Capital    Consumer        Skill
                      Processing        Intermediates      Goods       Goods        Intensive
   Abbreviation         RAW                  INT            CAP        CONS             SI

Notes: This table reports the summary statistics of the sectoral characteristics among the sectors selected into each
cluster, when the number of clusters is 5. The last two columns report the mean and standard deviations of those
characteristics among all manufacturing sectors. The row "Num. of ind" reports the number of sectors in each cluster,
and "Trade share" reports the fraction of world trade accounted for by sectors in that cluster. The bottom panel lists the
intuitive labels of the clusters, as well as 3-letter abbreviations. Both are heuristic and assigned by the authors.




                                                           65
Table A6: Control Variables Selected in the Double-Selection LASSO Procedure: Robustness Checks

               Admissible                                                       Controls Selected
               Controls                                 Dropping Large Trading Partners Dropping Contiguous Countries
               e x
                ik , t
                                                                    e   x
                                                                      i 94, t
                                                                                                   e  x
                                                                                                    i 111, t
                                                                     i 104, t
                                                                     e x                            i 176
                                                                                                    e x
                                                                                                          ,t
                                                                     i 111, t
                                                                     e x                            i 182
                                                                                                    e x
                                                                                                          ,t
                                                                    e  x
                                                                     i 114, t
                                                                    e  x
                                                                     i 158, t
                                                                     i 176
                                                                     e x
                                                                           ,t

                im
                ik , t

               e x
               i g ,t


                im
                i g ,t

               e x · ln FMA
               ik , t       ik , t                           e  x
                                                              i 114 , t
                                                                          · ln FMA i 114, t   e  x
                                                                                               i 143 , t
                                                                                                          · ln FMA i 143, t
                                                             e  x
                                                              i 152 , t
                                                                          · ln FMA i 152, t   e  x
                                                                                               i 152 , t
                                                                                                          · ln FMA i 152, t
                                                              i 175
                                                              e x
                                                                    ,t
                                                                          · ln FMA i 175, t   e  x
                                                                                               i 186 , t
                                                                                                          · ln FMA i 186, t
                                                              i 186
                                                              e x
                                                                    ,t
                                                                          · ln FMA i 186, t   e x
                                                                                              i 202 , t
                                                                                                         · ln FMA ik 202, t
                                                              i 190, t
                                                              e x         · ln FMA i 190, t   e  x
                                                                                               i 203 , t
                                                                                                          · ln FMA i 203, t


                im
                ik , t
                       · ln CMA ik , t                        im
                                                              i 166, t
                                                                       · ln CMA i 166, t       im
                                                                                               i 166, t
                                                                                                        · ln CMA i 166, t
                                                              im
                                                              i 229, t
                                                                       · ln CMA i 229, t



                  k g       e x · ln FMA
                            ik , t       ik , t


                  k g        im
                             ik , t
                                    · ln CMA ik , t

                  k g        im
                             ik , t
                                    · d ln CMA ik , t

               ln population i , t

               ln k i , t

               ln y i , t                                             included                        included

                              2
                ln y i , t

               Time effects                                           included                        included

               Number of Controls Selected                               13                              9
               Estimates Figures                                     Figure A5                       Figure A5


 Notes: All specifications control for initial GDP per capita. Industries in our sample are relabeled by number from 1 to
 268 for coding purposes, i.e. k 1 , 2 , . . . , 268. The numbers in the subscripts refer to the corresponding industries.




                                                                              66
                                   Figure A5: Robustness: Cluster-Specific Coefficients and Confidence Intervals




                                                                                                                     8
              7.5


                                                                                 F(5,126)=2.56
                                                                                        p=0.03




                                                                                                                     6
 Elasticity of real income
                         5




                                                                                                        Elasticity of real income
                                                                                                                             4
             2.5




                                                       2.47
                                                                                                                                                                     2.97
                                           1.17




                                                                                                                2
                               0.14                                              0.08       0.05
 0




                                                                                                                                                     1.32
                                                                     -0.58

                                                                                                                                     0.17                                                            0.11        0.05




                                                                                                                     0
              -2.5




                                                                                                                                                                                        -0.52

                             RAW         INT        CAP          CONS         AG         MIN




                                                                                                                     -2
                                                          Clusters
                                                                                                                                    RAW            INT             CAP           CONS              AG          MIN
                                      95% confidence bands               90% confidence bands                                                                                Clusters


                                (a) Decreased Tuning Parameter                                                                      (b) Cluster Measurement Error Simulation
              7.5




                                                                                                                     7.5
                                                                                 F(5,126)=2.44                                                                                                          F(5,126)=2.88
                                                                                        p=0.04                                                                                                                 p=0.02
 Elasticity of real income




                                                                                                        Elasticity of real income
                         5




                                                                                                                                5
             2.5




                                                                                                                    2.5



                                                                                                                                                                            2.18
                                                       1.66
                                           1.05                                                                                                             1.06

                               0.14                                              0.07       0.05                                            0.15                                                        0.01         0.05
 0




                                                                                                        0




                                                                     -0.27                                                                                                                 -0.42
              -2.5




                                                                                                                     -2.5




                             RAW         INT        CAP          CONS         AG         MIN                                          RAW                INT         CAP            CONS             AG         MIN
                                                          Clusters                                                                                                           Clusters

                                      95% confidence bands               90% confidence bands                                                      95% confidence bands                         90% confidence bands



                             (c) Dropping Large Trading Partners                                                                          (d) Dropping Contiguous Countries

Notes: This figure reports estimates of the  e    x
                                                 g coefficients in equation (3.6) via post double-LASSO. All specifications
control for (i) time effects and (ii) log initial GDP per capita. The bars display the 90% and 95% confidence bands,
that use standard errors clustered by country. The boxes display the results of an F -test for equality of the coefficients
in each plot. Panel (a) reports the results with a decreased tuning parameter. 15 control variables are selected in the
double-selection step. In panel (c), the construction of the FMA terms omits foreign markets for which country i is a
large trading partner. 13 control variables are selected in the double-selection step. In Panel (d) construction of the
FMA terms omits contiguous countries. 9 control variables are selected in the double-selection step. Panel (b) reports
the range in coefficient estimates in the measurement error simulations described in Section 5.3. The vertical bars report
the 95% range of coefficient point estimates.




                                                                                                   67
Figure A6: Cluster-Specific Coefficients and Confidence Intervals When Grouping the Manufacturing
Industries to 5 Clusters
                   7.5




                                                                                                                           15
                                                                                   F(6,126)=4.17
                                                                                          p=0.03                                                                                           F(6,126)=2.44
                                                                                                                                                                                                  p=0.03
      Elasticity of real income




                                                                                                              Elasticity of real income
                              5




                                                                                                                                     10

                                                                                                                                                                6.38
                  2.5




                                                        2.43
                                                                                                                          5




                                              1.54

                                                                   0.43                                                                               1.54
                                    0.20                                             0.04         0.07                                                                     0.49
      0




                                                                           -0.12                                                            0.18                                   -0.02     0.00         0.05
                                                                                                              0
                   -2.5




                                                                                                                           -5




                                  RAW      INT       CAP       CONS       SI       AG       MIN                                           RAW      INT       CAP       CONS       SI       AG       MIN
                                                               Clusters                                                                                                Clusters

                                           95% confidence bands            90% confidence bands                                                    95% confidence bands            90% confidence bands



                                                 (a) OLS Estimates                                                                                   (b) LASSO Estimates

 Notes: This figure reports estimates of the  e  x
                                                g coefficients in equation (3.6) via post double-LASSO, when grouping
 the manufacturing industries to 5 clusters. All specifications control for (i) time effects and (ii) log initial GDP per
 capita. The left panel displays the baseline OLS estimates. The right panel displays the post double-LASSO estimates.
 9 control variables are selected in the double-selection step. The bars display the 90% and 95% confidence bands, that
 use standard errors clustered by country. The boxes display the results of an F -test for equality of the coefficients in
 each plot.




                                                                                                         68
Figure A7: Robustness I, Developed vs. Developing Countries: Cluster-Specific Coefficients and
Confidence Intervals

                                                                                    I. Decreased Tuning Parameter
                   7.5




                                                                                                                                         15
                                                                                                F(5,56)=3.79
                                                                                                      p=0.00                                                                                                             F(5,56)=11.78
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                p=0.00
                              5
      Elasticity of real income




                                                                                                                            Elasticity of real income
                                                                                                                                                   10
                                                                                                                                                                                         9.23
                   2.5




                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                  1.95

                                                  1.03
                                     0.24                                                                      0.05
        0




                                                                                                                                                                         0.50                                            0.61
                                                                                                                                                           0.04




                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -0.51
                                                                                -1.23           -1.13                                                                                                   -1.26
                   -2.5




                                                                                                                                         -5
                                  RAW          INT             CAP          CONS               AG            MIN                                        RAW          INT              CAP          CONS                 AG           MIN
                                                                     Clusters                                                                                                               Clusters

                                            95% confidence bands                    90% confidence bands                                                          95% confidence bands                      90% confidence bands



                                            (a) Developed Countries                                                                                               (b) Developing Countries

                                                                                          II. 5 Manufacturing Clusters
                   7.5




                                                                                                                                         15




                                                                                                    F(6,69)=3.03
                                                                                                          p=0.01                                                                                                             F(6,56)=14.62
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    p=0.00
      Elasticity of real income




                                                                                                                            Elasticity of real income
                              5




                                                                                                                                                  10




                                                                                                                                                                                  9.86
                  2.5




                                                                                                                                       5




                                               1.54        1.42

                                                                         0.58           0.48                                                                         1.25
                                    0.25                                                                        0.05                                                                                                          0.44
      0




                                                                                                                                                          0.09
                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -0.44
                                                                                                                                                                                                -0.93           -1.07
                                                                                                     -0.99
                   -2.5




                                                                                                                                         -5




                                  RAW       INT          CAP         CONS          SI           AG           MIN                                        RAW        INT          CAP         CONS          SI             AG           MIN
                                                                     Clusters                                                                                                               Clusters

                                            95% confidence bands                    90% confidence bands                                                          95% confidence bands                      90% confidence bands



                                            (c) Developed Countries                                                                                               (d) Developing Countries

 Notes: This figure reports estimates of the  e    x
                                                  g coefficients in equation (3.6) via post double-LASSO, separately for
 developed (left side) and developing (right side) countries. All specifications control for (i) time effects and (ii) log
 initial GDP per capita. The bars display the 90% and 95% confidence bands, that use standard errors clustered by
 country. The boxes display the results of an F -test for equality of the coefficients in each plot. The top panel reports the
 results with a decreased tuning parameter. For the sample of developed countries, 11 control variables are selected in
 the double-selection step. For developing countries, 6 control variables are selected in the double-selection step. The
 bottom panel reports the results when grouping the manufacturing industries to 5 clusters. For developed countries, 5
 control variables are selected in the double-selection step. For developing countries, 0 control variables are selected in
 the double-selection step.




                                                                                                                       69
Figure A8: Robustness II, Developed vs. Developing Countries: Cluster-Specific Coefficients and
Confidence Intervals

                                                                          I. Dropping Large Trading Partners
                   7.5




                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                         F(5,69)=6.52                                                                                           F(5,56)=15.43
                                                                                               p=0.00                                                                                                  p=0.00
                              5
      Elasticity of real income




                                                                                                                Elasticity of real income
                                                                                                                                       10
                                                                                                                                                                      9.34
                   2.5




                                                                                                                            5
                                                1.50        1.59


                                    0.25                                                            0.05                                                  0.84
                                                                          0.01
       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                0.58
                                                                                                                                              0.06




                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                           -0.49

                                                                                         -1.46                                                                                      -2.02
                   -2.5




                                                                                                                             -5
                                  RAW         INT        CAP          CONS            AG         MIN                                        RAW         INT        CAP          CONS         AG         MIN
                                                               Clusters                                                                                                  Clusters

                                           95% confidence bands                  90% confidence bands                                                95% confidence bands               90% confidence bands



                                           (a) Developed Countries                                                                                   (b) Developing Countries

                                                                          II. Dropping Contiguous Countries
                   7.5




                                                                                                                             15




                                                                                         F(5,69)=3.72                                                                                           F(5,56)=15.71
                                                                                               p=0.00                                                                                                  p=0.00
                                                                                                                                       10
      Elasticity of real income




                                                                                                                Elasticity of real income
                              5




                                                                                                                                                                      8.28
                  2.5




                                                                                                                             5




                                                            1.76

                                                0.83
                                    0.26                                                                                                                  0.69
                                                                                                    0.05                                                                                        0.26
      0




                                                                                                                                              0.05
                                                                                                                0




                                                                          -0.16
                                                                                                                                                                                                           -0.60
                                                                                                                                                                                    -1.70
                                                                                         -1.32
                   -2.5




                                                                                                                             -5




                                  RAW         INT        CAP          CONS            AG         MIN                                        RAW         INT        CAP          CONS         AG         MIN
                                                               Clusters                                                                                                  Clusters

                                           95% confidence bands                  90% confidence bands                                                95% confidence bands               90% confidence bands



                                           (c) Developed Countries                                                                                   (d) Developing Countries

 Notes: This figure reports estimates of the  e    x
                                                  g coefficients in equation (3.6) via post double-LASSO, separately for
 developed (left side) and developing (right side) countries. All specifications control for (i) time effects and (ii) log
 initial GDP per capita. The bars display the 90% and 95% confidence bands, that use standard errors clustered by
 country. The boxes display the results of an F -test for equality of the coefficients in each plot. The top panel reports the
 results while dropping large trading partners. For the sample of developed countries, 1 control variable is selected in
 the double-selection step. For developing countries, 0 control variables are selected in the double-selection step. The
 bottom panel reports the results when dropping contiguous countries. For developed countries, 5 control variables are
 selected in the double-selection step. For developing countries, 0 control variables are selected in the double-selection
 step.




                                                                                                           70
      Figure A9: Developed vs. Developing Countries: Cluster Measurement Error Simulation
                    7.5




                                                                                                                                                 15         10
                                5




                                                                                                                                                                                            9.37
      Elasticity of real income




                                                                                                                                   Elasticity of real income
                  2.5




                                                                                                                                                5
                                                                               2.24
                                              1.56


                                     0.27                                                                                                                                      0.81                                       0.55
                                                                                             -0.01                  0.05                                          0.06
                    0




                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -0.49

                                                                                                         -1.13                                                                                             -1.94
                    -2.5




                                                                                                                                                 -5
                                    RAW     INT                            CAP            CONS        AG          MIN                                            RAW         INT          CAP          CONS              AG      MIN
                                                                                      Clusters                                                                                                     Clusters


                                            (a) Developed Countries                                                                                                         (b) Developing Countries

 Notes: This figure reports estimates of the  e x
                                               g coefficients in equation (3.6) via post double-LASSO in the measurement
 error simulations. All specifications control for (i) time effects and (ii) log initial GDP per capita. The left panel displays
 the results for the sample of developed countries. The right panel displays the results for developing countries. The
 vertical bars report the 95% range of coefficient estimates.




Figure A10: Elasticity of Real Income with Respect to a Uniform Foreign Shock, Developed vs.
Developing Countries
                                                           .6




                                                                                                                                                                         MYS        TWN
                                                                                                                  VNM                                                       HUN
                                                                                                                                                                          SVK


                                                                                                                                                                              CZE
                                                                                                                        PHL
                                                                      .4
                                             Elascity of the Growth Rate




                                                                                                                                                                 THA
                                                                                                                                                                                            IRL
                                                                                                                                                                               KOR
                                                                                                                                                                              SVN     DEU

                                                                                                                                                 BWA                                   AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                      BEL
                                                                                                       LSO                                                                             SWE
                                                                                                       KHM                                    TUN                                       NLD
                                                                                                                           MAR       CRI ROM POL
                                                           .2




                                                                                                                                          MEXLTU            FIN   CHE
                                                                                                                                       BGR
                                                                                                                                       BLR          ISR        DNK                                         ARE
                                                                                                                            CHN MKD                        ITA
                                                                                                                            AGO
                                                                                                                             ALB                   PRT
                                                                                                                   MDA       NAM UKR           HRV        FRA
                                                                                                                                                         GBR
                                                                                                                                                        ESP  CAN                                     NOR
                                                                                                                  KGZ                JOR TUR
                                                                                                                                   IRQ                   JPN
                                                                                                                    HNDUZB
                                                                                                                    NIC              ZAF
                                                                                                                 IND         IDNAZE
                                                                                                                                  DOM                          SAU
                                                                                                                                                              OMN                                      KWT
                                                                                          CAF   TGO HTI BGD              COG  SLV
                                                                                                                            LKA             KAZRUS               USA
                                                                                            MWI BFA          TJK
                                                                                                              MRT                  TKM       CHL        NZL                                                        QAT
                                                                                       MOZ        GIN
                                                                                                   TCD
                                                                                                    UGA     ZMB
                                                                                                            KEN
                                                                                                          SEN        PAK                DZA VEN      GRC
                                                                           BDI          NER
                                                                                        ETH        MLI  TZA  GHA
                                                                                                            CMR
                                                                                                 SLE BEN CIVLAO            GEOPERECU    LBNARG
                                                                                                                 SDNNGA SYRGTM EGY COL BRA
                                                                                                                                        URY                   AUS
                                                                                             RWA
                                             0




                                                                                                  MDG NPL              YEM ARM
                                                                                                                       BOL
                                                                                                                           PRY
                                                                                                                            MNG
                                                           -.2




                                                                           6                                     8                    10                                                                             12
                                                                                                                 Log Real GDP Per Capita


 Notes: This figure presents the scatterplot of the elasticity of real income with respect to a uniform foreign demand
 shock (6.1) against real GDP per capita. It is calculated using the estimated coefficients in estimating equation (3.6) for
 developed and developing country subsamples separately, and the sectoral trade shares in 2015.




                                                                                                                              71
     Table A7: Predicted Decennial Growth Difference Relative to Median Geographic Location, Medians by Region and Time Period

                                                                                        Counterfactual Region
           Actual Region               East Asia         Eastern Europe      Latin America  Middle East                  South           Sub-Saharan         West Europe/
                                       & Pacific         & Central Asia       & Caribbean & North Africa                  Asia              Africa           North America

           East Asia                       0.43                0.91               0.54                -0.04               -0.28                0.17                1.87
           & Pacific (N = 14)        [ -0.01 , 3.65 ]     [ 0.28 , 2.13 ]    [ 0.04 , 2.64 ]     [ -2.50 , 1.51 ]    [ -2.07 , 0.88 ]    [ -0.41 , 2.86 ]     [ 0.40 , 3.78 ]

           Eastern Europe                  -0.87               -0.25               -0.54               -1.12               -1.12               -1.38              -0.21
           & Central Asia (N = 24)   [ -1.91 , -0.18 ]    [ -0.88 , 0.19 ]   [ -1.83 , -0.01 ]   [ -1.78 , -0.56 ]   [ -2.29 , -0.67 ]   [ -2.20 , -0.72 ]   [ -0.69 , 0.21 ]

           Latin America                   -0.49               -0.04              -0.06                -0.53               -1.15               -0.51               0.16
           & Caribbean (N = 18)      [ -1.55 , -0.04 ]    [ -1.23 , 0.34 ]   [ -0.44 , 0.52 ]    [ -2.04 , -0.26 ]   [ -1.80 , -0.49 ]   [ -1.56 , -0.16 ]   [ -1.00 , 0.44 ]

           Middle East                    -0.02                0.78               0.92                 0.31                -0.22              -0.17                1.07
           & North Africa (N = 15)   [ -0.15 , 0.29 ]     [ 0.11 , 1.38 ]    [ 0.17 , 1.36 ]     [ -0.17 , 0.77 ]    [ -0.67 , -0.03 ]   [ -0.52 , 0.22 ]     [ 0.28 , 1.96 ]

           South Asia (N = 5)             -0.09                0.11               0.29                 -0.04               0.00               -0.01                0.37
                                     [ -0.26 , 0.14 ]     [ 0.06 , 0.19 ]    [ 0.20 , 0.54 ]     [ -0.26 , -0.02 ]   [ -0.49 , 0.20 ]    [ -0.28 , 0.01 ]     [ 0.10 , 0.47 ]

           Sub-Saharan &                  -0.11                0.43               0.36                -0.01               -0.15               -0.02                0.49




72
           Africa (N = 33)           [ -0.25 , 0.52 ]     [ 0.16 , 1.03 ]    [ 0.10 , 0.72 ]     [ -0.24 , 0.26 ]    [ -0.62 , 0.29 ]    [ -0.21 , 0.20 ]     [ 0.29 , 1.23 ]

           West Europe/                    -1.20                0.01               -0.76               -1.28               -1.43               -1.29               0.13
           North America (N = 18)    [ -2.75 , -0.23 ]    [ -0.81 , 0.56 ]   [ -2.37 , -0.55 ]   [ -3.31 , -1.01 ]   [ -3.42 , -0.68 ]   [ -3.33 , -0.67 ]   [ -1.02 , 0.63 ]

        Notes: This table reports the region pair-specific differences in economic growth, in percent per decade, between the actual growth and the
        counterfactual growth that the country would experience if it were moved to the counterfactual region. The numbers in square brackets are the
        interquartile range across countries in the region.
    Figure A11: Foreign Supply: Cluster-Specific Coefficients and Confidence Intervals for CMA

                   45




                                                                                                                               45
                                                                                          F(5,126)=3.25                                                                                               F(5,126)=4.13
                                                                                                 p=0.01                                                                                                      p=0.00
                             30




                                                                                                                                         30
      Elasticity of real income




                                                                                                                  Elasticity of real income
                  15




                                                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                                                                         13.28
                                                                           11.40
                                                             6.90                                                                                                                      7.47

                                                                                          1.51                                                                                                        2.42
      0




                                                                                                                  0
                                    -1.22        -1.68                                                                                          -1.61
                                                                                                                                                             -3.02
                                                                                                     -4.80                                                                                                       -5.29
                   -15




                                                                                                                               -15
                                  RAW          INT        CAP          CONS            AG         MIN                                         RAW          INT        CAP          CONS            AG         MIN
                                                                Clusters                                                                                                    Clusters

                                            95% confidence bands                  90% confidence bands                                                  95% confidence bands                  90% confidence bands



                                                 (a) OLS Estimates                                                                                        (b) LASSO Estimates

 Notes: This figure reports the coefficients in estimating Equation (3.6), for the foreign supply shocks (CMA). All
 specifications control for (i) time effects and (ii) log initial GDP per capita. The left panel displays the baseline OLS
 estimates. The right panel displays the post double-LASSO estimates. 16 control variables are selected in the double-
 selection step. The bars display the 90% and 95% confidence bands, that use standard errors clustered by country. The
 boxes display the results of an F -test for equality of the coefficients in each plot.




Figure A12: Foreign Demand: Cluster-Specific Coefficients and Confidence Intervals, Controlling for
Foreign Supply
                   7.5




                                                                                                                               7.5




                                                                                          F(5,126)=6.21                                                                                               F(5,126)=3.89
                                                                                                 p=0.00                                                                                                      p=0.00
      Elasticity of real income




                                                                                                                  Elasticity of real income
                              5




                                                                                                                                          5




                                                                                                                                                                         3.60
                                                             2.84
                  2.5




                                                                                                                              2.5




                                                 1.14                                                                                                        1.18

                                    0.15                                   0.13           0.24                                                  0.12                                                  0.29
                                                                                                     0.02                                                                                                        -0.00
      0




                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                       -0.03
                   -2.5




                                                                                                                               -2.5




                                  RAW          INT        CAP          CONS            AG         MIN                                         RAW          INT        CAP          CONS            AG         MIN
                                                                Clusters                                                                                                    Clusters

                                            95% confidence bands                  90% confidence bands                                                  95% confidence bands                  90% confidence bands



                                                 (a) OLS Estimates                                                                                        (b) LASSO Estimates

 Notes: This figure reports the coefficients in estimating Equation (3.6), for the foreign demand shocks (FMA). All
 specifications control for (i) time effects and (ii) log initial GDP per capita, and (iii) foreign supply shocks (CMA). The
 left panel displays the baseline OLS estimates. The right panel displays the post double-LASSO estimates. 6 control
 variables are selected in the double-selection step. The bars display the 90% and 95% confidence bands, that use
 standard errors clustered by country. The boxes display the results of an F -test for equality of the coefficients in each
 plot.




                                                                                                             73
