                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    INFORMAL CENTRAL BANK COMMUNICATION

                                  Annette Vissing-Jorgensen

                                      Working Paper 28276
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28276


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




I thank Adair Morse for many productive discussions. The views expressed herein are those of
the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Informal Central Bank Communication
Annette Vissing-Jorgensen
NBER Working Paper No. 28276
December 2020
JEL No. E5,G12

                                         ABSTRACT

Starting from a set of facts on the timing of stock returns relative to Federal Reserve decision-
making, I argue that informal communication ­ including unattributed communication -- plays a
central role in monetary policy communication. This contrasts with the standard communications
framework in which communication should be public and on-the-record because it serves to
ensure accountability and policy effectiveness. I lay out possible benefits of using unattributed
communication as an institution, but these should be weighed against substantial costs: It runs
counter to accountability to use unattributed communication, causes frustration among those
trying to understand central bank intensions, and enables use of such communication by
individual policymakers. Unattributed communication driven by policymaker disagreements is
unambiguously welfare reducing, because it reduces policy flexibility and harms the central
bank's credibility and decision-making process. Central banks may benefit from resisting
unattributed communication via expensive newsletters and increasing consensus-building efforts
to reduce disagreement-driven unattributed communication.


Annette Vissing-Jorgensen
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
545 Student Services Building, #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
vissing@haas.berkeley.edu
    Informal Central Bank Communication

    By Annette Vissing-Jorgensen 1



    Abstract
    Starting from a set of facts on the timing of stock returns relative to Federal Reserve
    decision-making, I argue that informal communication ­ including unattributed
    communication -- plays a central role in monetary policy communication. This
    contrasts with the standard communications framework in which communication
    should be public and on-the-record because it serves to ensure accountability and
    policy effectiveness. I lay out possible benefits of using unattributed communication
    as an institution, but these should be weighed against substantial costs: It runs
    counter to accountability to use unattributed communication, causes frustration
    among those trying to understand central bank intensions, and enables use of such
    communication by individual policymakers. Unattributed communication driven by
    policymaker disagreements is unambiguously welfare reducing, because it reduces
    policy flexibility and harms the central bank's credibility and decision-making
    process. Central banks may benefit from resisting unattributed communication via
    expensive newsletters and increasing consensus-building efforts to reduce
    disagreement-driven unattributed communication.



1   Facts: Information flows at unexpected times
    I want to start with a set of facts to argue that central bank communication does not
    always work the way you may think. The facts are about the Federal Reserve but, as
    you will see, a lot of the underlying economics generalizes to the ECB context.

    Fact 1. Based on data from 1994 to 2011, Lucca and Moench (2015) document that
    the average US stock return in the 24-hour period from 2 pm to 2 pm prior to
    scheduled FOMC announcements was about 50 bps. They view this as a puzzle
    since monetary policy news coming out would have to be systematically positive and
    leaks are "unrealistic from an institutional viewpoint".

    Fact 2. Studying stock returns over the full cycle between scheduled FOMC
    meetings, Cieslak, Morse and Vissing-Jorgensen (2019, CMVJ) document using
    1994-2016 data that stock returns (in excess of T-bill returns) on days that fall in
    even weeks relative to the FOMC announcement day are on average 12 bps higher
    than stock returns on days that fall in odd weeks. Figure 1a below illustrates this,
    plotting 5-day average excess returns for days t to t+4 over the FOMC cycle. CMVJ
    argue that this pattern is driven by monetary policy news, which over the post-1994
    period has been unexpectedly accommodating (as opposed to generating a risk

    1
        University of California Berkeley, CEPR and NBER.




    Information Central Bank Communication                                                 1
premium). To link the stock return pattern to monetary policy, they document that
prior to 1994, when intermeeting target changes were common and thus reveal
timing of Fed decision making/debate, these changes disproportionately took place
in even weeks in FOMC cycle time. This is shown in Figure 1b below. 2 CMVJ also
show that Fed funds futures yields on average fell in even weeks in FOMC cycle
time and that even-week stock returns were particularly high following low prior stock
returns, consistent with a surprisingly strong "Fed put". They suggest that the even-
week timing of Fed news may arise from meetings/calls to discuss the discount rate
requests from the Federal Reserve Banks. These requests are themselves a
channel for influencing the target chosen at the next policy meeting. Each Reserve
Bank has to submit a request at least every two weeks, implying that a two-week
cycle for internal policy debate would be meaningful.

Figure 1a
Stock returns over the FOMC cycle, 1994-2016




Figure 1b
Target changes over the FOMC cycle 1982M9-1993M12




2
    The peaks in Figure 1b are delayed a couple of days relative to the peaks in Figure 1a. Prior to 1994, the
      FOMC did not make an announcement after the target was changed. The data source used in CMVJ
      dates target changes based on when they were likely implemented in open market operations 1-2 days
      after the decision.




Information Central Bank Communication                                                                      2
Fact 3. Morse and Vissing-Jorgensen (2020, MVJ) study detailed calendars of a set
of Federal Reserve governors from 2007-2018. They document that even-week
returns are particularly high on days with interactions between governors and
Reserve Bank presidents, either at FOMC events or in phone calls or meetings.
Even-week days with governor-president calls/meetings see average stock returns
that are 15 bps higher than other even-week days. This implies that the pre-FOMC
period studied by Lucca and Moench (2015) is not special ­ even-week interactions
among top policymakers appear to more generally be associated with information
flow to markets. To document information flow via informal channels, MVJ document
that average stock returns on even-week days with governor-president interactions
are particularly high if there is informal communication via on-the-record public
commentary by the FOMC (using data from FOMC Speak) or governor calendars list
media interviews (of which almost none identifies the news outlet, suggesting they
are not on-the-record).

What is surprising about these stock return facts is that they are unaffected by
controlling for formal Fed communication: There are no formal communications
during the pre-FOMC period as it is part of the blackout period, and CMVJ and MVJ
find that controlling for speeches and formal information releases (e.g. Fed minutes)
does not materially affect the results. This suggests that monetary policy news
reaches markets via more informal channels.

Several pieces of evidence suggest a substantial role for unattributed
communication: 3

·        CMVJ provide a series of examples of how confidential information from the
         Fed has appeared in newspapers or market newsletters. They discuss how the
         FOMC statement resulted from congressional pressure for transparency
         following a series of newspaper stories revealing confidential Fed information.

·        Former Governor Meyer's 2004 book state: "The use of reporters as part of the
         Fed's signal corp is not official Board or FOMC doctrine. The public affairs staff
         and the Chairman like to pretend it doesn't happen."

·        Greg Ip, a top reporter covering the Fed for the Wall Street Journal and the
         Economist, was asked in a 2012 interview whether he does a lot of "on-
         background" interviews. He replied: "Yes, I do tons of them. With the Federal
         Reserve, for example, it's always been that way." 4




3
    A multitude of terms used in journalism to describe how information can be used by the reporter. "On-the-
      record" means that everything is usable and the source can be quoted by name. "Off-the-record"
      means the information obtained cannot be used for publication. In between there is a range of
      categories for which definitions vary. Using the Fed's interpretation, based on Meyer (2004), "not for
      attribution" means everything is usable, the source should not be directly identified, but the information
      can be attributed to "senior Fed officials" or the like. "On background" means information gathered can
      be used but not attributed to the official directly or the Federal Reserve but to "government officials" or
      similar. "On deep background" implies that information is usable but no source information should be
      given. I will use "unattributed" to refer to "not for attribution", "on background" and "on deep
      background".
4
    https://journalistsresource.org/tip-sheets/research/chat-the-economists-greg-ip-key-tips-business-
       reporting-analysis/




Information Central Bank Communication                                                                          3
    ·       A comment by President Plosser at the January 2011 FOMC meeting is also
            informative: "My impression is that the Board, for example, gives very few on-
            the-record interviews, and, instead, the discussion is oftentimes on
            background."

    This evidence begs the question of whether the transmission of monetary policy
    news via unattributed communication is how monetary policy communication is
    supposed to work.



2   The traditional view of monetary policy communication
    Monetary policy is typically delegated to a central bank with some level of
    independence from elected politicians. This is done to ensure that the central bank is
    able to implement policy that may be unpopular but necessary, like raising rates or
    imposing macro-prudential rules. 5 Furthermore, the complexity of central banking
    makes it a governmental function best delegated to an agency of experts. The role of
    communication in this setting is twofold.

    Accountability, to sustain independence: A central bank needs to convey the gist
    of its deliberations to elected parliamentarians and the public so they can oversee
    that decisions are made competently in accordance with the central bank's mandate.
    Some of this communication invariably is technical in nature. However, the central
    bank's independence from political pressure is more likely to endure if the broad
    public understands decisions and views the central bank as competent.

    Policy effectiveness: The impact of forward guidance and asset purchases on
    medium and long interest rates depends crucially on the public understanding the
    likely duration of low rates/monthly purchases. Furthermore, effective monetary
    policy requires economic agents (households, firms, governments) to understand the
    central bank reaction function. For example, agents will behave less conservatively
    in their spending decisions (C, I, or G) if they understand that the central bank will
    accommodate aggressively if needed.



3   On-the-record versus unattributed communication
    The traditional roles for communication suggest that communication should be public
    and on-the-record, conveying the central bank's chosen policy and policy framework,
    and allowing oversight by all who want to hold the central bank accountable.




    5
        Bernanke (2015) describes the unpopularity of the AIG bailout and states: "If we acted, nobody would
          thank us. But if we did not act, who would? Making politically unpopular decisions for the long-run
          benefit of the country is the reason the Fed exists as a politically independent central bank. It was
          created for precisely this purpose: to do what must be done ­ what others cannot or will not do." The
          AIG example documents that even expansionary policies can be widely unpopular.




    Information Central Bank Communication                                                                        4
      Possible explanations for why unattributed communication plays a role can be
      grouped into two categories: 6

      1.       The Federal Reserve as an institution may prefer unattributed to on-the-record
               communication in some situations

      2.       Unattributed communication could be driven by disagreeing policymakers who
               each try to influence the expectations of the public or financial markets in order
               to strengthen their bargaining position at the Fed.

      Let me consider each possibility in turn.



4     Institutional use of unattributed communication


4.1   Benefits of unattributed institutional communication

      The political science literature is at the forefront of knowledge about unattributed
      communication since such practices are standard in politics. Pozen (2013) focuses
      on leaks from the White House and argues that many of these are not leaks in the
      sense of unauthorized disclosure but instead authorized "plants" of information in
      media outlets. Use of plants rather than for-attribution disclosure allows the sender to
      "impart information about executive branch policies without officially acknowledging
      those policies and thereby inviting unwanted forms of accountability or constraints".
      Mapping this to the central banking context, the benefits of unattributed
      communication include the following.

      Flexibility: In the Fed context, it is beneficial to provide frequent policy guidance in
      order to facilitate more accurate decision making by the private sector. However,
      communication ties policymakers' hands if the public does not fully understand the
      state-contingent nature of policy. In that case, the Fed will be viewed as flip-flopping
      if policy differs from prior statements of likely outcomes. Unattributed comments may
      impose less of a constraint on subsequent policy decisions than on-the-record
      communication (since less of a promise has been made), though of course more
      than no communication at all.

      Consistent with the idea that the Fed is very concerned about policy flexibility and
      views formal disclosure as especially flexibility-reducing, the Fed used to delay the
      release of minutes until after the subsequent FOMC meeting in order to "safeguard
      the Committee's flexibility to make needed adjustments to policy" (Vice Chairman
      Kohn, July 1993 FOMC meeting). Furthermore, in 1994 the Fed agreed to make
      public statements if policy is changed. This action coincided with an abrupt reduction
      in the frequency of intermeeting rate changes, from about 2/3 to around 10% of all
      changes (see CMVJ). This has to my knowledge never been explained but is likely

      6
          I am disregarding the possibility that the documented return patterns are due to policymakers
             inadvertently disclosing large amounts of information, given the pervasive nature of information flow
             implied by the asset pricing evidence reviewed. I am also not going to discuss the very unlikely
             possibility that someone inside the Fed with access to the information is systematically trading on it.




      Information Central Bank Communication                                                                           5
      due to an aversion to make formal public statements for fear that they will tie the
      committee's hands going forward (in particular, by making it hard to reverse an
      intermeeting change for fear of looking less competent). Vissing-Jorgensen (2019)
      provides quotes from the FOMC transcripts to further document the importance of
      policy flexibility and how it is reduced by Fed disclosure.

      Explaining: Use of unattributed communication could also be motivated by a Fed
      desire to explain its assessment of the economy and its policy or policy framework.
      Using background conversations with reporters is less time-consuming than on-the-
      record communication since it does not require the Fed to engage in a subsequent
      public debate about the information disclosed.

      Learning: Another possibility is that unattributed communication via "plants" is used
      for learning purposes: to gauge support outside the Fed for a particular policy
      change (or economic assessment). This is what the political scientists refer to as a
      "trial balloon leak". By floating an idea not-for-attribution, the Fed avoids looking bad
      if the idea is unpopular and not implemented. A Wall Street Journal article discusses
      how Bernanke appears to have floated the idea of doing Operation Twist with a
      market newsletter in August 2011 to test the waters. 7

      These are all meaningful benefits, but unattributed communication has costs.



4.2   Costs of unattributed institutional communication

      Unattributed communication is the opposite of transparency and
      accountability: In a time of populism, a public appreciation for the role and tools of
      central banks is crucial for these to retain their legitimacy and independence. The
      Bank of England's Citizens' Panels, the "Fed Listens" events, and the "ECB Listens"
      events that are part of the ECB's review exemplify recent initiatives to increase
      transparency and accountability by engaging in direct communication with the public
      at large. Yet, the lack of public understanding of Federal Reserve informal
      communication stands in stark contrast to such efforts. I wonder what the newly-
      engaged citizens would think if we told them that the Federal Reserve, and perhaps
      other central banks, does a lot of its communication in ways that are not well
      understood but appears to have enormous impact on asset prices. I suspect they
      would worry about who gets access to all that information first and how their pension
      fund managers are doing in that race. Certainly, their trust in central banks as
      institutions would not increase. 8



      7
          https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052970204554204577025922155198762
      8
          A quote by Mr Fisher, Manager of the Fed's System Open Market Account, summarizes his frustration with
             the Fed's communication giving unfair information access to some. Referring to market movements in
             the intermeeting period leading up to the June 1999 FOMC meeting, he states: "In my judgment, if you
             had tried to trade in the bond market during this period and had followed only the FOMC's
             announcement on May 18, the data releases as they came out, and the Chairman's Joint Economic
             Committee testimony, you would have lost a lot of money. On the other hand, if you had subscribed to
             all the high-priced insider rags and carefully tracked the utterances, attributed and unattributed, of
             FOMC members, you would have fared a good bit better."




      Information Central Bank Communication                                                                     6
    Frustration: It is likely that the level of frustration with Fed communication is higher
    if market participants are in a constant struggle to understand which newsletters and
    newspapers have obtained new information from the Fed. Is the Fed putting itself in
    a situation in which thousands of frustrated market participants and reporters are
    ready to criticize the Fed following any decision or announcement that appears
    inconsistent with prior perceptions? 9 In this sense, using unattributed communication
    may actually reduce policy flexibility, relative to on-the-record communication. Use it
    sparingly! It may come back to haunt you.

    One could formalize this possibility as follows. Think of a setting in which today is
    date 0 (say half way through the policy cycle) and the central bank's next policy
    meeting is at date 1. Express the credibility cost to the Fed of setting a policy rate 1
    at date 1 that differs from what the market expects after any date 0 disclosure as:

                                                 × [1 - 0 (1 )]2

    where

                  [Formality of date 0 disclosure] + [Frustration with Fed communication]
             =
                                     Understanding of reaction function

    If the public has a complete (infinite) understanding of the Fed's reaction function,
    market expectations do not constrain policy --  is zero since the public will
    understand that news arrived between date 0 and 1 that necessitates a different
    policy rate. If not, communication matters. The flexibility argument is that less formal
    announcements retain more flexibility, here captured by [Formality of date 0
    disclosure] and thus  being lower. However, this ignores any indirect effects of
    disclosure choice on the frustration term. Accounting for that, unattributed
    communication may retain less flexibility than on-the-record communication.

    Facilitates use by individual policymakers: By using unattributed communication
    as an institution, the Fed opens itself up more to the tug-of-war over market
    expectations by disagreeing policymakers. With less clear institutional guidance on
    how the consensus is evolving, individual policymakers have more room to try to
    drive market expectations.



5   Individual policymaker use of unattributed communication
    Rather than it being used for institutional communication, the second possible driver
    of unattributed communication is that individual policymakers seek to gain influence
    from using it. Disagreement about appropriate policy is a central feature of group
    decision making and it places monetary policy making in a more standard political
    setting. Central bank communication in a setting with disagreement is not only




    9
        We can argue about whether off-the-record communication enhances the understanding of the reaction
          function relative to on-the-record communication. Perhaps policymakers are willing to say more about
          the reaction function when they can use informal communication though a confident central banker
          should be happy to speak on-the-record.




    Information Central Bank Communication                                                                       7
      institutional but also individual. It becomes about affecting markets and public
      opinion to improve your bargaining position in policy negotiations.



5.1   Individual communication

      An individual policymaker may seek to gain from changing public views in several
      ways.

      Posturing: Making firm statements of what policy the policymaker prefers. This
      imposes a greater loss from compromise on the policymaker him/herself, thus
      improving his/her bargaining position. Posturing is clearly best done via public on-
      the-record communication, in speeches or interviews.

      Influencing: Changing the public's view of appropriate policy by putting forward
      arguments supporting the policymaker's view. This makes it costlier for other
      policymakers to deviate from the policymaker's preferred policy.

      Spin: Distorting the public's assessment of what the likely policy decision is. Those
      succeeding in moving the public's expectations in their preferred direction gain
      bargaining position because the central bank as an institution (and thus all central
      bank policymakers) suffer if the central bank is perceived as flip-flopping. Any
      perceived lack of competence plays into the hands of politicians seeking to reduce
      central bank independence.

      The line between influencing and spin is thin. Both are intended to affect beliefs, but
      spin implies a use of more manipulative tactics to control the message. Crucially, if
      influencing or spin is based on confidential information, it has to be done using
      unattributed communication. In central banking, staff economic projections, internal
      deliberations, and views of colleagues are often confidential until a decision has
      been made (or in some cases much longer). 10 11



5.2   The game-theory of unattributed individual communication

      In Vissing-Jorgensen (2019) I model the unattributed tug-of-war over market
      expectations between disagreeing policymakers, what one could call the ``quiet
      cacophony". In the model, two policymakers set policy.

      ·        Each policymaker's preferred policy rate evolves over time. Policymakers know
               each other's preferred rate at each point in time. They choose what to reveal to
               the public about policy preferences at an intermediate date between policy
               meetings. Policymakers care about how close the chosen policy rate is to their
               preferred rate but also about the central bank not being viewed as "flip-

      10
           The FOMC Policy on External Communications of Committee Participants lays out what is confidential,
             see https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_ExtCommunicationParticipants.pdf
      11
           There are also instances where the identity of the messenger affects the impact of the message. For
             example, hearing that a known policy hawk thinks inflation is just around the corner may affect public
             opinion less than a press article stating that some central bank officials privately worry about the risk of
             inflation.




      Information Central Bank Communication                                                                            8
     flopping". If either policymaker communicates with the public, both incur a loss if
     the chosen policy rate deviates from the average preferred policy rate
     communicated at the intermediate date. Providing information at the
     intermediate date about policymaker preferences thus reduces policy flexibility.

·    If no information is provided to the public, the chosen policy rate at the next
     meeting is the average of policymakers' preferred rates at that time.

·    With communication, the chosen policy rate is a weighted average of the
     average preferred policy rate at the time of the meeting and the market's
     expectation of the average preferred policy rate based on information
     communicated at the intermediate date.

Given all this, will policymakers decide to disclose information about policy
preferences at the intermediate date and what will they disclose?

·    Assume that policymakers are to some extent able to spin market perceptions
     of policy preferences by selectively revealing internal information that supports
     a claim that policymakers' average preferred policy rate is higher (or lower) than
     is in fact the case.

     The outcome of the game is that if disagreement is sufficiently strong (judged
     relative to the amount of news that may arrive before the next policy meeting)
     and sufficient spin is possible, the unique Nash equilibrium is that each
     policymaker communicates with his/her preferred spin in order to move the
     policy rate chosen in his/her preferred direction.

Figure 2 below illustrates how each policymaker's spin reacts to that of the
opponent. In the example graphed, person D's preferred policy rate is lower than that
of person H. If H does not spin, D therefore spins the market's expectation of the
average preferred policy rate negatively (point A in the figure). If H does spin, he will
spin positively given his policy preference. The more positively H spins, the more
negatively D spins to counter. In equilibrium, we thus end up at point B where both
spin to the fullest extent possible (S* and ­S*) but the spin cancels out.

Since the spin cancels out, neither policymaker gains from their communication.
However, the disclosure reduces (compared to no disclosure) the flexibility of the
central bank to react to information arriving between the intermediate date and the
next policy meeting. As a result, both policymakers are worse off than if they could
each commit to not using informal communication. This provides an illustration of
welfare-reducing use of unattributed communication. It is analogue to the prisoners'
dilemma, in which both prisoners would be better off if neither confessed (to get a
reduced sentence) but both confess in equilibrium.




Information Central Bank Communication                                                 9
Figure 2
The tug of war over market expectations: Spin reaction functions




In the model described, both parties are equally able to spin, implying that spin
cancels in equilibrium. One could think of cases in which the internally known
information all (or mainly) favours one side, with the other side unable to counter.
Two recent disclosures of ECB staff projections the day before scheduled policy
announcements exemplify this.

·        A September 11, 2019, a Reuters article titled "ECB projections to show future
         growth barely above 1%: sources" illustrates a dovish leak, motivated by a
         desire for additional policy accommodation. It states: "Growth will be not far
         above 1 percent both this year and next, the figures are expected to show,
         underpinning the ECB's plans to approve more stimulus, the sources, who
         asked not to be named, told Reuters." 12

·        A September 9, 2020 Bloomberg article titled "ECB Forecasts Said to Show
         More Confidence in Economic Outlook" illustrates a hawkish leak. It attributes
         information about the forecast to "euro-area officials" who "also said that in their
         view additional monetary support beyond the current 1.35 trillion-euro ($1.6
         trillion) emergency bond-buying program doesn't appear warranted from the
         current perspective". 13

In these examples, those communicating may benefit in the short run by an
improved bargaining position at the policy meeting, but on average over time each
side gains as often as they lose. 14

Harm to credibility and the decision-making process: In Vissing-Jorgensen
(2019), I study FOMC transcripts back to 1948 to gain insight into whether

12
     https://www.reuters.com/article/us-ecb-policy-forecasts/ecb-projections-to-show-future-growth-barely-
       above-1-sources-idUSKCN1VW259
13
     https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-09-09/ecb-forecasts-said-to-show-more-confidence-in-
       economic-outlook
14
     An interesting aspect of the game-theoretic framework is that as the policy decision nears, the temptation
      to disclose internal information (via unattributed communication) increases since the benefit of retaining
      flexibility to better react to any new information that may arrive before the decision diminishes.




Information Central Bank Communication                                                                       10
      unattributed communication has other costs than lost policy-flexibility relative to non-
      disclosure. The Fed uses the word "leak" for non-institutionally sanctioned
      communication of confidential information. I document 114 FOMC documents with
      discussions of leaks (generally one document correspond to one FOMC meeting or
      conference call). The documents reveal that such communication is viewed as a
      threat to Fed credibility and harm the Fed's decision-making process. For example, a
      2010 memo from Chairman Bernanke to the FOMC states: ``[...] it damages the
      reputation and credibility of the institution if the outside world perceives us as using
      leaks and other back channels to signal to markets, to disseminate points of view, or
      to advance particular agendas" and "such leaks threaten the free give and take of
      ideas and collegiality of the FOMC as we grapple with the difficult issues we face".

      In addition to leaks harming the free give and take of ideas, withholding of
      information to prevent leaks further damages decision quality. Meyer (2004)
      describes how staff used to omit information from the Greenbook for fear of leaks by
      policymakers. A 2014 Reuters article gives an example of information withholding at
      the ECB, stating that "Several ECB sources said Draghi had cut back on circulating
      policy papers in advance of council meetings, apparently out of concern that
      opponents, notably in the German Bundesbank, were leaking them to try to block or
      discredit decisions." 15 This could materially harm the quality of decisions made.



6     Possible changes


6.1   Resisting communicating via expensive Fed-watcher or ECB-
      watcher newsletters whether for individual or institutional reasons

      The Medley Global Advisors scandal in 2012 that led to the resignation of President
      Lacker from the Richmond Fed was very harmful to the Fed's reputation. It
      reinforced concerns about unequal access to information. When I tried to buy the
      Medley newsletter a few years ago, it cost $120,000/year. Yes, it is easier for central
      bankers to convey what they want to experts at newsletters, and the newsletter can
      drive market expectations quickly, but so can financial newspapers.

      In a time when trust in formal institutions is low, populisms is prevalent, and
      governments are under pressure to finance huge deficits, central bank independence
      cannot be taken for granted. A new paper by Bianchi, Kind and Kung (2020)
      documents significant drops in Fed funds futures rates around Trump tweets about
      the Fed. How many more Medley scandals can Fed independence take?




      15
           https://www.reuters.com/article/us-ecb-governors-exclusive/exclusive-central-bankers-to-challenge-
             draghi-on-ecb-leadership-style-idUSKBN0IO1GY20141104




      Information Central Bank Communication                                                                    11
6.2   Seeking consensus to avoid the prisoners' dilemma of
      disagreement-driven unattributed communication

      At the ECB, President Lagarde has introduced a series of changes to limit
      unattributed communication driven by disagreements. A February 2020 Reuters
      article titled "No phones, no leaks: How Lagarde is making her mark on ECB"
      describes the changes. 16 The change in phone use are useful and make for a good
      headline, but other changes are likely more important. They include the president
      spending more time listening to colleagues, building consensus, not front-running
      decisions before meetings, and showing more trust in colleagues by distributing
      meeting proposals up to a week in advance, not just hours before for fear of leaks.

      How do these changes relate to the prisoners dilemma? Standard solutions include
      enforcement (in a military context, think of arms treaties with inspectors) or
      punishment in a repeated version of the game. The new no phones policy fits in the
      enforcement category but only helps for information obtained during the meetings.
      The consensus-building approach maps directly to the repeated game solution, since
      the President now has the choice to take away influence if someone leaks. This
      cannot work perfectly, since leakers are hard to identify. However, an improved
      consensus-focused culture is likely to make leaking less acceptable among
      colleagues who may know the identity of a leaker. While they may not formally want
      to reveal this, they can help impose informal sanctions. After all, many policymakers
      will see their influence reduced if the President goes back to a less consensus-
      building approach. Pozen (2013) describes in the US political context how leakers
      are disciplined informally via "shaming, shunning and exiling".

      References

      Bianchi, F., T. Kind, and H. Kung (2020), "Threats to Central Bank Independence:
      High-Frequency Identification with Twitter", working paper.

      Cieslak, A., A. Morse and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2019), "Stock Returns over the
      FOMC Cycle", Journal of Finance, 74, 7, 2201-2248.

      Lucca, D. O. and E. Moench (2015), "The Pre-FOMC Announcement Drift", Journal
      of Finance, 72, 1, 329-371.

      Morse, A. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2020), "Information Transmission from the
      Federal Reserve to the Stock Market: Evidence from Governors' Calendars", working
      paper.

      Pozen, D. E. (2013), "The Leaky Leviathan: Why the Government Condemns and
      Condones Unlawful Disclosures of Information", Harvard Law Review, 127, 512-635.

      Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2019), "Central Banking with Many Voices: The
      Communications Arms Race", Conference Proceedings, 23rd Annual Conference of
      the Central Bank of Chile.


      16
           https://www.reuters.com/article/us-ecb-policy-lagarde-inisght/no-phones-no-leaks-how-lagarde-is-making-
             her-mark-on-ecb-idUSKBN2040NO




      Information Central Bank Communication                                                                  12
