                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          WHY DOES THE U.S. HAVE THE BEST RESEARCH UNIVERSITIES?
              INCENTIVES, RESOURCES, AND VIRTUOUS CIRCLES

                                    W. Bentley MacLeod
                                     Miguel Urquiola

                                     Working Paper 28279
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28279


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




This paper was prepared for the Journal of Economic Perspectives. For useful comments and
input we thank Elías Cueto, David Figlio, Patricia Graham, Gordon Hanson, Enrico Moretti, and
Timothy Taylor. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by W. Bentley MacLeod and Miguel Urquiola. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Why Does the U.S. Have the Best Research Universities? Incentives, Resources, and Virtuous
Circles
W. Bentley MacLeod and Miguel Urquiola
NBER Working Paper No. 28279
December 2020
JEL No. I2,I23,N0

                                          ABSTRACT

Around 1875 the U.S. had none of the world's leading research universities; today, it accounts for
the majority of the top-ranked. Many observers cite events surrounding World War II as the
source of this reversal. We present evidence that U.S. research universities had surpassed most
countries' decades before WWII. An explanation of their dominance must therefore begin earlier.
The one we offer highlights reforms that began after the Civil War and enhanced the incentives
and resources the system directs at research. Our story is not one of success by design, but rather
of competition leading American colleges to begin to care about research. We draw on agency
theory to argue that this led to increasing academic specialization, and in turn, to more precise
measures of professors' research output. Combined with sorting dynamics that concentrated
talent and resources at some schools--and the emergence of tenure--this enhanced research
performance.


W. Bentley MacLeod
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, MC 3308
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
wbmacleod@wbmacleod.net

Miguel Urquiola
Economics Department
Columbia University
420 W 118TH ST #1022
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
msu2101@columbia.edu
    The educational performance of nations is not uniform across dierent dimensions, nor is it static.

Around 1875, the United States had substantially higher levels of schooling than any European

country, but that gap has largely disappeared (Goldin and Katz 2008).                    By contrast, circa 1875

the United States had none of the world's leading research universities; today, it accounts for the

majority of the top-ranked (Cole 2009; Clotfelter 2010).

    One way to illustrate the rise of US research universities is by counting the times universities are

mentioned in the biographies of Nobel prize winnersthe idea being that universities that train or

host Nobel winners are likely places active in research. These mentions are associated with years,

for example, the year a winner graduated from one institution or became a professor at another.

One can use this to create a time series reaching back into the 1800s. Figure 1 shows that by this

measure, around 1875 American universities badly lagged their European counterparts; today they

are distinctly ahead.




                     Figure 1: University Nobel Prize Mentions, By Country

This gure describes the frequency with which Nobel winners' biographies mention universities in dierent countries.
Specically, the dates in the gure refer to the years in which laureates graduated from a given school if they were
students there (this accounts for why there are dates for the late 1800s, before the prize was granted). If they were
professors, the dates refer to the year of award for the university they were aliated with at that point, and the
year of joining for other schools. The gure plots tted values of locally weighted regressions of each country's share
of total mentions on the year. The data cover the four countries with universities accounting for the most mentions.
They do not adjust for income or population because that does not change the two central facts the paper
addresses: American universities' initial weakness and later leadership. For such adjustments, see Urquiola (2020).



    Many observers cite events surrounding World War II as producing the turning point in American

performancefor example, they highlight the migration of Jewish academics from Germany to the

United States, and the rise of federal research funding (Graham and Diamond 1997; Cole 2009;

Gruber and Johnson 2019). The emphasis on World War II is analytically attractive: it highlights



                                                          2
factors that surely strengthened American universities, and it addresses the relative German decline

apparent in Figure 1.
                          1

       However, the raw data behind the gure indicate that US universities had matched or surpassed

most countries' well before World War II. By the measure used they were ahead of all but Germany's

by 1910, and of all countries' by 1920. To cite one anecdote illustrating this timing, in 1901 Theodore

Richardwho went on to win a Nobel Prize in Chemistrybecame the rst American-trained

professor to be oered a position at a German university.               In short, a successful explanation of

American universities' research dominance must begin in the late 1800s, and must involve factors

other than mid-20
                      th century events in Europe.

       The explanation we oer highlights reforms that began after the Civil War and enhanced the

incentives and resources the American university system directs at research.
                                                                                        2 Understanding these

reforms benets from two observations. First, the U.S. takes a relatively free market approach to

higher education; for instance, it allows easy entry by schools seeking to satisfy customer demand.

Second, universities do not supply their customers with a single product; they provide a complex

set of services among which is sorting. When a school produces sorting, it implicitly sells peer

groupsa chance to be exposed to and associated with certain types of people. For example, some

schools cater to students who are smart, or wealthy, or artistic.

       We begin to review the history of US university research by noting that since colonial times and

into the 1800s, American households demanded denominational sorting. For example, Presbyterians

wished to attend college with Presbyterians, Episcopalians with Episcopalians, etc. Further, most

preferred colleges close to home. Together, these factors produced massive entry: while in 1776 the

United States had 9 colleges, about 900 more opened before the Civil War.

       Mass entry meant that early U.S. colleges tended to be small and underfunded. They oered a

basic, narrow, and rigid curriculum delivered by unspecialized, often poorly paid professors. Colleges

routinely hired faculty using criteria other than expertise, and provided them with few incentives

or resources to do research. It is not surprising that, on average, the colleges did not excel in this

dimension.

       We then discuss how reforms allowed the system to begin providing incentives and resources.

First, we sketch an agency model that asks how universities can incentivize professors to do research.

It highlights that even if an institution is committed to research, producing it benets from reason-

ably precise research performance measures. Precision is enhanced by academic specializationin

this case, by organizing professors into disciplines.

       We then describe how American schools gained an interest in research and increased specializa-

tion. To preview, during the last few decades of the 1800s, U.S. colleges let a gap grow between the

   1
       Analyses of recent university performance often rely on bibliographic databases. Such data have advantages,
but are of limited use here because databases like the Web of Science only have author aliation information going
a few decades back; see Urquiola (2020).
   2
       In emphasizing earlier events, our approach is closer to Veysey (1965) and Goldin and Katz (1999). We draw
on Urquiola (2020).




                                                         3
skills they taught and those their customers demanded. With industrialization, interest grew around

areas that the college curricula essentially ignored, like engineering and business. In the 1870s and

80s, new universities like Cornell and Johns Hopkins showed that one could attract students by

oering specialized and advanced instruction in a range of areas, rather than by supplying denomi-

national sorting. Incumbents like Harvard and Columbia responded forcefully, forming specialized

arts and sciences departments and creating professional schools.

   Free entry allowed other schools to join the fray. This was helped by private donations, which

propelled universities like Chicago and Stanford. It was also aided by public resources, which were

crucial for entrants like Berkeley and MIT.

   All these schools began to seek professors who were specialists and, therefore, researchers at the

frontier of a eld. The academic system responded by providing tools to measure research output,

like specialized journals. Schools thus gained the ability to identify, bid for, and begin to recruit

successful researchers.

   These years also saw some American universities acquire tremendous amounts of resources. In

the early 1900s, the schools implementing reforms sought and achieved rapid enrollment growth.

However, they found that this threatened the match between the sorting they provided and that

which key students demanded. In particular, enrollment growth brought in lower-income students

and Jewish students andin a period of rising antisemitismalienated the Protestant elites the

colleges had traditionally served. By the early 1920s Columbia implemented selective admissions,

with several schools following soon after. Selectivity set in motion another sorting process, concen-

trating high ability/income studentsand eventually high tuitions and donationsat such schools.

This bolstered their ability to recruit desirable professors.

   In addition, the early decades of the 1900s saw the emergence of lumpy rewards for research, the

most salient being tenure. Agency theory implies that an up-or-out incentive system can promote

performance, particularly if professors compete against individuals of similar ability.     In concert

with increasingly precise research performance measures, tenure furthered a sorting process that led

to professors clustering in departments with colleagues of similar ability.

   In short, top American schools came to enjoy a virtuous circle that gave them resources to invest

in research, which they could now eectively incentivize; this helped attract strong students and

funding, which could go into further reforms and enhancements. At the same time, other schools

struggled and lost ground, creating the between-school inequality evident in the United States.

   Finally, throughout this period, such dynamics operated much more weakly in Europe, particu-

larly on the continent. European states controlled their higher education systems and did not allow

easy entry. This prevented the emergence of hundreds of struggling schools but also slowed the rise

of extremely well-heeled magnets for global talent, like MIT or Stanford. Overall, sorting of all types

was not as extensive in Europe. Concerning incentives, European professorial arrangementswhose

origins lie in the high middle agesuse up-or-out schemes like tenure to a much lesser extent.




                                                   4
1    The Initial American Weakness in Higher Education

A demand for denominational sorting drove the creation of the nine American colonial colleges.

For example, Massachusetts Puritans created Harvard to produce what they saw as a theologically

sound education. They took this task seriously; for instance, the colony forced out Harvard's rst

President, Henry Dunstereven as it praised his managementbecause of his stance on infant

baptism.   Analogous objectives led to the creation of the College of New Jersey (Princeton) by

Presbyterians, King's (Columbia) by Anglicans, Queen's (Rutgers) by the Dutch Reformed, Brown

by Baptists, and so on (Herbst 1982).

    In addition, like school-users to this day, the early founders desired proximityto have schools

close to home (for modern evidence see Card 1995 and Neilson 2017). For example, Connecticut-

based Puritans created Yale because they perceived that the Harvard of Massachusetts-based Pu-

ritans was too physically distant (in addition to too religiously liberal). After independence, the

desire for sorting and proximity led to massive entry: historians estimate 900 colleges opened before

the Civil War (Tewksbury 1932; Hofstadter 1955; Burke 1982). Religious denominations competed

to open colleges, including on the changing western frontier (Xiong and Zhao 2020).

    Well into the 1800s, therefore, American colleges mainly catered to small local markets. It was

common for a college to have fewer than 100 students and, say, 5 faculty members (Rudolph 1962;

Geiger 1986). The latter were often hired with attention to their religious aliation. For example,

the desire for clarity on this front led colleges to prefer their own graduates and avoid sending them

away for training. In 1879, Princeton President James McCosh wrote to an alumnus studying in

Europe: You are aware that the Trustees ... are resolute in keeping the college a religious one. You

have passed through varied scenes since you left us ... If a man has the root in him he will only be

strengthened in the faith by such an experience. It will be protable to me to nd how you have

stood all this (Leslie 1992).

    Wealth-related criteria mattered too.   Rudolph (1962) writes: From 1835 to 1852 chemistry

at Williams was taught by a man of independent wealth who spent his token salary on laboratory

equipment. The appointment of Henry D. Rogers ... at ... Pennsylvania ... was a response to his

oer to serve without salary. Amasa Walker joined Oberlin ... on the same terms.          This reects

that professorships often paid relatively little. Historians state that even in the 1860s, salaries at

Harvard and Yale were below the cost of living (Flexner 1946).

    While religion clearly inuenced hiring, expertise could matter less. For example, in 1853 James

Renwick, Columbia's sole professor of natural philosophy, announced his retirement.           Among

the mainly Anglican trustees who searched for his replacement was Samuel Ruggles, a real estate

investor. Ruggles favored hiring Wolcott Gibbs, a chemist with sterling credentials who would later

teach at City College and Harvard. Some trustees, however, noticed a blemish on his record: he

was a Unitarian. Ruggles tried to preempt the opposition, proposing a motion:

      Whereas the original charter incorporating King's ... College ... provides that [its] laws



                                                  5
       ...   shall not `extend to exclude any person of any religious denomination whatever,

       from equal Liberty and advantage of Education' ...      RESOLVED that in lling [this]

       Professorship, the Trustees are legally and morally bound to select such Professor, with

       reference solely to his tness for the place, without regard to his religious opinions.


This was rejected (Thompson 1946).

   Other types of identity could matter too. In 1802, Yale President Timothy Dwight recruited

Benjamin Silliman to teach chemistry.     That Silliman would become an illustrious teacher would

not have been obvious at the time; as Kelley (1974) notes: Silliman had never studied chemistry

and knew almost nothing about it. ... Dwight chose Silliman because he knew it would be dicult

to nd anyone in America with knowledge of chemistry and natural history, and he was afraid to

select a foreigner.

   In short, the early U.S. colleges did not prioritize specialized or even trained personnel. It is not

surprising that they made an associated choice: they oered a basic curriculum featuring few, if

any, electives. The course of study emphasized Latin, Greek, logic, rhetoric, mathematics, physical

sciences (natural philosophy), and ethics and politics (moral philosophy). It excluded practical

elds such as business and engineering. When the curriculum involved science, the emphasis was

deductive rather than experimental/inductive (Butts 1939; Storr 1953).         The teaching methods

involved rote learning in the form of recitations in which students declaimed memorized passages.

   These curricular and pedagogical choices meant that classes could be staed by few instructors.

One faculty member at Williams taught rhetoric, English literature, aesthetics, and political econ-

omy.   Another at Dartmouth was hired to teach English, Latin, Greek, Chaldee and such other

languages as he shall have time for (Rudolph 1962). Even more extreme, in the 1700s, individual

tutors delivered all instruction to a given cohort (e.g., the class of 1776) into the junior year. Given

such a task, modern professors might warm to rote learning!

   These practices kept costs down, which was necessary due to limited enrollments and revenues.

Serious budgetary pressures were common; Boyer (2015) states that most colleges hovered between

genial penury and unmitigated scal disaster.

   The whole setup also reected the inability and/or unwillingness of schools to branch out.

For example, to the extent that instruction in applied science developed, it was mainly outside

colleges. A notable player was the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI), which oered engineering,

surveying, applied science, and some of the rst laboratories in the country. However, schools like

RPI also oered narrow curricula and little advanced instruction. Rudolph (1977) states that around

1830, a motivated college graduate could earn an RPI degree in 24 weeks. Further, the existence of

such institutes facilitated the claim by colleges that science belonged elsewhere. When Williams

hired Ira Remsen to teach chemistry, he asked for a small room to set up a self-funded laboratory.

The response:     You will please keep in mind that this is a college and not a technical school

(Rudolph 1962).




                                                   6
Table 1: University-Level Mentions in Nobel Biographies During Given Time Periods


                                                     Total number of mentions for:
         1855-1900                        1901-1940                            1941-1980                         1981-2016
Humboldt Univ. of Berlin   19   University of Cambridge 63         Harvard University           101   Harvard University              32
University of Cambridge    11   Harvard University           35    University of Cambridge       83   Stanford University             28
University of Munich       10   Humboldt Univ. of Berlin 31        Columbia University           64   Massachusetts Inst. of Tech.    27
University of Strasbourg   10   Columbia University          29    University of Chicago         64   Univ. of Calif., Berkeley       20
University of Paris         9   University of Gottingen      27    Univ. of Calif., Berkeley     62   University of Chicago           18
Leiden University           8   University of Munich         25    Massachusetts Inst. of Tech. 48    Yale University                 17
University of Wurzburg      7   University of Paris          21    Stanford University           46   Princeton University            16
Heidelberg University       6   University of Chicago        20    University of Oxford          33   University of Cambridge         13
University of Copenhagen    6   University of Manchester 18        Princeton University          32   Columbia University             12
University of Gottingen     6   University of Oxford         17    California Inst. of Tech.     29   University of Texas             12
ETH Zurich                  5   ETH Zurich                   16    Yale University               26   Johns Hopkins University        10
University of Bonn          5   California Inst. of Tech.    15    Cornell University            23   California Inst. of Tech.        9
University of Vienna        5   University of Copenhagen 15        University of Illinois        20   Rockefeller University           9
Ecole Normale Superieure    4   University of Wisconsin 15         University of Paris           20   Cornell University               8
University of Manchester    4   Johns Hopkins University 14        Carnegie Mellon University 19      Nagoya University                8
Leipzig University          3   Univ. of Calif., Berkeley 12       University of Pennsylvania    19   Northwestern University          8
University of Giessen       3   University of Marburg        12    Johns Hopkins University      15   University of Pennsylvania       8
University of Graz          3   Uppsala University           12    New York University           15   Univ. of Calif., San Diego       7
University of Lyons         3   Cornell University           11    Rockefeller University        15   Univ. of Calif., Santa Barbar    7
University of Stockholm     3   Princeton University         11    Technical Univ. of Munich     15   University of Oxford             7

The table lists the number of times Nobel winners' biographies mention specic universities in given time periods.
Source: Urquiola (2020).




    All of the above is not to say that no research went on in the early American colleges.                                           In

the 1830s, Amherst's Edward Hitchcock completed the rst geological survey of Massachusetts;

Harvard's Asa Gray corresponded with Charles Darwin on the                               Origin of the Species.          But such

eorts were exceptions rather than the rule.

    Meanwhile, European universities were in a dierent situation.                               Since the Protestant Refor-

mation, European statesparticularly on the continenthad tended to control and eventually

relatively generously fund their universities. Faculty were often well-paid civil servants, assigned by

ministries of education to specialized chaired professorships (Paulsen 1906). They gradually began

to absorb the research activity previously located in academies founded mainly in the 1600s (for

example, the Académie Royale des Sciences, the Royal Society of London, and the Berlin Academy

of Sciences).

    This created a contrast evident in two schoolsone American, one Germanboth chartered

in the mid-1700s by George II (King of England and ruler of German lands). By the 1850s, the

American school, Columbia, had 6 professors and 150 students; the German, Göttingen, about 90

professors and 1,600 students (Ruggles 1854). Table 1 returns to the data to list the 20 universities

most mentioned in Nobel winners' biographies in roughly 40-year periods. For 1855-1900, Göttingen

was among the top 10; Columbialike all other American schoolsdid not make the top 20.

    What happened since the 1850s? To start, many more schools entered the market. Today, the




                                                                 7
U.S. has about 4,700 post-secondary institutions. By the logic above, its universities might be even

weaker. And yet, the country has about 100 Research I universities.
                                                                                       3 Thanks to these schools, the

United States accounts for 17 of the top 20 universities in the last column of Table 1 (for 1981-2016).

The next sections review how this transformation happened.




2        Agency Theory and Research Performance

We begin by sketching an agency theory framework that helps make sense of what occurred (a

mathematical version of this section is in the appendix).                   Our starting point is the fundamental

idea that individuals respond to rewards, and that performance measures shape those rewards. As

Merton (1968) argued, this applies to academic activities.

        Suppose professors work at a university, and exert eort on research and outside activities.

The outside activities may include consulting work and staying active in alumni networks or, in the

1800s, religious groups. We suppose the professors are intrinsically motivated to do research, and

so they will engage in this activity to some extent even if they are not compensated for it. We also

assume that all else equal, individuals and universities prefer a stable rather than a risky income

stream.
           4

        A key question is whether compensation can be used to reward research performance, which

depends on whether the university observes meaningful measures of research output. Suppose rst

that the university does not, and so faculty salary cannot vary with research eort.

        This basic setup captures elements of the American college system well into the 1800s. There

were few rewards for research, and yet some professors engaged in it.                       This was likely easier for

wealthier individuals with less need for outside activity.                 In addition, in the 1800s the return to

outside eort could have been substantial even if one were focused on an academic career.                               The

cases discussed above illustrate that one might more eectively land a professorship by signaling

one's denomination than by doing research.

        Now suppose that a measure of professors' research performance exists, and that the university

places value on producing research. Principal-agent theory (as in Holmstrom and Milgrom 1991)

implies that the university should make faculty compensation depend on this measure. Indeed, at

modern universities, rewards like salaries and raises vary with research performance. Such compen-

sation provides incentives, but it entails a cost because it exposes professors to risk. Thus, a more

precise research performance measure is a win-win: it reduces risk and allows for better incentives.

A key question, therefore, is how one might enhance the precision of such a measure.

        This question matters because it is usually dicult for non-experts to assess professors' research

    3
        Research University-I was a category in the taxonomy of higher education institutions developed by the
Carnegie Commission on Higher Education
    4
        In the case of individuals, this follows from risk aversion; in the case of universities, stable and egalitarian pay
reduces organizational conict (Lazear 1989; MacLeod 2003).




                                                              8
performance.        This is particularly true in making comparisons across elds.              For example, in the

humanities faculty tend to write books, while articles are the norm in the sciences.                      Similarly, a

chemistry professor may be listed as a co-author on all papers produced by her laboratory while an

economic theorist writes aloneit is hard to tell who is being more productive.

        To obtain more precise measures one useful step is to organize professors into elds, and to com-

pare their performance        within elds (Lazear and Rosen 1981).        With access to a relative performance

measure, it makes sense for the university to increase the rewards for research.

        In short, our framework highlights factors that improve research performance:                  i) increasing

specialization that organizes faculty into elds; ii) reducing the return to outside activities that

compete with research for faculty eort; and iii) increasing the extent to which universities value

research. We now discuss how reforms beginning in the 1800s promoted these changes.




3        U.S. Reforms of Higher Education

As industrialization advanced in the second half of the 19
                                                                     th century, American colleges increasingly

failed to satisfy some areas of educational demand. Some students were interested in subjects the

colleges did not cover, such as business, engineering, law, and mining. Others wanted specialized,

modern training in areas like chemistry and economics. Over the rst part of the 1800s, reformers

at several schools (like Brown, Harvard, Union) attempted to address these shortcomings but failed

to sustain reform (Butts 1939; Rudolph 1962).

        Lasting change arrived with two entrants:          Cornell (1865) and Johns Hopkins (1876).             Each

received substantial private support, the salient donations being those of Ezra Cornell and Johns

Hopkins. But each also received major public support: Cornell got federal funds via the Morrill

Act, and Hopkins eventually received support from Maryland (Curti and Nash 1965).
                                                                                                      5

        These schools expanded the curriculum and began to oer specialized instruction. Cornell saw

rapid enrollment growth, showing that a school could thrive by responding to curricular demand

rather than by providing denominational sorting. For its part, Hopkins emulated the focus of Ger-

man universities on advanced/graduate instruction. Its rst president, Andrew Gilman, promoted

hiring based on expertise and research ability, rather than aspects like denominational aliation.

He stated: The institution we are about to organize would not be worthy the name of a University,

if it were to be devoted to any other purpose than the discovery and promulgation of the truth; and

it would be ignoble ... if the resources ... given by the Founder ... should be limited to the main-

tenance of ecclesiastical dierences or perverted to the promotion of political strife. ... sectarian

and partisan preferences should have no control in the selection of teachers (Hawkins 1960). In our

    5
        The Morrill Act (1862) transferred shares of mostly Western federal land to states. The proceeds of their sale
were to benet higher educational institutions whose objective was without excluding other scientic or classical
studies, to teach such branches of learning as are related to agriculture and the mechanic arts. States retained wide
latitude in the use of funds; for example, they could be awarded to private universities.




                                                           9
framework, Gilman was increasing the weight on research and decreasing that on outside activities.

    Incumbent schools had to decide how to respond. Harvard and Columbia invested aggressively

to compete with Cornell and Hopkins in oering electives, funding research, and creating graduate

schools of arts and sciences and professional schools (like business, engineering, law, and medicine).

Other well-heeled incumbentsnotably Princeton and Yalegenerally followed, but retained a

greater focus on their undergraduate colleges. Yet other incumbents, like Amherst and Williams,

remained fully committed to undergraduate curricula.

    Even these last schools began to oer majors and electives and to split academic areas into

specialized elds.   For example, natural philosophy into astronomy, biology, chemistry, physics;

political economy into economics, political science, sociology, etc. Academic specialization was on

the rise.

    Reformers soon faced additional competition from other entrants aiming to be research universi-

ties. These included Stanford (1885), and the University of Chicago (1890), which relied on private

donations, and schools that beneted from Morrill Act funding and/or state supportsuch as the

universities of California, Illinois, Michigan, Minnesota, and Wisconsin, along with Michigan State,

Penn State, and Purdue. Yet others, like MIT, enjoyed both private and public funding.

    Many of these schools innovated in ways of their own.      For example, Chicago was unusually

aggressive in raiding other schools' faculty; Berkeley emphasized hiring junior professors and avoided

inbreeding (another way of reducing the return to outside activities); MIT and Stanford moved

to collaborate with the private sector in ways that generated funding, setting a pattern for years to

come.

    It is worth noting that the scale of entry stood in stark contrast to the situation in Europe.

There, states controlled and mostly restricted the creation of universities. For example, around the

time of the American Civil War, the U.S. had hundreds of separate colleges, while England still had

four universities. Further, many continental universities required state approval to venture into new

elds, particularly where states funded faculty salaries.

    Competing to deliver advanced and specialized instruction, American universities began to seek

professors at the cutting edge of their elds. Initially, such academics were in short supply and/or

hard to identify. For example, early in his long presidency of Harvard (1869-1909), Charles Eliot

observed: There is in this country a very considerable body of teachers who know how to teach

Latin and Greek . . . but if you are in search of teachers to teach botany, chemistry, physics and so

on, you cannot nd them. They do not exist (Flexner 1946).

    As the competition for research talent heightened, the supply of Ph.D.-trained specialists grew.

The academic system also began to emphasize specialization in ways that provided measures of

professors' research performance.

    Faculty members founded professional associations, like the American Chemical Society (1877)

and the American Historical Association (1884).       These began to publish journals: for example,




                                                 10
the American Economic Association (1885) introduced the  Publications of the American Economic
Association, which evolved into the American Economic Review. University department journals
supplemented such periodicals; for example, Harvard's Quarterly Journal of Economics (1886) and

Chicago's American Journal of Sociology (1895).

          Here the United States was catching up to Europe, where academic societies and specialized

journals had existed much before. For example, consider mathematics, where European periodicals

like the      Journal de l'Ecole Polytechnique      appeared in the 1700s (Bartle 1995). At Johns Hopkins,

President Daniel Gilman hired an English Mathematician, James Sylvester, who led the founding

of the       American Journal of Mathematics        in 1878. Years later, in his retirement address, Sylvester

disputed this role:


            You have spoken of our Mathematical Journal. . . .         Mr. Gilman is continually telling

            people that I founded it . . . I assert that he is the founder. Almost the rst day I landed

            in Baltimore, .   .   .   he began to plague me to found a Mathematical Journal on this

            side of the water . . . I said it was useless, there were no materials for it. Again and

            again he returned to the charge and again and again I threw the cold water I could on

            the scheme; nothing but obstinate persistence . . . brought his views to prevail (Flexner

            1946).


As American periodicals formalized their procedures and made use of peer review, they dierentiated

in quality. Those that became better-regarded received more submissions, and their editors made

them more selective, thus attracting more papersa hierarchy evolved in each eld.
                                                                                                   6

          Charles Eliot reected on the impact this had over his presidency: The chief diculty that

I encountered was the procuring of teachers competent to give advanced instruction. There were

really no guides to the discovery and invitation of the persons needed. Then none of the societies

organized for the ... mutual support of learned ... men existed. By 1885 I could get some assistance

...       from the proceedings of the ...      scientic societies.   At the beginning there was no such aid

(James 1930).

          The demand for research talent improved the negotiating position for professors. To illustrate,

Chicago's rst president, William Harper, raided campuses for faculty. One of his targets was Clark

University, which had made an underfunded attempt to compete with Johns Hopkins at graduate

teaching; Harper hired away 15 of its professors.               To compete, schools were soon oering higher

salaries, reduced teaching loads, and sabbaticals. At Swarthmore, President Joseph Swain informed

an astronomer he was recruiting that he would satisfy his demand for a 24-inch telescope. Still, he

added a caveat: remember, this is a Friend's College and thee should give up thy smoking (Leslie,

1992). In the event, Swain had to accept the professor's tobacco habit too.

      6
          It is possible that a more thorough hierarchy appeared in the United States than in Europe.   Geiger (1986)
suggests that Europe displays a greater tendency for academics to submit work to periodicals in their own institutes,
universities, or countries; language dierences may factor into the latter too.




                                                           11
4        Resources and Admissions-Related Reform

How did universities manage to nance these changes? How were top departments able to pay tal-

ented researchers well, oer them sabbaticals and Ph.D. students? How did the American system

transition from one in which essentially all colleges experienced genial penury to one in which a

(small) minority of universities spend lavishly? To elaborate, at present U.S. university spending

is highthe country is an outlier in regressions of per-student expenditure on GDP per capita.
                                                                                                                 7

Beyond this, it displays distinct inequality. Hoxby (2016) estimates that the most selective univer-

sities spend about $150,000 per studentabout six times the U.S. average and about fteen times

as much as their less well-heeled counterparts. How did this situation develop?

        A key part of the story involves selective admissions. Before the 1920s, essentially all colleges

had open enrollment policies, reecting their desire to grow. Harvard's Charles Eliot (1908) stated:

The American universities have always and everywhere been desirous of increasing the number of

their students; and this is a true instinct of university governors in a democratic country.
                                                                                                          8 Such

policies, combined with the reforms that rendered schools attractive, produced higher enrollments.

The historically cash-strapped schools welcomed this development. In the 1910s Columbia and Har-

vardperhaps the most aggressive reformerswere the largest American universities by enrollment,

larger than any public school (Rudolph 1962).             At this time, size was seen as a signal of quality

because it provided resources to pursue reforms.

        However, this growth began to generate its own challenges.             Because universities continued

to serve relatively local markets, growth entailed the arrival of less prepared and/or lower-income

students. The resulting heterogeneity threatened universities' ability to deliver the peer groups their

traditional elite customers (white and usually Protestant men) expected. In other words, at some

schools, traditional customers might have felt that their educational spaces were being invaded, or

at least losing some of their signaling value.

        Economic theory suggests that if universities had low xed costs, such concerns would lead to

the existence of a large number of schools, each catering to individuals of specic types (Epple and

Romano 1998; MacLeod and Urquiola 2015). But in reality, xed costs and coordination challenges

prevented elites from easily seceding from the schools they used.                Instead, they began to form

exclusive clubs within their schools.         At Harvard, Princeton, and Yale, wealthier students sorted

into private dormitories, eating clubs, and secret societies; at Cornell, Michigan, and Wisconsin,

into select fraternities and sororities (Synnott 1979; Karabel 2006; Urquiola 2020). Beyond providing

exclusivity, these clubs performed tasks that growth had led schools to neglectlike supplying living

spaces and dining rooms.

        Many students coveted membership in these clubs. Franklin Roosevelt's experience is illustrative.

    7
        For cross country data see Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (2013).
    8
        Some eastern schools had admission exams, but routinely enrolled students with conditions, that is, despite
having failed (Karabel 2006).




                                                         12
Arriving at Harvard in 1900, he aspired to join Porcellian, the most exclusive club. He later described

his failure to do so as the greatest disappointment of his life. Eleanor Roosevelt added that this

experience led him to identify with life's outcasts (Karabel 2006). Similarly, a student at Princeton

stated, on being rejected by a club: The news came like a thunderbolt. With a cold, sick feeling the

bottom dropped out of my college life (Karabel 2006). Such reactions may seem out of proportion,

but they echo the disappointment some students today feel about not getting into this or that elite

college. This illustrates that in this period the clubsrather than the colleges themselvesbegan

to provide the sorting students coveted.

   Initially, many university leaders did not see that this was problematic. In 1892, for example,

Charles Eliot justied it: Rich people cannot be made to associate comfortably with poor people,

or poor with rich. They live, necessarily, in dierent ways, and each set will be uncomfortable in

the habitual presence of the other. Their common interests are unlike, and their pleasures are as

dierent as their more serious occupations (Veysey 1965).

   But in time, university leaders realized that the clubs posed challenges.      First, alumni might

donate to their clubs rather than to their school, especially if the clubs were the source of valuable

networks. Second, a school that loses control of the student experience loses control over its admis-

sions and image; for instance, in the early 1900s some students avoided Yale because they perceived

getting into its clubs as too dicult (Karabel 2006). Third, the clubs had their own agenda, one

that often gloried unruly/unscholarly behavior; in the words of Princeton's President Woodrow

Wilson (1902-1910): The sideshows are so numerous, so diverting, so important, if you will, that

they have swallowed up the circus (Brubacher and Rudy 1958).

   To complicate matters, this happened in a period of rising antisemitism when many of the

new studentsparticularly at urban schools such as Columbia, Harvard, and Pennsylvaniawere

Jewish. For example, by 1920, the share of Jewish students at Columbia had reached 30 percent

(Karabel 2006). These are estimates since initially, colleges had little data on religious aliation.

But they began to work toward this at this time.       At Harvard, President Abbott Lowell asked

a committee to use extensive personal data to assign students to three groups: J1conclusively

Jewish, J2 indicatively Jewish, and J3possibly, but not probably Jewish (Synnott 1979).

   In 1919 Columbia responded by implementing selective admissions. It capped its entering class

size, started requiring more personal data from applicants, and began to reject some without stating

a reason. Soon other schools (including Cornell, Harvard, MIT, Stanford, and Yale) implemented

similar policies.

   Despite its convoluted origins, selectivity gradually made for an academically stronger student

body at these schools.   Making enrollments predictable also allowed universities to better supply

services like dormitories and dining rooms, aiding eorts to rein in student behavior.

   In other words, selectivity set the stage for a massive sorting processin this case involving

students. The academically more talented began to congregate in a few schools. Just as happened




                                                  13
with journals, a pecking order developed. Further, like the appearance of journals facilitated the

sorting of professors, standardized tests like the SAT (1926) facilitated student sortingin both

cases, observability was central. Among schools, student sorting created winners and losers. Many

schools whose students had been quite similar to Harvard's in ability found that to no longer be the

case (as documented by Hoxby 2009). Further, an open enrollment sector continued to exist, as

predicted by theory.

        Selectivity produced a nancially virtuous circle for the schools that moved early. These took in

bright and/or well-connected students and provided them with good experiences, including teaching

by the best professors (at least in terms of research ability). They gave their students networks with

potentially valuable labor market and marriage market contacts. Their satised alumni donated to

them, allowing these schools to make even more investments, and so forth.

        Events around World War II added a powerful ingredient that helped raise spending and rein-

forced inequality: federal public research funding. Gruber and Johnson (2019) note that in 1938

federal and state governments spent a combined 0.08 percent of national income on research. By

1944, the U.S. government was spending nearly 0.5 percent, a gure which would reach 2 percent

by the 1960s (thereafter declining to its pre-war level). Much of this funding is allocated to research

projects as a function of quality as assessed by panels of experts. To the extent that the top univer-

sities account for more than their fair share of research talent, it is not surprising that they receive

a substantial share of these funds (Graham and Diamond 1997).
                                                                         9

        Here again, a contrast emerges with Europe, where many states suppressed the type of inequality

and sorting that characterizes the American university sector.            For example, German states and

countries like Spainwhich largely control their universitiesallocate resources to promote equality

across schools. In a similar spirit, German states often set faculty salaries largely as a function of

seniority and rank. Such restrictions limit universities' ability to dierentiate pay and compete on

a global hiring market.




5        Tenure

Higher salaries, lower teaching, and enhanced laboratory space illustrate some ways in which pro-

fessors' compensation began to reect research performance.               Furthermore, this period saw the

emergence of tenure, a salient reward for performance. Unlike salary, tenure is lumpyit does not

allow for small enhancements. Rather, tenure rewards reaching a threshold level of achievement,

and cannot be taken away. This section describes the emergence of tenure and discusses how agency

theory suggests it can incentivize research performance.



        The Emergence of Tenure
    9
        See also https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/nsf13325/content.cfm?pub_id=4240&id=2




                                                       14
      One can see the rise of tenure as a response to two related sets of demands. The rst was a

desire on the part of professors for academic freedom and protection from arbitrary dismissal. Several

events illustrating this involve economists, in part because during this period many saw themselves

as reformers in addition to researchersthis created tension with university presidents and donors.

One famous case involved Richard Ely, who was hired (in 1881) by Johns Hopkins president Andrew

Gilman. Ely was active in the progressive movement, supported labor unions, and helped found the

American Economic Association (Barber 1987). He later moved to the University of Wisconsin at

a time of labor tensions in that state. Soon Wisconsin president Charles Adams heard complaints

that Ely taught socialism and had entertained a union organizer in his home (Schrecker 1986).

The university's board appointed a committee to investigate. The board not only supported Ely,

but made a broader statement (Scott, 2018):


        As Regents of a university with over a hundred instructors ... who hold a vast diversity of

        views ... we could not for a moment think of recommending the dismissal ... of a teacher

        even if some of his opinions should, in some quarters, be regarded as visionary. Such

        a course would be equivalent to saying that no professor should teach anything which

        is not accepted by everybody as true. We cannot for a moment believe that knowledge

        has reached its nal goal, or that the present condition of society is perfect. We must

        therefore welcome from our teachers such discussions as shall suggest the means and

        prepare the way by which knowledge may be extended, present evils be removed and

        others prevented.


However, this outcome was not preordained, as is evident in the case of Edward Ross, one of Ely's

students. Ross obtained a Ph.D. in political economy at Johns Hopkins and taught economics and

sociology at Stanford, where he publicly defended the socialist Eugene Debs and opposed Asian

immigration. This irritated Jane Stanford, whose fortune partially derived from her late husband's

investment into railroads built using Chinese labor. She accused Ross of aiding the vilest elements of

socialism, and pressured President David Jordan to terminate Ross (Dorn, 2017). Jordan obtained

Ross's resignation (1900), but at the cost of bad press and eight additional faculty departures. The

case contributed to creating the American Association of University Professors (AAUP), which in

1915 stated a desire to safeguard freedom of inquiry . . . against both covert and overt attacks.
                                                                                                            10

      The second set of demands reected universities' desire to incentivize and occasionally terminate

professors.   Harvard's early hiring practices illustrate some associated challenges.           In the 1700s,

Harvard hired tutors using renewable contracts. Its ocials explained this stating that permanent

contracts raised the risk that bad instructors might be xed on the college for life (Metzger,

1973). Further, renewable contracts could provide incentives; as put by Harvard's statutes, they

could excite tutors . . . to greater care and delity in their work (Metzger, 1973). A further benet

 10
      American Association of University Professors, Declaration of principles on academic freedom and academic
tenure.



                                                      15
of nite terms is that a school does not have to cite a cause to dismiss a professor who performs

poorlyit can simply let his contract end.              Yet as any manager knows, terminating a worker is

dicult even if it is feasible; when renewals come up, it is always tempting to kick the can down

the road.       Metzger (1973) states that a 1760 Harvard rule limiting appointments within a rank

to eight years was to prevent incumbencies from being lengthened by reappointments given out of

neglect or sympathy; it was intended to defeat the importance of kindness in the serious business

of evaluating personnel.

       These two sets of demandsfor permanence/freedom and performance/incentivescould be-

come intertwined. For example, in the 1930s, Harvard president James Conant wished to strengthen

his school's social sciences, widely perceived to have fallen behind those at Chicago and Columbia.

Two economists with somewhat limited publication records and labor union ties came up for reap-

pointment.       When they were terminated, some complained that politics had been the cause.                      A

faculty committee found no evidence of this but questioned the timing of their review.

       Cases like this illustrate that it is dicult to disentangle the desire for permanence/freedom and

the desire to provide incentives. It is possible to see tenureby creating a pre-dened trial period

leading to an up-or-out dateaddressing both sets of demands.
                                                                                11 It is not entirely clear when

tenure became formalized because, as happened with many features of the U.S. system, it appeared

in a decentralized fashion. Salient parts of the package had emerged at Princeton by the 1920s and

at several schools by the 1930s; by 1950, the full package was commonplace.
                                                                                             12



       Tenure and Agency Theory

       Agency theory also provides ways to understand tenure. Even with improvements in the precision

of research measures, there always remains an element of subjectivity, which can allow the university

to shirk on its compensation commitments. A solution to this problem is for the school to commit

in advance to providing rewards for relative performance (Lazear and Rosen 1981; Carmichael 1983;

Malcomson 1984). For example, it might create a teaching award, leaving in question only who will

win it.
         13

       However, if there is substantial variation in ability, then some individuals will have a very low

(or high) probability of winning the prize, and for them, the scheme will not enhance performance.

This implies that all else equal, tenure will more eectively promote research if combined with a

process whereby professors sort into schools/departments according to their research ability.

       Indeed, once measures of professors' research output were available, and once universities began

  11
       As a matter of law, tenure does not guarantee permanence of employment, but rather sets the bar for dismissal
high. Faculty who violate behavioral policies or fail to teach, for example, can be dismissed.
  12
       In recent decades, tenure has become less common in the United States, and it is increasingly available only to
research-focused professors at wealthier universities (Figlio, Schapiro, and Sotter 2015).
  13
       In practice, perfect performance measures do not exist. MacLeod (2003) shows that this necessarily leaves space
for conict, which decreases as the quality of information improves. In the appendix we show that lower variation in
ability increases the eectiveness of prizes; see Brown (2011) for evidence.



                                                          16
to bid on faculty, stratication by ability/performance resulted.      In other words, academic elds

came to display a pecking order of departments/schools.       This sorting process was facilitated by

professors, given that they themselves have incentives to segregate by ability. For example, some

believe there are externalities from proximity to talented colleagues, or that belonging to an elite

department enhances their reputation (MacLeod et al. 2017).

    Tenure likely facilitated such sorting. The individuals most qualied to judge faculty in a special-

ized area are other academics in that area. This can create a problem when hiringif incumbents'

employment depends upon relative evaluations, they will naturally want to hire individuals less

skilled than themselves. Carmichael (1988) observes that tenure helps solve this problem. If faculty

with tenure have protected employment, they have no incentive to misrepresent the quality of new

hires.

    Agency theory provides additional insights into tenure. First, the length of the tenure clock may

allow for a more precise measure of performance. Second, labor economists often treat labor as a

standard commodity; for instance, workers produce a certain output in an hour and are paid for

that hour. Work on research can be quite dierent; for example, a researcher might work for years to

make one important discoveryMacLeod (2007) calls this an        innovative   commodity. In such cases,

optimal compensation can feature delayed rewards and bonuses (Levin 2003; Fuchs 2007; Manso

2011), which tenure helps introduce.    Third, universities wish to hire professors with an intrinsic

preference for research (Stern 2004). A long tenure clock and relatively low pay can result in the

self-selection of faculty who will keep exerting research eort even after receiving tenure. Fourth,

with tenure, faculty come to have a vested interest in their institution, and will be more willing to

contribute towards its advancement (Carmichael 1983, 1988).

    Note that tenure mostly did not emerge in Europe. To be clear, European universities certainly

have a set of senior professors who enjoy job security and other privileges. For example, chaired

German professors enjoy arguably greater power in their schools than American full professorsthey

are the heirs of the masters that controlled ancient universities like Paris and Heidelberg.

    However, younger academics in Europe are much less likely to face an internal up-or-out

research-based evaluation. At some schools (for instance in France and the U.K.) faculty essentially

receive immediate tenure. Their progression through the ranks may indeed depend upon their per-

formance, but their permanence is assured. In other settings (for example in Germany), universities

hold open contests for all senior professorships, in some cases even precluding applications by ju-

nior academics at the same school. This diers from the American arrangement where the junior

tenure-track professor takes part in an internal evaluation and the only question is whether she

has attained an absolute level of attainment.

    Further to the extent that tenure has positive impacts, these are likely reinforced by the fact that

it interacts with faculty sorting by research talent. Sorting implies that each assistant professor is

matched to a department at which she is not far, in expected output, from her colleagues; combined




                                                  17
with a tenure goal, this will raise eort through a wide range of the ability distribution.




6    Conclusion

We have discussed why the United States accounts for a high proportion of the world's leading

research universities. Our story is not one of success by design, but rather of competition helping

to create a conuence of incentive mechanisms that help explain current performance.

    The rise of American higher education began in the late 1800s, when industrialization increased

universities' interest in advanced/specialized instruction, hence on professors' ability to do research.

The emergence of specialized elds (with accessories like journals) produced improved measures

of performance.   Armed with these, schools began to bid for and reward good researchers.          This

began to concentrate talent at a few schools, a process reinforced by the emergence of tenure that

selected dedicated individuals and created incentives for them. Schools that aggressively pursued

these reforms began to experience growth and responded to associated challenges by implementing

selective admissions. This unleashed a further sorting process, allowing them to attract the most

talented students along with high tuition payments and donations. In short, complementary and self-

reinforcing dynamics concentrated research-talented professors and strong studentsincreasingly

from all over the worldat a few schools.

    In thinking about the emergence and persistence of US leadership in university research, it is

worth contrasting this outcome with the situation in K-12 education. A country's performance in

K-12say as measured by international testsdepends on the state of hundreds if not thousands

of schools. In addition, the existence of the teacher value-added literature illustrates the diculty

of measuring performance in K-12. By contrast, when it comes to university research, it is easier to

measure performance, sorting may be less of a concern, and top quality output is disproportionately

important. Thus national performance can depend on what happens at a few dozen universities.

    The American system is well suited to producing top schools, although at the cost of inequality.

To illustrate, del Corral (2020) compares the performance of the Spain and the United States in a

recent Shanghai university ranking. The United States accounts for 40 of the top 100 universities;

Spain for 0.   On the other hand, 83 percent of public Spanish universities (delivering in-person

instruction) appear somewhere in the ranking; only 23 percent of their American counterparts do.

    In closing, we note that agency theory highlights that performance depends crucially on high-

quality performance metrics.    Today the academy is rife with complaints that individuals focus

excessively, and with calls for inter-disclipinarity. Our results suggest that a move in that direction

is likely to entail trade-os because it may bring on noisier evaluation systems.




                                                  18
7         Appendix

One goal of our paper is to highlight the role of faculty incentives in explaining universities' research

output.
             14 Specically, we are interested in the impact that specialization has on performance. To

explore this, this appendix sets out a simple agency model building on the multi-tasking framework

developed by Holmstrom and Milroam (1991). To explore the eects of competition, we augment

this with a tournament model along the lines of Lazer and Rosen (1981) and Green and Stokey

(1983).

         Suppose, as discussed in the main text, that universities can enhance the demand for their

services by improving their reputation for research production. To keep matters simple, suppose

that a university hires a single professor, i, who can exert research eort, denoted              ri .   This produces

the following payo for the school:

                                                    = Vr × ri - wi ,                                              (1)


where       Vr   is the value the university assigns to research and       wi   is the compensation paid to the

professor. Part of the latter may be in amenities such as lab space, reduced teaching assignments,

etc.



7.1         Faculty performance and preferences


Suppose that when evaluating a candidate, the university observes a measure of individual research

performance. Specically, in considering an individual             i who works in eld f , the university observes:

                                                   si = ri + i + f ,

where       ri is research eort, i is ability (assumed to be non-random for simplicity), and f  N (0, f )
is eld-specic noise. This last component reects the fact that non-expertssay a university hiring

or tenure committeehave trouble assessing professors' research performance. This is particularly

true in making comparisons across elds.                For example, in the humanities faculty tend to write

books, while articles are the norm in the sciences. Similarly, a chemistry professor may be listed as

a co-author on all papers produced by her laboratory, while an economic theorist writes aloneit

is hard to tell who has higher performance.

         One way to tackle this problem is by comparing a candidate to other professors in her eld. To

see this, suppose the university observes a second signal that consists of the average performance

in a candidate's eld:

                                                  sf = r
                                                       ¯f + f + f .

The rst term         r
                     ¯f   is the average eort in the eld; this will be determined as an equilibrium outcome

    14
         The seminal work of Merton (1968) emphasizes the importance of reward design to understand the structure and
performance of academic research.




                                                           19
below. The random variable                 f   represents the average ability of individuals in the eld, and we

let this be given by       f  N (¯
                                 f , f );               i.e,   f   captures the variance in ability in eld               f.   As before,

f  N (0, f        ).15
       Using both signals, the university can create a signal of                          relative   performancecomparing indi-

viduals against their eld (Lazear and Rosen 1981). In particular, it can compute:



                                                        if = si - sf
                                                           = ri - r
                                                                  ¯f + i - f .

A key point is that comparing within eld causes the term                                    f   to drop out. The variance of this

signal is thus     f .
       Following Lazer and Rosen (1981) and Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991), compensation can then

take the form:

                                                        wi = w
                                                             ¯i + bi si + bf if ,

which features a base wage and bonuses paid as a function of the individual and the relative

performance measures.
                                 16 Let    p = {w,
                                                ¯ bi , bf }        summarize the contract oered by the university.

       Suppose that in addition to doing research, professors can engage in non-research, outside

activities. Broadly, this could include consulting work, but also staying active in alumni networks

or, in the 1800s, religious groups. Formally we assume that the eort exerted by a professor is given

by:



                                                               ei = [ri , oi ]T ,

where     ri   is eort on research and             oi   is eort on outside activities.                This highlights the fact that

eort is fundamentally a resource allocation problemhow to allocate one's time. To keep things

tractable, we posit a quadratic eort cost function (Holmstrom and Milgrom 1991):


                                                                              1 d
                                                    C (ei ) = eT
                                                               i                       ei /2.
                                                                              d 1

The o-diagonal terms,                 d  (0, 1),   imply that the two types of eort are substitutesan increase

in outside activity,      oi ,   increases the cost of supplying research eort and vice versa. Note that the

                    1 d
matrix     A=                    /2   is invertible and positive denite, and hence                    C (ei )  0   for any eort and
                    d 1
  15
       It would be possible to add an additional subscript           t   to   ,   exploring over-time variation. We leave that for future
work.
  16
       We have assumed that measures are normally distributed, and hence this equation can be viewed as a measure
of log wages.




                                                                         20
is zero if and only if:

                                                                            0
                                                             ei =               .
                                                                            0
         The payo for professor          i   takes the form:


                                                                              
                                 Ui = E {wi } + Vo × oi + Vri × ri - C (ei ) - var (wi ) .
                                                                              2

In words, the parameters that determine faculty performance are the marginal value of outside

activities,     Vo ,   the intrinsic value the professor attaches to research,             Vri ,   and relative risk aversion,

.    In order to have a smooth trade-o between research and outside activities, we assume that the

value of both activities is suciently similar such that professors always choose a combination of

research and outside activities:


                                                                  Vo Vr
                                                  1  min            ,           > d > 0.
                                                                  Vr Vo

         Finally, note that this setup does not model the issue of matching faculty to appointments.

There is work showing that some individuals have an intrinsic taste for research that leads them to

seek university positions (Stern 2004; Agarwal and Ohyama 2013). Our focus is on the design of

rewards.



7.2        Optimal Compensation


We now derive the optimal contract for the university. The problem facing it is to choose a pay

package,       pi = {w
                     ¯i , bi , bf },   subject to participation and incentive constraints.
                                                                                                       17

         Relying on the assumption that the expected value of the noise term                       f       is zero, the professor's

payo given compensation,                p i = {w
                                               ¯i , bi , bf },   is:


                                                                         
                  Ui (ei , pi ) = E {wi } + Vri ri + Vo oi - C (ei ) - var (wi )                                               (2)
                                                                         2
                                =w ¯i + bi (ri + i ) + bf (ri - r ¯f + i -   ¯ f ) + Vri ri + Vo oi - C (ei )
                                   2
                                -     b f + b2 f f .
                                  2 i
                                =w ¯i + (bi + bf ) ri + Vri ri + Vo oi - C (ei )                                               (3)
                                                               2
                               bi i + bf (i -    ¯f - r¯i ) -    b f + b2  f f .
                                                              2 i

Let      Bi  (bi + bf )       be the total reward for eort provided by the university. Notice that eort is

a function of the total reward (Bi ), the professor's intrinsic motivation,                        Vri ,   and the return to the

outside option         Vo .   We suppose that parameters are set so we have an interior solution with positive

    17
         To keep matters simple, we x the candidate's alternative utility to the average ability of individuals in the eld,
and hence      U0 = ¯f .


                                                                       21
levels of both types of eort,   ri   and   oi .   Then we can set:


                                                     ri (Bi )
                                ei (Bi ) =                                                                         (4)
                                                     oi (Bi )
                                            = argmaxe Ui (e, p) ,                                                  (5)

                                                    1             Bi + Vri - dVo
                                            =                                                                      (6)
                                                  1 - d2        Vo - d (Bi + Vri )

Thus, as the total reward for research,           Bi ,   increases, the eort devoted to research goes up, while

that devoted to outside activities declines. The payo for the university is given by:



                  (ri , pi ) = Vr × ri - (w
                                          ¯i + bi (ri + i ) + bf (ri - r
                                                                       ¯f + (i - ¯ f ))) ,
                            = Vr × ri - (w
                                         ¯i + Bi (ri + i ) - bf (¯
                                                                 f + r
                                                                     ¯f )) .

Note that variable employment costs thus have two terms. One term is the direct incentive cost that

rewards total productivity,   ri + i .     The second term reects the relative performance evaluation.

If the professor is above average, that creates an additional cost.                   As we shall see, the optimal

compensation also depends upon the risk the professor must face, which aects the base wage,                        w.
                                                                                                                   ¯
   The determination of bonus pay is assumed to maximize university welfare subject to the pro-

fessor's participation constraint:



                                      maxpi  (pi )                                                                 (7)

                                                    ei argmaxei Ui (ei , pi ) ,
                                           Ui (ei , pi )  U 0 = ¯.

The solution to this problem is relatively straightforward. We can substitute the closed form solution

for eort from (4). The Lagrangian for the optimal contract is:



                         L (pi , ) =  (ri (pi ) , pi ) +  {Ui (ei (pi ) , pi ) - ¯f } .

In order to have an optimal solution for the xed payment                  w
                                                                          ¯   it must be the case that    = 1.   Using

(2) and (4) this becomes:



                   L (pf , 1) = (Vr + Vri ) ri (Bi ) + Vo × oi (Bi ) - C (ei (Bi )) - ¯f
                                 2
                              -    b f + b2  f f .
                                2 i

Note that the rst line depends only upon total performance-based compensation,                      Bi .   The second

line measures the trade-o between the two forms of compensation, based upon the relative precision




                                                             22
of the performance measures. Given               Bi   we follow Grossman and Hart (1983) and dene the risk

premium that must be paid to faculty as a function of performance pay:


                                                                     2
                                      RP C (Bi ) = minBi bi +bf       b f + b2
                                                                             f f .
                                                                    2 i

This is increasing in      Bi     with each component given by:


                                                              f
                                                 bi (Bi ) =          Bi ,                                           (8)
                                                            (f + f )
                                                              f
                                                 bf (Bi ) =          Bi .                                           (9)
                                                            (f + f )

Thus the ratio of relative performance pay (bif ) to performance pay is:


                                                         bf   f
                                                            =   .                                                  (10)
                                                         bi   f

In other words, the use of relative performance pay increases with                  f ,   i.e., with the diculty non-

experts have in assessing performance in a eld                f.   From this we can compute the overall costs of

performance pay:


                                                               f  f
                                              RP C (Bi ) =               Bi .
                                                              2 (f + f )
                                                           Bi                                                      (11)



where          measures the marginal cost of performance pay upon faculty payos.                      Thus, the cost

of performance pay falls with more precise signals.                   If   f   increases due to the increase in the

complexity of a eld, then costs can be reduced if the variance of individual performance,                    f ,   can

be reduced. This can be achieved with hierarchical sorting by skill. From this we can compute both

the optimal level of performance pay and the total expected compensation to faculty as the solution
     dL(Bi )
to
      dBi      = 0,   where:


                                                        
                               L (Bi ) = (Vr + Vri ) × ri (B ) + Vo × o              
                                                                       i (Bi ) - C (ei (Bi ))                      (12)

                                      -¯ f - RP (Bi ) .




                                                              23
Taking the rst order condition we get:


                                        dL (Bi )                      C     dri
                                                 =     Vr + Vri -
                                         dBi                          ri    dBi
                                                               C      doi
                                                + Vo -
                                                               oi     dBi
                                                - .

Using the closed form solution for eort we get:


                                         
                                        Bi =Vr -  1 - d2 ,                                                 (13)

                                                       f f
                                            =Vr -                1 - d2 .                                  (14)
                                                      2 (f + f )

By construction, faculty utility is xed at           ¯f ,   the average quality of individuals in the peer pool.

Rewards have to compensate individuals choosing eort above their normal level given by the

intrinsic return to research,   Vri .   Total expected compensation is given by:


                                                                   
                                           wi = ¯ f + U 0 (Bi ) + Bi .

Thus, the faculty member receives additional pay to compensate her for additional eort,


                                               
                          U 0 (Bi ) = Vri ri (Bi ) + V o o                  
                                                          i (Bi ) - C (ei (Bi )) ,                         (15)



and the costs associated with relative performance evaluation,
                                                                             .
                                                                            Bi

7.3   Implications


This yields two propositions. Consider rst the situation in which there is no bonus pay (Bi               = 0).
In that case result (6) implies:


Proposition 1.    Suppose faculty are paid a xed wage that ensures participation (with no bonus pay
for research performance). Then research eort is given by:
                                                            Vri - dVo
                                                 ri =                 .
                                                             1 - d2

Hence research is increasing in the intrinsic preference for research, and decreasing in the return to
outside activities.
   It is optimal for colleges to reward faculty as a function of their research performance.                The

amount of reward is given by (8), (9) and (13). Hence, we have:




                                                             24
Proposition 2.     Optimal performance pay is decreasing with the variance of the ability of the can-
didates. The use of relative performance evaluation increases rewards for research, and the level of
research activities.
   Notice that the level of performance pay is determined by the value of     :

                                                  f  f
                                             =              .
                                                 2 (f + f )

A smaller       leads to lower costs, and this can only be achieved with universities becoming increas-

ingly selective in their pool of applicants which determines the value of   f .   Thus we have:


Proposition 3.   If departments can draw from a more homogeneous pool of candidates ( smaller f ),
this decreases , and hence increases the optimal bonus (from 13), and in turn increases research
output (from 6).

References

 [1] Agarwal, Rajshree, and Atsushi Ohyama. (2013) Industry or Academia, Basic or Applied?

    Career Choices and Earnings Trajectories of Scientists.      Management Science, 59(4):   950970.


 [2] Barber, W. J. (1987) Should the American Economic Association have toasted Simon Newcomb

    at its 100
                 th birthday party?   Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1(1), 179-183.
 [3] Bartle, R. G. (1995) A brief history of the mathematical literature.   Publishing Research Quar-
    terly, 11, 3-13.
 [4] Boyer, John W. 2015.      The University of Chicago: A History. Chicago and London:      The Uni-

    versity of Chicago Press.


 [5] Brown, J. (2011). Quitters never win: The (adverse) incentive eects of competing with super-

    stars.   Journal of Political Economy 119    (5), 9821013.


 [6] Brubacher, John S. and Willis Rudy. 1958.      Higher Education in Transition. New York:     Harper

    & Row.


 [7] Burke, C. B. (1982).     American Collegiate Populations: A Test of the Traditional View.      New

    York and London: New York University Press.


 [8] Butts, R. F. (1939).    The College Charts its Course: Historical Conceptions and Current Pro-
    posals. New York and London:        McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc.




                                                    25
 [9] Card, D. (1995). Using geographic variation in college proximity to estimate the return to

    schooling. In E. Christodes and R. Swidinsky (Eds.),    Aspects of labor market behaviour: Essays
    in Honour of John Vanderkamp. Toronto:        University of Toronto Press.


[10] Carmichael, H. L. (1983) Firm-Specic Human Capital and Promotion Ladders,             Bell Journal
    of Economics, 14, 251-258
[11] Carmichael, H. L. (1988). Incentives in academia: Why is there tenure?         Journal of Political
    Economy 96    (3), 453472.


[12] Clotfelter, C. T. (2010). Introduction. In C. T. Clotfelter (Ed.),    American Universities in a
    Global Market. Chicago and London:       The University of Chicago Press.


[13] Cole, J. R. (2009).The Great American University: Its Rise to Preeminence, its Indispens-
    able National Role, Why it Must be Protected. New York: Public Aairs.
[14] Curti, M. and R. Nash (1965).      Philanthropy in the Shaping of American Higher Education.
    New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.


[15] del Corral, J. (2020) Ranking de Shanghai: Â¾comparando EspaÃ           ±a con Estados Unidos?
    mimeo, Studia XXI.
[16] Dorn, Charles. 2017.     For the common good: a new history of higher education in America.
    Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.


[17] Eliot, C. W. (1908).    University Administration. Boston and New York:    Houghton Miin Com-

    pany.


[18] Epple, D. and R. E. Romano (1998). Competition between private and public schools, vouchers,

    and peer-group eects.      American Economic Review 88    (1), 3362.


[19] Figlio, David N., Morton O. Schapiro, and Kevin B. Soter. 2015. Are tenure track professors

    better teachers?   The Review of Economics and Statistics    97 (4): 715-724.


[20] Flexner, A. (1946).     Daniel Coit Gilman: Creator of the American Type of University.       New

    York: Harcourt, Brace and Company.


[21] Fuchs, W. (2007) Contracting with repeated moral hazard and private evaluations,         American
    Economic Review     97(4), 1432-1448.


[22] Geiger, R. L. (1986).   To Advance Knowledge: The Growth of American Research Universi- ties,
    1900-1940. New Brunswick and London:         Transaction Publishers.


[23] Ghosh, S. and M Waldman (2010) Standard promotion practices versus up-or-out contracts.

    The RAND Journal of Economics, 41(2), 301-325.



                                                  26
[24] Goldin, C. and L. F. Katz (1999). The shaping of higher education: The formative years in the

    United States, 1890-1940.     Journal of Economic Perspectives 13   (1), 3762.


[25] Goldin, C. and L. F. Katz (2008).     The Race Between Education and Technology.     Cambridge

    and London: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.


[26] Graham, H. D. and N. Diamond (1997).       The Rise of American Research Universities: Elites
    and Challenges in the Postwar Era.      Baltimore and London: The Johns Hopkins University

    Press.


[27] Green, Jerry R., and Nancy L. Stokey. (1983) A Comparison of Tournaments and Contracts.

    Journal of Political Economy, 91(3):    349364.


[28] Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver D. Hart. (1983) An Analysis of the Principal-Agent Problem.

    Econometrica, 51(1):      745.


                                    Jump-Starting America: How Breakthrough Science Can
[29] Gruber, J. and S. Johnson (2019).

    Revive Economic Growth and the American Dream. New York: PublicAairs.
[30] Hawkins, H. (1960).      Pioneer: A History of the Johns Hopkins University, 1874-1889.     Bal-

    timore and London: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2002.


[31] Herbst, J. (1982).    From Crisis to Crisis: American College Government, 1636-1819.        Cam-

    bridge and London: Harvard University Press.


[32] Hofstadter, R. (1955).   Academic Freedom in the Age of the College. New Brunswick and London:
    Transaction Publishers, 1996.


[33] Holmstrom, B. and P. Milgrom (1991). Multi-task principal-agent analyses: Incentive contracts,

    asset ownership, and job design.    Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 7, 2452.
[34] Hoxby, C. (2009). The changing selectivity of American colleges.   Journal of Economic Perspec-
    tives 23   (4), 95118.


[35] Hoxby, C. M. (2016). The productivity of U.S. postsecondary institutions. Technical report,

    Stanford University.


[36] James, H. (1930).     Charles W. Eliot: President of Harvard University, 1869-1909, Volume I.
    Boston and New York: Houghton Miin Company.


                       The Chosen: The Hidden History of Admission and Exclusion at Harvard,
[37] Karabel, J. (2006).

    Yale, and Princeton. Boston and New York: Mariner Books, Houghton Miin Company.
[38] Kelley, B. M. (1974).    Yale: A History. New Haven and London:    Yale University Press.



                                                  27
[39] Lazear, E. P. and Rosen, S. (1981) Rank-Order Tournaments as Optimal Labor Contracts

    Journal of Political Economy, 89, 841-864.
[40] Lazear, E. P. (1989) Pay Equality and Industrial Politics  Journal of Political Economy, 97,
    561-580. Leslie, W. B. (1992).    Gentlemen and Scholars: College and Community in the "Age
    of the University," 1865-1917. University Park:        Pennsylvania State University Press.


[41] Levin, J. (2003) Relational Incentive Contacts.      American Economic Review, 93, 835-857
[42] MacLeod, W. B. (2003). Optimal contracting with subjective evaluation.             American Economic
    Review 92     (1), 216240.


[43] MacLeod, W. B. (2007). Reputations, relationships, and contract enforcement.           Journal of Eco-
    nomic Literature 45     (3), 597-630.


[44] MacLeod, W. B., E. Riehl, J. E. Saavedra, and M. Urquiola (2017). The big sort: College

    reputation and labor market outcomes.         American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 9
    (3), 223261.


[45] MacLeod, W. B. and M. Urquiola (2015). Reputation and school competition.              American Eco-
    nomic Review 105       (11), 34713488.


[46] Malcomson, J. M. (1984). Work incentives, hierarchy, and internal labor markets.           Journal of
    Political Economy 92     (3), 486507.


[47] Manso, G. Motivating Innovation,       The Journal of Finance, 2011, 66(5), pp. 1823-1860.
[48] Merton, RK, The Matthew Eect in Science,            Science, 1968, 159, 56-63.
[49] Metzger, W. P. 1973. Academic tenure in America:             a historical essay.   Faculty Tenure: A
    Report and Recommendations        by the Commission on Academic Tenure            in Higher Education.

    San Francisco: Josey-Bass, Inc.


[50] Neilson, C. (2017). Targeted vouchers, competition among schools, and the academic achieve-

    ment of poor students. Unpublished manuscript, Princeton University.


[51] Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (2013) Education expenditures by

    country. Mimeo, https://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/pdf/Indicator_CMD/coe_cmd_2013_03.pdf.


[52] Paulsen, F. (1906).   The German Universities and University Study. New York:           Charles Scrib-

    ner's Sons.


[53] Rudolph, F. (1962).    The American College and University: A History.           Athens and London:

    The University of Georgia Press, 1990.



                                                    28
[54] Rudolph, F. (1977).      Curriculum: A History of the American Undegraduate Course of Study
     Since 1636. San Francisco:     Josey-Bass Publishers.


                          The Duty of Columbia College to the Community, and its Right to Exclude
[55] Ruggles, S. B. (1854).

     Unitarians from its Professorships of Physical Science. New York: John F. Trow. Printer.
[56] Schrecker, E. W. 1986.      No Ivory Tower: McCarthyism and the Universities.      New York and

     Oxford: Oxford University Press.


[57] Scott, Joan Wallach. (2018). The tension between the university and the state. In      Academic
     Freedom: The Global Challenge. Edited by Michael Ignatie and Stefan Roch. Budapest:         Cen-

     tral European University Press.


[58] Stern, S. (2004) Do scientists pay to be scientists?    Management Science, 50, 835-853.
[59] Storr, R. J. (1953).   The Beginnings of Graduate Education in America. Chicago:   The University

     of Chicago Press.


[60] Synnott, M. G. (1979).  The Half Opened Door: Discrimination and Admissions at Harvard,
     Yale, and Princeton, 1900-1970. New Brunswick and London: Transaction Publishers, 2010.
[61] Tewksbury, D. G. (1932). The Founding of American Colleges and Universities Before the
     Civil War: With Particular Reference to the Religious Inuences Bearing Upon the College
     Movement. Manseld Centre: Martino Publishing, 2011.
[62] Thompson, D. G. Brinton. 1946.     Ruggles of New York: A Life of Samuel B. Ruggles. New York:
     Columbia University Press.


[63] Urquiola, M. (2020).    Markets, Minds, and Money: Why America Leads the World in University
     Research. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
[64] Veysey, L. R. (1965).    The Emergence of the American University.    Chicago and London: The

     University of Chicago Press.


[65] Xiong, Heyu and Yiling Zhao (2020) Sectarian Competition and the Market Provision of Human

     Capital. Mimeo, Case Western Reserve University.




                                                   29
