                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    POUND FOR POUND EXPORT DIVERSIFICATION

                                      James E. Anderson
                                        Yoto V. Yotov

                                     Working Paper 28277
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28277


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




We thank João Santos Silva for kindly sharing the original programming codes for the FLEX
estimator. We thank Rebecca Freeman and Stephan-Alfons Nolte for very helpful advice and
guidance to the data. We also thank the participants in the Winter NBER ITI meetings for useful
comments, questions and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by James E. Anderson and Yoto V. Yotov. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Pound for Pound Export Diversification
James E. Anderson and Yoto V. Yotov
NBER Working Paper No. 28277
December 2020
JEL No. F13,F14,F15

                                          ABSTRACT

We propose a short-run model of the extensive margin of trade and deploy it to distinguish and
quantify domestic and cross-border margins. Our empirical focus is on the domestic extensive
margin of trade (domestic distribution of a product) and its importance for quantifying policy and
globalization effects on the international extensive margin of trade. We build a dataset that
combines data on the domestic extensive margin and the standard international extensive margin.
It reveals significant and intuitive variation in the domestic extensive margin across countries and
over time. We quantify the extensive margin effects of European Union (EU) integration,
2008-2018, and demonstrate that these effects cannot be identified without the domestic extensive
margin. We find strong and highly heterogeneous effects, both across countries and directionally.


James E. Anderson
Department of Economics
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
james.anderson.1@bc.edu

Yoto V. Yotov
School of Economics
Drexel University
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and ERI-BAS
yotov@drexel.edu
          "Trade diversification is a national imperative for the Government of Canada.
          Over the next six years, starting in 2018-19, Canada's export diversification strat-
          egy will invest $1.1 billion to help Canadian businesses access new markets."
                                                    (Government of Canada, March 3, 2020)

          "Increased diversification is associated with lower output volatility and greater
          macroeconomic stability [in low-income countries]. There is both a growth payoff
          and a stability payoff to diversification, underscoring the case for paying close
          attention to policies that facilitate diversification and structural transformation."
                                                                            (IMF, March, 2014)


1         Introduction

The opening quotes highlight export diversification as a policy imperative for developing
and developed countries alike. Measuring and analyzing export diversification have thus
been important objectives for most international organizations, e.g., the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund (IMF), and the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB).1
The analytic image of export diversification is the extensive margin of trade. The literature
on the extensive margin is large: from a theory perspective, e.g., Helpman et al. (2008a);
from an estimation perspective, e.g., Santos Silva et al. (2014); from a policy perspective, e.g.,
Cadot et al. (2011); and from a measurement/index perspective, e.g., Hummels and Klenow
(2005). We contribute to the extensive margin literature a simple model of adjustment on
both domestic (range of products) and international (range of destinations) margins. We
deploy the model to distinguish and quantify globalization effects on domestic and cross-
border margins of trade.
        Our focus is on the domestic extensive margin of trade and its importance for quantifying
the international extensive margin of trade. We demonstrate that the theory-motivated
    1
     The traditional export diversification indexes and the Hummels-Klenow (product and country) exten-
sive margin indexes are featured prominently in the World Bank's World Integrated Trade Solution interface
(https://wits.worldbank.org/wits/wits/witshelp/Content/Utilities/e1.trade indicators.htm). Similarly, the
International Monetary Fund developed and maintains the "The Diversification Toolkit: Export Diversi-
fication and Quality Databases" (https://www.imf.org/external/np/res/dfidimf/diversification.htm), while
the Inter-American Development Bank has devoted significant effort to study and promote export diversifi-
cation in Latin America (https://www.iadb.org/en/news/idb-recommends-latin-america-accelerate-export-
diversification).
introduction of the domestic extensive margin enables us to identify the effects of a number
of policies whose impact is impossible to obtain within a properly specified empirical gravity
model that only employs data on the external extensive margin. Specifically, with data
on the domestic extensive margin we could identify the effects of (i) non-discriminatory
export support policies, e.g., export subsidies, trade fairs, etc., (ii) non-discriminatory import
protection policies, (iii) country-specific characteristics and policies, e.g. institutional quality,
technical barriers to trade (TBT) etc., (iv) exchange rates, and (v) the effects of globalization
on the extensive margin of trade. We also argue that the introduction of the domestic
extensive margin may have implications for the estimates of bilateral trade policies, e.g.,
regional trade agreements (RTAs), membership in the World Trade Organization (WTO),
etc.
       On the theory side, we introduce the domestic extensive margin of trade in a short
run structural gravity model that features dynamic adjustments of bilateral capacities by
heterogeneous firms. The lens of the model allows focus on action on the extensive margin
of international trade (new export destinations) and domestic trade (new products). Capital
is sector- and destination-specific. Investment on the extensive margins is selected when the
expected return exceeds the product of the opportunity cost of capital and an adjustment
cost factor.2 Since much of this capital is unobservable, its behavior is inferred by fixed effects
modeled consistently with the theoretical implications of the model. A key implication of our
model is that proper quantification of the international extensive margin (the set of partners
any sector exports to) should also take into account the domestic margin of trade (the set
of sectors with positive production).
       The empirical analysis is based on a novel dataset that covers the extensive margin
of trade in mining and manufacturing goods for 32 European countries over the period
   2
    The baseline for our theory is the intensive margin short-run gravity model of Anderson and Yotov
(2020). However, the general approach to model investment in bilateral trade links is also in the spirit of
Arkolakis (2010), Head et al. (2010), Chaney (2014), Mion and Opromolla (2014), Sampson (2016), and
Crucini and Davis (2016). Our innovations in relation to these papers are (i) developing the model on the
extensive margin, and (ii) the focus on the domestic extensive margin.



                                                    2
2008-2018. The important and unique dimension of our dataset is the domestic extensive
margin. The dataset is constructed from two original sources. Production data is taken
from Eurostat's Production Communautaire (PRODCOM) database. Production data is
combined with trade data from Eurostat's COMEXT data. The combination of PRODCOM
and COMEXT allowed us to build an estimating sample that covers consistently constructed
data on the external and the domestic extensive margins for 32 European countries and about
3300-3400 products, 2008-2018. We also experiment with several alternative estimating
samples, which demonstrate the robustness of our main findings.
       Variation in the domestic extensive margin is quantified in a novel index, the Domestic
Extensive Margin (DEM). DEM is defined as the ratio of the number of products actually
produced by a given country in a given year and the total number of possible products that
could have been produced by the same country and in the same year. DEM reveals sev-
eral interesting patterns in its variation across countries and over time. First, the domestic
extensive margin varies widely (but intuitively) across countries. The countries with the
lowest DEM indexes are smaller and/or poorer economies (e.g., Iceland and North Macedo-
nia), while the countries with the largest DEMs are large and rich economies (e.g., Germany
and France).3 Significant DEM variation over time also varies across countries. A number
of countries have experienced an increase/improvement on the domestic extensive margin
(e.g., Hungary and the Netherlands). Decreases in DEM are experienced by Portugal, Croa-
tia, Finland, Italy, and the United Kingdom. A third group of countries (e.g., Spain and
Germany) have not experienced significant changes in their DEMs.
       We demonstrate the use of our methods by quantifying the impact of European Union
(EU) integration on the extensive margin of trade, 2008-2018. This application is attractive
for three reasons. First, it highlights a key argument that one cannot identify the desired
   3
    This observation is consistent with and complements the policy argument for the importance of the
international extensive margin from the development literature, according to which the (international) ex-
tensive margin of trade is a more important indicator for developing/poorer countries because their exports
are less diverse. This makes them dependent on exports of a few products and, therefore, these countries
are more vulnerable to terms of trade changes.



                                                    3
EU integration effects in a theory-consistent econometric specification without data on the
domestic extensive margin. Second, from an econometric perspective, the focus on Europe
(2008-2018) allows us to obtain estimates of the EU integration effects within a simple,
flexible, and robust econometric specification with fixed effects only.4 The fixed effects
treatment is convenient because it enables us to obtain a series of EU integration estimates
(across time and for individual countries) while, at the same time, the rich fixed effects
structure of our model diminishes omitted variable and endogeneity concerns. Finally, the
proposed application is interesting and relevant for its potential implications for export
diversification strategies.
       We rely on three different strands of the literature to specify our econometric model.
First, the theory developed in this paper extends the CES structural gravity model to a
closed form that features both domestic and cross-border extensive margins of trade. The
model motivates our reduced-form empirical specification that identifies these margins. Sec-
ond, the reduced form specification achieves identification with a rich set of fixed effects
following recent developments in the empirical gravity literature on the intensive margin of
trade. Third, the fixed effects representation of the theoretical model is estimated with the
Santos Silva et al. (2014) FLEX estimator. FLEX is designed to consistently deal with the
boundedness above and below of the extensive margin dependent variable. We also demon-
strate the robustness of our main findings to the use of alternatives estimators including
Tobit, OLS, and the Poisson Pseudo Maximum Likelihood (PPML) of Santos Silva and Ten-
reyro (2006, 2011). We show below that identification of the EU integration effects with the
theory-consistent specification requires the use of data on the domestic extensive margin,
   4
     Technically, we do have controls for membership in the World Trade Organization (WTO) and in Eco-
nomic Integration Agreements (EIAs) in our main specifications. However, given the specifics of sample
(i.e., covering only European economies) and the use of country-pair fixed effects, the estimates of the EIA
and WTO covariates are identified of very few observations and the introduction of these variables does
not affect our main results. For example, Montenegro is the only country from our sample that became a
WTO member during the period of investigation (in 2012), while all the variation in the EIA covariate come
from the trade agreements of very few countries including Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Montenegro,
and Serbia. We capitalize on the fact that Montenegro is the only country that joined the WTO in our
sample to demonstrate that the introduction of the domestic extensive margin also allows for identification
of country-specific policy effects.


                                                     4
regardless of the estimator.
   The empirical analysis starts with a benchmark specification that imposes common glob-
alization effects across all countries in the sample. The main result from this analysis is that
globalization has had a significant positive impact on the international extensive margin
of trade relative to the domestic extensive margin for the European economies. Intensive
integration processes within Europe are the natural explanation for this result. This result
should be important from a policy perspective because there is plenty of anecdotal evidence
that the impact of globalization on the intensive margin stalled during the years after the
great recession. In contrast, our results indicate that the impact of globalization on the
extensive margin during the same period has been economically strong and statistically sig-
nificant. Our preferred specification implies that, on average across the countries in our
sample, the number of internationally traded products increased by about 271 relative to
the number of domestically traded products during the period of investigation, or about 7.2
percent of the total number of possibly traded products in 2018.
   Highly heterogeneous effects emerge when we allow for country-specific effects of EU
integration. Three main findings stand out from the country-specific analysis. The first is
the wide heterogeneity of EU integration effects. Second, the estimates suggest that the
effects on the extensive margin have been the strongest for the recent and new EU members,
while the large EU economies have experienced relatively small extensive margin gains.
Third, a decomposition of the effects on the new EU members reveals that the impact of EU
integration on the extensive margin on their trade has been positive but very asymmetric,
with significantly stronger effects on the imports of new from old EU members, and still
positive but significantly smaller effects on the exports of the new to the old EU members.
The intuitive explanation is that the new EU members were not able to position their
(possibly inferior) products well in the more developed West-European market. In contrast,
the new EU members responded strongly to the opportunity to increase varieties from the
Western European countries.


                                               5
       Our work complements and extends two strands of the literature. Most closely related
is the literature on the extensive margin of trade. Melitz (2003), Helpman et al. (2008a)
and Chaney (2008) are prominent examples of theoretical contributions to this literature,
and Redding (2011) offers an excellent survey of the related theoretical literature, the em-
pirical challenges related to this research, and its implications for the extensive margin of
trade. From an empirical and application perspective, see Hummels and Klenow (2005) for
an important study on the extensive margin at the sector/product level, and Helpman et
al. (2008a) for an influential analysis of the extensive margin at the country level. Finally,
from an estimation point of view, Santos Silva et al. (2014) summarize and extend the latest
econometric developments in the estimation of the extensive margin of trade. Their FLEX
estimator is used to obtain our main results. Our main innovations in relation to this liter-
ature are the modeling of the extensive margin in the short run and the introduction of the
domestic extensive margin. As we demonstrate below, our contribution has implications for
quantifying the effects of various policies as well as for the measurement and the construction
of indexes on the extensive margin of trade.5
       The other branch of related literature includes papers that emphasize the importance
of proper account for domestic trade flows on the intensive margin of trade. For example,
Yotov (2012) uses domestic trade flows to resolve `the distance puzzle' in international trade.
Ramondo et al. (2016) demonstrate that when domestic trade flows are taken into account,
two other gravity literature puzzles are resolved: (i) that larger countries should be richer
than smaller countries and (ii) that real income per capita increases too steeply with coun-
try size. Agnosteva et al. (2019) employ domestic trade flows to estimate heterogeneous
domestic trade costs. Finally, Heid et al. (forthcoming) show that the use of domestic trade
allows for identification of unilateral and non-discriminatory trade policies in intensive mar-
gin structural gravity models. Our contribution is that we offer a theoretical motivation and
   5
     Thus, from a policy perspective, our contribution is related to a very large number of papers that study
the impact of various determinants of the extensive margin of trade. Without an attempt to be exhaustive,
for some excellent studies we refer the reader to Felbermayr and Kohler (2006), Berthou and Fontagne (2008),
Cadot et al. (2011), Persson (2013), and Beverelli et al. (2015).


                                                     6
empirical evidence for the importance of the domestic extensive margin for quantifying the
extensive margin of trade. Our methods open avenues for many extensions and applications,
e.g., estimating the impact of country-specific policies and characteristics (e.g., export pro-
motion, institutional quality). We elaborate on some of these ideas in the concluding section
of the paper.
    The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 develops our theoretical model
and then translates it into an econometric specification. Section 3 describes the data sources
and our methods to construct the data. Section 4 reports and discusses our estimates of
the impact of globalization and the results from a series of robustness experiments. Finally,
Section 5 summarizes our contributions and findings and points to a series of additional
implications and extensions. The derivations of our theoretical model are in the Appendix.



2     Quantifying the Extensive Margin of Trade

Subsection 2.1 combines and extends three prominent strands of the trade literature to de-
rive a short-run gravity theory on the extensive margin(s) of trade. Our key contributions
in relation to the existing literature are the derivation of the short-run extensive margin of
international trade and the introduction of the notion of domestic extensive margin. Subsec-
tion 2.2 capitalizes on a number of developments in the empirical literature on the extensive
and the intensive margins of trade to translate our theory into an econometric specification.


2.1    Short Run Gravity and the Extensive Margin

Three influential strands of the trade literature are building blocks erected here in a closed
form structural short-run gravity model of the extensive margin. First, our model nests
the standard gravity equation, c.f., Anderson (1979), Eaton and Kortum (2002), Anderson
and van Wincoop (2003), and Arkolakis et al. (2012). Second, we incorporate bilateral
investment/dynamics in the spirit of Arkolakis (2010), Head et al. (2010), Chaney (2014),


                                              7
Mion and Opromolla (2014), Sampson (2016), Crucini and Davis (2016), and Anderson and
Yotov (2020). Third, we account for action on the extensive margin of trade following Melitz
(2003), Helpman et al. (2008a), Chaney (2008), and Redding (2011). The novelties are (i)
our treatment of the extensive margin in the short run and (ii) the explicit account for the
domestic extensive margin. Since the key building blocks of our theory are relatively standard
in the literature, we relegate all derivations to the Appendix. This section summarizes
our assumptions, presents the resulting model, and provides intuition behind each of its
components with emphasis on the novel elements.
       The world consists of many countries that produce their own product varieties (Arm-
ington, 1969) and trade with each other. Heterogeneous firms in each sector h and origin i
allocate capital and labor to production and to distribution to a set of destinations j using
Cobb-Douglas technology.6 The capital becomes specific once allocated. Subsequently, the
firms draw productivities from a Pareto distribution, demand shocks are realized and labor
is efficiently allocated to production and distribution. The firms face iceberg trade frictions
in distribution as well as the cost of resources needed to serve the destinations. The iceberg
frictions include a fixed labor cost for each destination. The firms that can make operating
profits hire labor from a national market. This production structure is combined with a
standard Armington-CES demand system for all buyers in the multi-country world. Impos-
ing perfect spatial arbitrage subject to the trade costs (both iceberg and endogenous) yields
the short run equilibrium structural gravity model for each sector with HS code h:7

                                             (1- h )h
                        h h
             h
                      Yi,t Ej,t   thij,t                    h ¯ h 1-     h     1-         h
            Xij,t   =                                   × (Uij /Ui ) × (h
                                                                        ij,t )    ,           j < n.    (1)
                        Yth       h      h
                                  i,t Pj,t

                             Structural Gravity           Short Run with M elitz F irms




   6
     The description of the model is in terms of integrated production and distribution firms but it applies
equally to arms length relations between production and distribution.
   7
     See the Appendix for detailed derivations.


                                                          8
       Equation (1) can be decomposed into two structural terms. We label the first term
`Structural Gravity' because, as famously demonstrated by Arkolakis et al. (2012), it can
be derived from a very wide class of theoretical economic micro-foundations. The intuition
behind this term is standard and simple, i.e., bilateral trade flows between two countries
  h                                                        h       h
(Xij,t ) are proportional to the product of their sizes (Yi,t and Ej,t , output and expenditure,
respectively) as a share of world output (Yth ), and inversely proportional to the trade frictions
between them, which consist of direct bilateral trade costs (th
                                                              ij,t ) and general equilibrium

trade frictions captured by the multilateral resistances (h        k
                                                          i,t and Pj,t , outward and inward,

respectively), and where (1 -  k )k is the trade elasticity, which is a function of the elasticity
of substitution,  k , and another structural structural parameter, k , which we define next.
       We label the second term in equation (1) `Short Run with Melitz Firms' because it com-
bines the `short run gravity' model model of Anderson and Yotov (2020) with the `heteroge-
neous firms' model of Melitz (2003). This term decomposes into three structural elements.
Common to all is the structural parameter h , a composite of demand and supply elasticities
that constitutes the buyers' incidence of short run trade frictions h . Alternatively, h can
be interpreted as the proportion by which the short run trade elasticity is reduced from the
long run trade elasticity.8 In a long-run equilibrium, proxied by h = 1, the `Short Run
with Melitz Firms' term will disappear and equation (1) collapses to the standard structural
gravity model, naturally interpreted as a long-run model. h
                                                          ij,t is an ex ante bilateral capacity

variable ­ the fraction of country i's capital in sector h allocated ex ante to marketing to
                  h ¯h
destination j .9 Uij                                                    h
                     /Ui gives the ex post utilization rate of capital Uij relative to its average
¯ih =
U               h   h                              h ¯h
                ij Uij for country i in sector h. Uij /Ui represents the capacity utilization effect
            j

   8
     To see this intuition, note that h enters multiplicatively the power of the trade cost element in the
`Structural Gravity' term, thus driving a wedge between the short-run and the long-run trade elasticity.
Anderson and Yotov (2020) obtain estimates of  around 0.25, a static structural rationale for the difference
between the larger (long-tun) trade elasticity values from the trade literature vs. the smaller (short-run)
estimates from the IRBC macro literature.
   9
     More broadly, the notion of bilateral capacity here is consistent with the network link dynamics modeled
by Chaney (2014), the link between managers' experience in previous firms and the export performance of
their current company described by Mion and Opromolla (2014), and with the `marketing capital' of Head
et al. (2010).



                                                     9
of selection of heterogeneous firms. Selection results from the combination of fixed labor
costs for export and heterogeneous productivity draws by ex ante identical firms. The short
run supply elasticity that is part of structural parameter h is a combination of diminishing
labor productivity in shipping to destination j (parameterized as the inverse of capital's
share parameter) and firm selection (parameterized by the shape parameter of a Pareto
distribution).10
       Our main concern in this paper is the application of this model to the extensive margin
                                                                                                         h -1
where j = n. This introduces a new term multiplying the right hand side of (1), (h
                                                                                 in )
                                                                                     
                                                                                                                ,
where h
      in > 1 is a fixed cost of entry in terms of capital. In order to cover the cost of entry

to the extensive margin destination n, the extensive margin capacity is reduced below its
long run efficient size to sufficiently raise the ratio of sales to capacity. Even if there is no
direct fixed capital cost of entry, the fixed labor cost of serving any destination effectively
absorbs some initial bilateral marketing capital, hence drives h
                                                               in > 1. Taking into account

the extensive margin of trade, our structural equation becomes:

                                    (1- h )h
              h h
  h
            Yi,t En,t    thin,t                    h ¯ h 1-h          1-h        h -1
 Xin,t    =                                    × (Uin /Ui )  × (h
                                                                in,t )    × (h
                                                                             in )     ,            j = n. (2)
              Yth        h      h
                         i,t Pn,t


                    Structural Gravity            Short Run & M elitz F irms   Extensive M argin




       The key object of interest to us is the interaction between the short run and the extensive
margin, which comprises the last two terms in (2). To ease notation, we define this composite
        h       1-h        h ¯h                           1-h
term as ij,t             (Uin /Ui ) × (h       h
                                       in,t )/(in )             , and we label the interaction term `The
Short-Run Extensive Margin'.
                                                                                         h              1-h
       Taking the model to data is a challenge in the absence of data on the elements of ij,t                   .
Bilateral-time fixed effects usefully constrained in a plausible way can control for the move-
ment of marketing capital, but as demonstrated below, these fail to identify the effects of
  10
    If firms are homogeneous, the utilization rates are equal to one and Equation (1) collapses to the short-
run gravity model of Anderson and Yotov (2020).



                                                        10
switching on bilateral capacity when applied with international trade data only. We empha-
size that (1) and (2) hold equally for international and domestic links, i.e., both for i = j and
for i = j . With trade data that includes both domestic and international trade it is possible
for fixed effects techniques to control for switching on bilateral capacity. Note that although
domestic sales often precede exports, this is neither necessary nor universally observed.
       Our theory and its application capture two distinct forms of the extensive margin of
trade. First is the standard external (cross-border) margin of trade whereby the production
and distribution for export changes. Second is the domestic margin i = j where domestic
distribution changes. This is what we call the `Domestic Extensive Margin' (DEM), a key
focus of our empirical analysis. The empirical analysis below demonstrates that proper
econometric accounting for the domestic extensive margin may have significant implications
for identifying the impact of a number of determinants of the external extensive margin. The
lesson is consistent with the closed form model (1) but more broadly suggests the importance
of simultaneously accounting for both extensive margins.
       The domestic extensive margin could in principle be active in an already active sector;
production need not imply domestic sales. This phenomenon is absent from the data in our
application, but we begin with it in (2) for analytic convenience. The other form of the
domestic extensive margin impacts potentially both the internal and cross-border extensive
margins. The domestic sectoral margin is where production and distribution of a product
begins or ends. Consider extensive margin sector Hi for country i. Sales require entry to
its distribution to a set of destinations MHi = [nH    Hi
                                                  i , ni ] The sectoral entry condition is
                                                    i



SiHi      nMHi   sH i  Hi 1-H
                  in  (i )
                             i  F
                                              Hi
                                 Hi  1 where Si  is sector Hi 's share of national sales in
                   1-Hi                  1-Hi
country i and Hi          =    nMHi    in       . FHi controls for any additional fixed one-time cost
of investment in external margin sector Hi . Some new sectors may export only, i  MHi is
not necessary.11 The details of the theoretical model are in the Appendix.
  11
    While it is simplest to think of expanding on the extensive margin, the extensive margin analysis above
applies equally to exit on the assumption that exit costs are equal to entry costs. Exit costs that differ are
analyzed by replacing in with some in > 1. Imperfect information about future prospects and departures
of the initial conditions from long run equilibrium efficiency complicate the entry/exit condition. Also,


                                                     11
    A key aspect of the short run structural gravity model (2) is its structural time invariance.
This opens the door to exploit time variation in exogenous variables within the structural
short run gravity model to empirically characterize the extensive margins of trade. There
are two sources of time series variation in the two extensive margins. One is due to cyclic
volatility of service in bilateral links. The other is secular change (growth or decline) in the
number of markets served. Both sources of action on the extensive margins are potentially
active and quantitatively important.12 Both forms of the extensive margin are described by
the simple selection mechanism of the heterogeneous firms embedded in specification (2).


2.2      From Theory to Empirics: Estimating the Extensive Margin

The lens of theoretical equation (2) focuses application on a corresponding econometric
model. To this end, we proceed in three steps and rely on three different strands of the
literature. First, we translate our theory into an econometric model, which is broadly con-
sistent with other structural models on the extensive margin of trade, e.g., Helpman et al.
(2008b). Second, following the recommendations of Santos Silva et al. (2014), we select their
FLEX estimator to obtain our main results. Finally, guided by the empirical literature on
the intensive and on the extensive margins of trade and by our key contribution (i.e., the
introduction of the domestic extensive margin), we select the covariates in our empirical
model.
    We start by translating our theory into an econometric model.13 Let Nij,t
                                                                         k
                                                                              be an indicator
equal to one when at least one firm exports k from i to j at time t. In order for this to be the
case, there should be at least one firm in this sector that finds it profitable to produce and
learning how to produce and serve new sector/destinations plausibly takes place over time, inducing partial
adjustment and correcting for mistakes. The treatment here abstracts from all such dynamic considerations
to simplify focus on the essential static logic: entry requires a lower than eventually efficient capacity to
raise next period returns above the opportunity cost of capital.
   12
      Besedes and Prusa (2006) document the high volatility over time of 10 digit HS level bilateral US exports.
Chaney (2014) describes the rich dynamics of French exporting firms focused on their entry into new bilateral
markets.
   13
      As demonstrated by Santos Silva et al. (2014), the same steps can be applied to translate Helpman et
al. (2008b) into a corresponding econometric model.



                                                      12
              k
export, i.e., ij,t ( ) > 0. This implies that the probability for a given sector to be exported
from origin i to destination j at time t is:


                               k                     k
                           Pr(Nij,t = 1|xij,t ) = Pr(ij,t ( ) > 0) = F k (x ij,t  )                       (3)


                            k
Letting Nij,t =        k   Nij,t be the total number of sectors exported from i to j at time t, the
previous expression implies:


                                           k
            E (Nij,t |xij,t ) =        Pr(Nij,t = 1|xij,t ) =       F k (x ij,t  ) = Ni,t F (x ij,t  ),   (4)
                                   k                            k



where Ni,t is the total number of sectors available in origin i, and F (x ij,t  ) = F k (x ij,t  ) /Ni,t
is interpreted as the probability that a randomly selected sector k will be exported from
country i to country j at time t.
       Next, to select the functional form for F (x ij,t  ), we follow Santos Silva et al. (2014):

                                                                              1
                                                                             -
                                  F (x ij,t  ) = 1 - 1 +  exp xij,t               .


As introduced by Santos Silva (2001), this functional form has two main advantages for our
purposes. First, consistent with the fact that our dependent variable is bounded from above
and from below, the proposed function is double-bounded too.14 Second, this specification
is flexible (hence, the FLEX estimator) as there are no prior constraints imposed on the
shape parameter  , apart from it being positive, i.e.  > 0. Thus, as noted by Santos Silva
et al. (2014), the implied distribution can be symmetric ( = 1), left-skewed ( < 1), or
right-skewed ( > 1), as dictated by the data. The flexible functional form is potentially
very important to capture the distribution of the extensive margin of trade, where the
larger number of observations is clustered in the lower tail of the distribution and they will
determine the shape of the estimated function and lead to bad fit of the upper tail of the
  14
    The functional form is in fact bounded between 0 and 1, but this will be consistent when the dependent
variable in our model is transformed from a level to a share.


                                                         13
distribution due to its low weight in the objective function. Following Santos Silva et al.
(2014), we will estimate the model by Bernoulli pseudo-maximum likelihood, which is easy
to implement and it is consistent under very general conditions, c.f., Papke and Wooldridge
(1996).15
      To demonstrate the robustness of our main results, we also experiment with three alterna-
tive estimators. First, we employ a double-bounded Tobit estimator. In addition, following
the best current practices in the intensive margin gravity literature, we also experiment with
the Poisson Pseudo Maximum Likelihood (PPML), which has the attractive properties of
being a count multiplicative model, which can take into account the information contained
in the zero observations in our sample. PPML established itself as the leading gravity esti-
mator due to the seminal work of Santos Silva and Tenreyro (2006), and we refer the reader
to Santos Silva and Tenreyro (2006) and Santos Silva and Tenreyro (2011) for excellent dis-
cussions of the attractive features of PPML for gravity estimations on the intensive margin
of trade, and to Berthou and Fontagne (2008) for an application to the extensive margin
of trade. Finally, despite its limitations in the current setting, i.e., inability to capture the
behavior of the distribution at its bounds because the partial OLS effects are assumed to be
constant, we also obtain robustness estimates with the OLS estimator. As demonstrated in
the sensitivity analysis, our main results and conclusions are robust to the use of alternative
estimators.
      The third and final step to complete our econometric setup is to explicitly define the
covariates in our model. To this end, we rely on the numerous contributions to the empirical
literature on the intensive and on the extensive margins of trade, as well as on our key
contribution, i.e. the introduction of the domestic extensive margin. Taking into account
the latest developments in the estimation of gravity equations (on the extensive and on the
 15
      The refer the reader to Gourieroux et al. (1984) and Papke and Wooldridge (1996) for a discussion.




                                                     14
 intensive margin), we start by defining:


                  exp xij,t  = exp (i,t + j,t + ij + BIP OLij,t 1 ) ,             i = j                 (5)


 Equation (5) includes three sets of fixed effects. i,t and j,t are exporter-time and importer-
 time fixed effects, which would control for and absorb the multilateral resistance terms
 from our theoretical model, as well as any other country-specific time-varying characteristics
 that may affect the bilateral extensive margin, on the exporter and on the importer side,
 respectively. ij denotes a set of country-pair fixed effects, whose purpose is to account for all
 time-invariant bilateral determinants of the extensive margin of trade. Finally, BIP OLij,t is
 a vector of time-varying bilateral determinants of trade, e.g., trade agreements, tariffs, etc.
        An important feature of all empirical papers on the extensive margin of trade, as captured
 by equation (5), is that, without exception, all of the existing extensive margin analyses are
 performed exclusively with international trade data only and without taking into account the
 domestic extensive margin.16 As we demonstrate next, proper/theory-consistent account for
 the domestic extensive margin may have significant implications for estimating the impact
 of numerous determinants of the extensive margin of trade. To see this, note that once the
 domestic extensive margin is introduced, equation (5) becomes:


exp xij,t  = exp (i,t + j,t + ij + BIP OLij,t 1 + EXSi,t×BRDRij 2 + IM Pj,t×BRDRij 3 ) ×

              = exp(CN T RYj,t×BRDRij 4 + EXRij,t×BRDRij 5 +                    i,t GLOBi,t × BRDRij ). (6)
                                                                          i,t


 The introduction of the domestic extensive margin allows us to identify the effects of five
 new terms, which appear in equation (6) but could not be identified from specification (5).
 When the extensive margin is defined based on cross-border observations only, the effects
 of any non-discriminatory export policies are absorbed by the exporter-time fixed effects.
 In contrast, once the domestic extensive margin observations are introduced, the impact
   16
    In our review of the voluminous empirical literatures on export diversification and on the extensive
 margin of trade we did not come across a single paper that took into account the domestic extensive margin.



                                                     15
of any non-discriminatory export support policies can be identified in the presence of the
exporter-time fixed effects because the export support policies apply only to international
and not to domestic trade. Specifically, EXSi,t is a vector of non-discriminatory export
support policies, e.g., export subsidies, trade fairs, etc. We interact EXSi,t with BRDRij ,
which is an indicator variable for cross-border trade, equal to 0 for domestic trade. Thus,
the resulting interaction, EXSi,t×BRDRij , is time-varying and bilateral and, therefore, it
can be identified in the presence of all fixed effects from (6).
   The second new term in (6) is IM Pj,t×BRDRij , and it is constructed as an interac-
tion between a vector of non-discriminatory import protection policies, IM Pj,t , and the
international border dummy. Similar to the case of export support, the impact of any non-
discriminatory import protection policies cannot be identified in the presence of importer-
time fixed effects without the domestic extensive margin.
   The third new term in (6) is CN T RYj,t×BRDRij , and it is constructed as an interaction
between a vector of country-specific characteristics and policies, e.g. institutional quality,
technical barriers to trade (TBT) etc., CN T RYj,t , and the international border dummy.
Once again, the impact of such policies cannot be identified without the domestic extensive
margin. The difference between this term and the directional (export and import policies)
is that we can only identify the differential impact of such policies on international relative
to internal trade, however not depending on the direction of trade flows, e.g., not on the
impact of exports vs. imports.
   The fourth new term in specification (6) is the exchange rate between i and j at t,
EXRij,t . Even though exchange rates are bilateral their impact cannot be identified in
gravity specifications with international trade data only due to perfect collinearity with
the exporter time and importer time fixed effects. Once the domestic extensive margin is
introduced, we can obtain estimates of the nonuniform/discriminatory impact of exchange
rates on the external relative to the domestic extensive margin, because exchange rates do
not vary domestically.


                                               16
       The fifth new term in specification (6) is     i,t   i,t GLOBi,t×BRDRij , which denotes a set
of time-invariant cross-border dummies BRDRij interacted with origin-time globalization
dummies GLOBi,t . The motivation for the inclusion and emphasis on this term is twofold.
First, from a practical perspective, the inclusion of the globalization dummies will enable
us to address the challenge that we do not have data on the key variable of interest in (2),
      h      1-h
i.e., in,t         . Thus, the country-time specific globalization estimates that we will obtain
in the empirical analysis will offer a flexible and comprehensive/all-inclusive account for
the dynamic evolution of the international bilateral links relative to the domestic extensive
margin. Second, the inclusion of the time-varying border indicators would enable us to
resolve the `the missing globalization puzzle', c.f., Coe et al. (2002), on the extensive margin
of trade. In the empirical analysis we demonstrate that the effects of globalization are
present and can be identified in our setting both when we constrain them to be common
across countries and also when they are country-specific. Importantly, as with all other new
terms that appear in (6), neither the common globalization trends nor the country-specific
globalization effects could be identified without the domestic extensive margin.
       Finally, we note that the introduction of the domestic extensive margin has two poten-
tially important implications for the estimates of the effects of any bilateral trade policies,
which are included in vector BIP OLij,t . Consider, for example, the impact of regional trade
agreements. The introduction of the domestic extensive margin allows for an explicit account
that, consistent with Melitz (2003), trade liberalization may lead to decrease in the num-
ber of products that are produced domestically.17 The implication for the estimates of the
impact of RTAs in that scenario is that they may be biased downward without accounting
for the domestic extensive margin. Alternatively, if one believes that trade liberalization
leads to production in more sectors, i.e., an increase in the domestic extensive margin, then
the implication for RTA estimates that are obtained without account for that is that they
  17
    Our econometric model does not take a stand on whether trade liberalization leads to an increased or a
decreased number of domestic varieties. However, we believe that this is an interesting empirical question,
which can be viewed as a direct test of one of the key implications of Melitz's landmark theory.



                                                    17
may be biased upward. Next, consider the impact of WTO membership on the extensive
margin of trade. In addition to allowing for the possibility to capture a possible decrease in
the number of domestically produced varieties, the introduction of the domestic extensive
margin allows for the identification of country-specific WTO effects for each member coun-
try. This is not possible without the domestic extensive margin because the country-specific
WTO effects would be absorbed by the exporter-time and/or importer-time fixed effects in
the econometric specification.



3      Data: Construction and Sources

To conduct the empirical analysis, we construct a novel dataset that covers the extensive
margin for about 3400 mining and manufacturing goods for 32 countries over the period
2008-2018. A very important and unique dimension of our dataset is the domestic extensive
margin. As described in more detail next, availability of data on the domestic extensive
margin is what predetermined the dimensions of our estimating sample(s). Guided by the-
ory, and in an attempt to utilize as much of the available data as possible, we construct
and experiment with several alternative samples by extending the data coverage across the
product and country dimensions. We construct the estimating sample(s) in three steps that
are described in the three corresponding subsections of this section.


3.1     The Domestic Extensive Margin

The original data source that we use to construct the domestic extensive margin is PROD-
COM. This database is developed, maintained, and hosted by Eurostat.18 PRODCOM
consists of yearly files that include statistics on the value of production (in thousands of
Euro) for 35 European countries and about 3800 product categories in mining, quarrying,
  18
     The title `PRODCOM' comes from the French "PRODuction COMmunautaire" (Community Produc-
tion). We accessed the original PRODCOM files at https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/prodcom/data/excel-
files-nace-rev.2.



                                                 18
and manufacturing. A list of the countries covered in PRODCOM, along with their 2-letter
ISO alpha codes, can be found in the first two columns of Table 1. Data for most coun-
tries are available and balanced throughout the period of investigation, 2008-2018. However,
there are several exceptions. Specifically, inspection of the data reveals that (i) Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Northern Macedonia; Serbia, and Montenegro appear in the database only in
2011, i.e., data for these countries are not available for the period 2008-2010. (ii) Turkey
has no data after 2011, i.e., data for Turkey are available only for three years, including
2008, 2009, and 2010; and (iii) data for Croatia are not available in 2012. Most probably
due to the focus on mining and manufacturing, three countries (Cyprus, Luxembourg, and
Malta) do not produce/sell any of the products covered in PRODCOM. These countries are
eliminated from our sample. As a result, we were able to construct an unbalanced domestic
extensive margin panel for 32 countries.
   Turning to the product dimension, PRODCOM offers production data for the broad cat-
egories of mining, quarrying, and manufacturing (with the exception of military products
and some energy products). Due to the invention of new products and discontinued produc-
tion of others, the number of categories covered in PRODCOM varies across years, but, on
average, PRODCOM covers about 3800 categories of mining, quarrying, and manufacturing
products. The number of all possible PRODCOM products in a given year appears in the
last row of Table 1. There are 25 steel products in the original PRODCOM dataset for which
data were missing for all countries and in all years. In addition, we noticed that Finland
had missing observations for 5 products in some years. After investigating the raw data, we
concluded that (i) Finland must produce in four of these categories, e.g., because there was
production of the same products in years that were neighboring to the missing observations,
and (ii) Finland did not produce in one category, e.g., because the observations for all but
the missing year were zeroes. This information was sufficient to construct the missing values
for Finland's extensive margin.
   In addition to actual reported values of production, the original PRODCOM database


                                             19
includes observations labeled as Confidential (:C), Estimated (:E), or Confidential/Estimated
(:CE). These observations account for a total of approximately 20% of the original data. The
observations labeled Confidential (:C) or Confidential/Estimated (:CE) account for more
than 19%, while the Estimated (:E) observations were less than 1%. While the presence
of confidential and/or estimated observations could have been potentially problematic for
an analysis on the intensive margin of trade, they are not such a big concern in our case,
where the focus is on the extensive margin and all we need to know is whether there is
production or not in a given category. To take advantage of the information contained in
the confidential and the estimated observations we proceed in three steps. First, we assign
a value of one on the extensive margin for any estimated or confidential observations for
which there were positive production values in the same category but in other years in the
original data. Second, we assign a value of zero on the extensive margin for any estimated or
confidential observations for which the non-missing production values in the same categories
in all other years in the original data are zeroes. Finally, if the observations for all years for
a given country and product category were classified as confidential and/or estimated, we
assign a value of one on the extensive margin.
   The last two steps in the construction of the domestic extensive margin are (i) to replace
the positive reported production values with ones, and (ii) to sum them for each country
and year in the sample. For consistent comparisons (since the number of possible products
varies across years), we define our novel index of the Domestic Extensive Margin (DEM) as
the ratio between the number of products actually produced by a given country in a given
year, Di,t , and the total number of possible products that could have been produced by the
same country and in the same year, Ni,t :

                                                    Di,t
                                        DEMi,t =         .
                                                    Ni,t

The domestic extensive margin indexes for all countries and all years in our sample appear



                                               20
in Table 1. The total number of possible products are reported in the last row of the table.
The last column of the table reports percentage changes for each country between the first
and the last year for which data are available. The exception is Serbia, for which the initial
year for the percentage change in the last column is 2012. As can be seen from Table 1, the
domestic extensive margin index for Serbia in 2011 is very different from the relatively stable
indexes in the subsequent years. In combination with the fact that 2011 is the first year for
which Serbia was included in PRODCOM, we conclude that the 2011 data for Serbia are not
reliable and, therefore, for the remainder of the analysis we treat the observations for Serbia
in 2011 as missing.
   Several interesting patterns regarding the heterogeneity of the DEM index across the
countries in our sample as well as the evolution of the index over time stand out from
Table 1. First, and most important for our identification purposes, we see that the domestic
extensive margin varies widely across countries. For simplicity, focus on the column for the
last year in the sample, 2018. The variation that we observe makes intuitive sense. For
example, the countries with the lowest domestic extensive margin indexes are smaller and
poorer economies (e.g., Montenegro, Iceland, North Macedonia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and Latvia), while the countries with the largest indexes are large and rich economies (e.g.,
Germany, France, Spain, Italy, and the United Kingdom). This observation is consistent
with and complements the policy argument for the importance of the international extensive
margin from the development literature, according to which the (international) extensive
margin of trade is a more important indicator for developing/poorer countries because their
exports are less diverse. This makes them dependent on exports of a few products and,
therefore, these countries are more vulnerable to terms of trade changes.
   The second notable finding in Table 1 is the significant variation in the domestic extensive
margin within countries and over time. Even though not crucial for our purposes, this vari-
ation will further aid identification. Three patterns stand out from Table 1 and, to analyze
them, we focus on the percentage changes that are reported in the last column of the table.


                                              21
First, we see that a number of countries have experienced an increase/improvement on the
domestic extensive margin. The countries with the largest increases are Hungary, Nether-
lands, Lithuania, Slovenia, and Greece. Apart from the Netherlands, a possible explanation
for such favorable ranking is that these countries have benefited from their integration in
the European Union. On the other side of the spectrum we find Portugal, Croatia, Finland,
Italy, and the United Kingdom. Finally, a third group of countries have not experienced sig-
nificant changes on the domestic extensive margin. These countries include Norway, Spain,
Germany, and Iceland. Interestingly, two of these countries (e.g., Germany and Spain) have
very large indexes, while the other two countries (e.g., Norway and Iceland) are among the
ones with the smallest indexes.
       This section presented the Domestic Extensive Margin index. The accompanying anal-
ysis revealed wide heterogeneity in the DEM indexes across the countries in our sample as
well as significant variation of DEM over time. This variation is useful for identification of
heterogeneous EU integration effects on domestic and international margins below, control-
ling for size effects and multilateral resistance effects consistent with the structural gravity
model.


3.2       Matching the Domestic & International Extensive Margins

We rely on the COMEXT database to construct the international extensive margin of trade.
According to the official Eurostat web site "COMEXT is Eurostat's reference database for
detailed statistics on international trade in goods", and the dataset offers very detailed statis-
tics according to the Combined Nomenclature (CN) classification system.19 We follow the
standard method to construct the extensive margin, i.e., first, we assign values of one to the
positive product-level flows in COMEXT, and then we sum them for each pair-year com-
bination. The result is a time-varying bilateral variable, which is defined as the number of
products exported from i to j at year t. The structure of COMEXT, in combination with
  19
    We accessed the historical version of the Comext data at https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/estat-navtree-
portlet-prod/BulkDownloadListing?sort=1&dir=comext.

                                                   22
the design of PRODCOM, presented several opportunities to construct and experiment with
alternative estimating samples. We describe those opportunities and our choices next.
      For each reporting country COMEXT includes separate data on exports and on imports.
Based on this information, we construct and experiment with three alternative measures
of the extensive margin of trade. First, following most of the literature on the intensive
margin of trade flows, our main extensive-margin variable is constructed based on the average
between the import and the export flows in COMEXT. Alternatively, we also construct a
sample, where we start with the reported export values and we replace the missing exports
observations with the corresponding non-missing import values. We call this sample the
"Exporter-based Sample", and we experiment with it in the sensitivity analysis. Similarly,
we also construct a measure where we start with the reported import values and we replace
the missing import observations with the corresponding non-missing export values. We call
this sample the "Importer-based Sample". As we demonstrate later, estimates obtained with
the three alternative samples are very similar to each other.
      The key novelty of our analysis is the introduction of the the domestic extensive margin.
Thus, it is very important for our purposes to construct a consistent correspondence between
the domestic and the international extensive margins. To this end, we benefited tremendously
from the fact that the two main underlying databases (PRODCOM and COMEXT) that
we used to build our estimating samples were designed to be consistent with each other by
construction. Specifically, as noted in the PRODCOM user guide, "[b]efore data collection
could begin, it was necessary to draw up a common list of products to be covered ... As
PRODCOM statistics have to be comparable with external trade statistics, which are based
on the Combined Nomenclature (CN), there had to be a close relationship between the two
nomenclatures." We took advantage of the close matching and existing concordances be-
tween the PRODCOM and the CN classifications to construct consistent estimating samples
that cover both the domestic and the international extensive margins.20
 20
    The original PRODCOM to CN concordance files come from the Eurostat RAMON site at:
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/ramon/relations/index.cfm?TargetUrl=LST REL&StrLanguageCode=EN


                                               23
   While the matching between PRODCOM and CN was intended to be very close by
design, "it was felt by the PRODCOM committee that there were instances where the CN
classification gave too much detail in how it broke down products within a specific category,
but equally instances when it did not give enough detail to meet the needs of the likely end
users of PRODCOM data." (p.6, PRODCOM Guide). As a result, the matching between
the PRODCOM classification and the Combined Nomenclature includes one-to-one matches,
many CN to one PRODCOM matches, one CN to many PRODCOM matches, and many CN
to many PRODCOM matches. There was also a small fraction of products of the PRODCOM
categories that did not have a match in the Combined Nomenclature.21
   As expected, an investigation of the matching patterns between PRODCOM and CN
reveals that most of the cases are one-to-one matches and the second largest share includes
many CN to one PRODCOM matches. In combination, these two types of matches cover
between 78.5% and 100% of the PRODCOM product categories for which there is a CN
match.22 Therefore, we constructed and experimented with two alternative estimating sam-
ples based on the underlying product matching and coverage between the PRODCOM and
the CN classifications. The first sample includes only the products for which we have one-to-
one matching. The number of products that we cover this way is around 2000 in each year
of our sample. We label this sample the "Conservative-product sample", and we use it in the
robustness analysis. The second sample, which is the one used in the main analysis, is our
"Extended-product sample" because it covers all products for which we have one-to-one or
one-to-many matching between PRODCOM and CN, i.e., in the latter case there are multi-
ple CN products corresponding to a single PRODCOM category. The number of products in
this extended sample varies between 3276 and 3513, thus covering almost all (between 93%
and 100%) possible products in the original PRODCOM classification for which there was a
&IntCurrentPage=4.
  21
     Specifically, the fraction of PRODCOM products that could not be matched to the CN classification
varies between 6.57%, in 2016, and 9.58% in 2010.
  22
     Specifically, they cover more than 97% of the PRODCOM products in 2008 and 2009, 100% of the
PRODCOM products in 2010 and 2011, more than 80% of the PRODCOM products between 2012 and
2016, and 78.5% of the PRODCOM products in 2017 and 2018.


                                                 24
CN match.
   Based on the "Extended-product sample" used to obtain our main results, the last column
of Table 1 reports the percentage change in the total number of exported products for
each country in our sample during the period 2008-2018, i.e., on the international extensive
margin (IEM) of trade. While we use bilateral international extensive margin data in our
econometric analysis, the percentage changes in the total number of exported products that
we report here are informative for at least two reasons. First, according to the indexes in
the last column of Table 1, the countries in our sample can be classified in three distinct
and sufficiently large groups: (i) We see some countries that experienced a very significant
increase in the international extensive margin between 2008 and 2018, e.g., Montenegro and
North Macedonia, followed by Croatia and Hungary; (ii) The second group of countries
did not experience significant change in the number of exported products between 2008 and
2018. Some examples include, Lithuania, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Bulgaria; (iii) Finally,
a number of countries saw a decrease in the number of exported products during the period
of investigation. The decrease is moderate and occurs mostly in developed countries, e.g.,
France, Germany, UK, Austria. Based on these results, we draw the intuitive conclusion that
the countries that have benefited the most on the international extensive margin of trade
are smaller and poorer European economies, while the larger and more developed countries
have actually contracted the number of products that they export.
   Second, comparisons between the percentage changes in the last two columns of Table
1 reveal some interesting patterns of the relationship between the evolution of the interna-
tional and the domestic extensive margins of trade. These patterns motivate the econometric
analysis below that identifies the relative impact of globalization and European integration
on the international relative to the domestic margin of trade. The percentage changes in
the last two columns of Table 1 reveal the following patterns: (i) Faster positive growth on
the external margin and slower positive growth on the domestic margin, e.g., North Mace-
donia; (ii) No change on the external margin but an increase on the domestic margin, e.g.,


                                            25
Lithuania; (iii) Decrease on the international extensive margin and no change on the do-
mestic extensive margin, e.g., Germany; (iv) Growth on the international extensive margin
and decrease on the domestic extensive margin, e.g., Montenegro; (v) Decrease on the do-
mestic extensive margin and stronger decrease on the international extensive margin, e.g.,
the United Kingdom. (vi) Faster positive growth on the domestic extensive margin and
slower positive growth on the international margin, e.g., Hungary. The case of Hungary is
particularly interesting because, based on the international extensive margin indexes, one
would conclude that Hungary has benefited a lot from globalization. However, this is not
the case relative to the domestic extensive margin for Hungary. We will return to some of
these descriptive patterns when we interpret the results of our econometric analysis.
       Even though COMEXT is based on data reported by European Union members only, the
database allowed us to construct the international extensive margin for a very wide number
of countries due to the fact that each EU reporter offered information both on its imports
from and on its exports to all other countries in the world. This feature of COMEXT has two
implications for our analysis. First, it enabled us to construct the extensive margin of trade
for the few non-EU countries (e.g., Turkey, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Northern Macedonia,
etc.) from the PRODCOM database. This determined the 32 × 32 country dimension of our
main estimating sample, where we have consistently constructed domestic and international
margins of trade for all countries in the sample. In addition, we capitalized on the extensive
country coverage of COMEXT to construct and experiment with an alternative (32 × 75)
"Extended-country sample", which includes domestic extensive margin for the 32 PRODCOM
countries, as well as the (international) extensive margin of trade between the 32 PRODCOM
countries and 75 additional importers from COMEXT.23
  23
    The COMEXT dataset includes information for a total of 212 importers. However, we note that the
wide importer coverage does not add to the domestic extensive margin and, therefore, it does not lead to
improvements in the data for our identification purposes. At the same time, an extended country sample is
much more computationally intensive with the non-linear estimators that we will employ. This is why we
only use 75 importers and we employ this extended sample in the robustness analysis. We selected the 75
importers as follows. First, we identified the 60 countries with the largest GDPs in 2018. Together they
account for more than 99.9% of world GDP in 2018. The 60 largest economies did not include 15 of the
smallest countries from the PRODCOM data. Therefore, we added these small economies to end up with a


                                                   26
   Finally, inspection of COMEXT revealed that there were export data for Cyprus, Lux-
embourg, and Malta, even though, as discussed earlier, these countries were not present in
PRODCOM. We also noticed that for many countries the number of exported products in
COMEXT exceeded the number of domestically produced products in PRODCOM. This
motivated us to implement an alternative procedure to construct the domestic margin of
trade, which further demonstrated the robustness of our main findings. Specifically, for each
year-country combination we constructed the domestic margin of trade as the total number
of products exported by this country to any other country in the world. The implicit assump-
tion that we make when implementing this procedure is that any product that is produced
in a given country is exported to at least one trading partner. We view this assumption as
plausible for two reasons. First, because our sample covers mining and manufacturing (and
not agriculture and especially services, where localized consumption is a more significant
problem for trade). And second, because usually every country declares exports to its most
closely related partner in almost every category.
   The proposed procedure also has several important advantages. First, by construction,
it ensures that the number of internationally-traded products will always be smaller and in
rare cases equal (i.e, when the maximum number of products exported to a specific trading
partner is the same as the total number of exported products). Second, it will enable us to
construct the domestic margin of trade for all 35 countries and all years that are covered in
the original PRODCOM database. Third, the procedure allows for the construction of the
domestic extensive margin based only on international trade data. Thus, in principle, it can
be used to construct the domestic extensive margin for a very large number of countries, as
long as the underlying international trade data are available for all pairs. This is not the
case in our sample, because COMEXT does not include trade between non-EU countries.
Therefore, we only experiment with a sample that covers the original 35 countries from
PRODCOM and the extended product list.
total of 75 countries in our "Extended-country sample".



                                                   27
   In sum, data availability enabled us to construct and experiment with several estimating
samples. Our main estimating sample has the following dimensions and characteristics: (i)
It covers 32 exporters and 32 importers for which there are consistently constructed data on
the domestic extensive margin and on the international extensive margin of trade; (ii) The
international extensive margin for the main sample is based on averaged data on export and
import trade flows; and, finally, (iii) The number of underlying products used to construct
our main sample is about 3300-3400 products, including the products for which there is
one-to-one and one-to-many matching between PRODCOM and CN.
   In addition, we also experiment with the following alternative estimating samples, each of
which differs from the main sample in one dimension only: (i) A sample that is constructed
without averaging but instead using the underlying export values as the base for the exten-
sive margin (the "Exporter-based Sample" ); (ii) A sample that uses the underlying imports
as the base for the extensive margin (the "Importer-based Sample" ); (iii) A sample that takes
advantage of the extended importer coverage in COMEXT, i.e. with 32 exporters and 75 im-
porters (the "Extended-country Sample" ); and (iv) A sample that uses about 2000 underlying
products that match uniquely between the PRODCOM and the COMEXT databases (the
"Conservative-product Sample" ). Finally, (v) we construct a sample based on the alternative
procedure to construct the domestic extensive margin as the total number of products that
are exported. We label this sample "Export-based DEM Sample". As demonstrated below,
our results are robust to the use of any of these estimating samples.


3.3    Additional Data and Sources

To perform our main analysis, we rely on a demanding specification with a rich set of fixed
effects. Specifically, we use exporter-time and importer-time fixed effects, which will control
for all possible country-specific determinants of the extensive margin on the exporter and
on the importer side, respectively. In addition, we employ country-pair fixed effects, which
will absorb and control for all possible time-invariant bilateral determinants of the extensive


                                              28
margin. Finally, we also control for additional time-varying bilateral variables (e.g., economic
integration agreements, EIAs, and membership in the world trade organization, WTO).
These control variables come from the dynamic gravity database of the U.S. International
Trade Commission, c.f., Gurevich and Herman (2018). We do note, however, that given the
specifics of our sample (i.e., covering only European economies) and the use of country-pair
fixed effects, the estimates of the EIA and WTO covariates would be identified of very few
observations. For example, all the variation in the EIA covariate could come from the trade
agreements of very few countries including Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Montenegro,
and Serbia. Similarly, Montenegro is the only country in our sample that became a WTO
member during the period of investigation (in 2012). We will capitalize on this in order to
demonstrate that the introduction of the domestic extensive margin will enable us to identify
country-specific WTO effects.



4        Globalization and the Extensive Margin of Trade

The implications of structural model (2) and the specifics of the data sample(s) of Section 3
naturally suggest application to quantify the impact of globalization on the extensive margin
of trade in Europe.24 This application has several advantages for our purposes. First, it is
interesting and relevant from a policy perspective, because it will enable us to answer an
important question: What is the impact of European integration on the extensive margin of
trade? Our estimates reveal that despite anecdotal evidence for stalled globalization on the
intensive margin of trade, the impact of globalization on the extensive margin in Europe has
been strong and widely (but intuitively) heterogeneous.
       Second, from an econometric perspective, the focus on Europe during the period 2008-
  24
    Given the composition of the sample, the analysis can also be interpreted as a quantification of the
impact of European integration on the extensive margin of trade. Apart from data limitations, the focus on
Europe is useful from a methodological perspective, because EU membership and globalization forces within
the European Union would be the main driving sources for our results by definition. The standard policy
variables such as WTO membership and the formation of free trade agreements play almost no role in our
analysis due to the presence of the country-pair fixed effects.



                                                   29
2018 will allow us to capture the desired globalization effects within a simple and robust
reduced form econometric specification with fixed effects only. The fixed effects treatment
enables us to obtain a series of globalization estimates while the rich fixed effects structure
of our model will diminish omitted variable and, more broadly, endogeneity concerns.
   Third, and most important for us, the application highlights our key argument/contribution
that the effects of globalization on the extensive margin on trade should be measured relative
to the domestic extensive margin. Specifically, model (2) requires fixed effect controls for
the origin-time and destination-time multilateral resistances which will absorb globalization
effects on the extensive margin in the absence of controls on the domestic extensive margin.
Another virtue of the application and the corresponding econometric specification is that it
enables a flexible estimation of the effects of globalization across time and across individual
countries.
   For the application to the impact of globalization in the EU, the econometric setup (6)
in Section 2.2 is simplified to the following estimating equation:

                                                                                            - 1
                                                                                                   
Nij,t
      = 1 - 1 +  exp i,t + j,t + ij + 1 W T Oij,t + 2 EIAij,t +            i,t GLOBi,t × BRDRij       +   ij,t .
Ni,t
                                                                     i,t

                                                                                                          (7)


The estimator, the dependent variable, and all fixed effects in specification (7) were defined
earlier. In addition, W T Oij,t is an indicator for membership in the World Trade Organiza-
tion and EIAij,t is a dummy variable for economic integration agreements (EIAs). Finally,
as defined earlier, the covariate   i,t   i,t GLOBi,t × BRDRij comprises time-invariant cross-
border dummies BRDRij interacted with origin-time globalization dummies GLOBi,t . In
the lens of theoretical model (2), suppressing the sector notation, the {GLOBi,t BRDRij }
dummies control for ij,t 1- . From a broader perspective, this setup captures the impact
of globalization on the external extensive margin of trade for each country-year combi-
nation in our sample as the globalization dummies {GLOBi,t BRDRij } absorb and fully
control for any non-discriminatory policy or country-specific characteristic that my affect

                                                 30
the external/cross-border extensive margin differentially relative to the domestic extensive
margin. Even though the set of country-year-specific globalization dummies does not allow
us to identify the effects of specific policies, we find their use appropriate to capture the
integration processes in Europe. From a methodological perspective, note that none of these
effects could be identified without the use of observations on the domestic extensive margin.
   A finding that i,t > 0 implies that there is a relative increase in the international
extensive margin relative to the domestic extensive margin. In principle, a positive estimate
of i,t may reflect several scenarios, e.g., (i) faster growth on the external margin and slower
growth on the domestic margin; (ii) no change on the external margin but a decrease on the
domestic margin, (iii) growth on the international extensive margin and no change on the
domestic extensive margin; (iv) growth on the international extensive margin and decrease
on the domestic extensive margin; (v) decrease on the international extensive margin and
faster decrease on the domestic extensive margin, etc. Based on the DEM and the IEM
indexes and their relationship that we discussed in the data section, we saw examples of
each of those scenarios and we will return to them when we interpret our results. In sum,
what we can identify is the effects of globalization/European integration on the international
relative to the domestic extensive margin. Finally, we note that, due to perfect collinearity
with the country-pair fixed effects, we have to omit the border estimate for one year for each
country when we obtain the country-specific estimates. The year we select is the first year
of the sample, 2008. Thus, the globalization estimates that we obtain should be interpreted
as deviations from the corresponding border effects in 2008.


4.1    Benchmark Results: Common Globalization Effects

We start the analysis with benchmark results which impose a common globalization effect
across all countries for each year in our sample, i.e., we constrain the country-specific global-
ization effects to be common across all countries in our sample, GLOBt =          i   GLOBi,t and
i,t = t . The results are reported in column (1) of Table 2. Note that due to the presence of


                                               31
domestic extensive margin observations we obtain estimates of the impact of globalization on
the extensive margin even in the presence of the full set of exporter-time and importer-time
fixed effects.25
       The globalization estimates in column (1) of Table 2 are (i) all positive and (ii) they are
increasing monotonically over time, with the exception of the estimate on GLOB 2009. In
combination, the implication of these results is that the impact of international borders on
the international relative to the domestic extensive margin has fallen significantly between
2008 and 2018 for the countries in our sample. In other words, globalization has had a signif-
icant positive impact on the international extensive margin of trade relative to the domestic
extensive margin for the European economies. Intensive integration processes within Europe
are the natural explanation for this result.
       From a policy perspective our results contrast with the data an anecdotal evidence that
the impact of globalization on the intensive margin stalled during the years after the great
recession. Our results indicate that the impact of globalization on the extensive margin
during the same period has been economically strong and statistically significant.
       From a methodological perspective, our finding about the monotonic decrease in the im-
pact of international borders on the extensive margin of trade is important because it reveals
that the gravity model is well suited to capture the extensive margin effects of globaliza-
tion. The "missing globalization puzzle", c.f., Coe et al. (2002) applied to both intensive
and extensive margins of trade. Our conclusion is that the effects of globalization were ac-
tually always in the structural gravity model, but `hidden' in the exporter-time and/or the
importer-time fixed effect. The introduction of the domestic extensive margin enables us to
pull these hidden effects out.26
       For an economic interpretation of globalization effects on the extensive margin, we obtain
  25
     Without domestic extensive margin observations, the GLOBt variables would have been perfectly
collinear with and, therefore, absorbed by the country-time fixed effects. Note also that identification
does not come from any variation over time ­ identification of border effects in the presence of exporter and
importer fixed effects even in a cross section setting so long as the dataset includes domestic trade.
  26
     On the intensive margin of trade, Anderson and Yotov (2020) utilize domestic trade data in the short
run gravity model to solve this version of the missing globalization puzzle.


                                                     32
the marginal effect of the globalization estimate in 2018, which captures the total impact
of globalization during the period of investigation. The marginal effect is 270.797 (std.err.
38.050), which means that, on average, the number of internationally traded products in-
creased by about 271 relative to the number of domestically traded products during the
period of investigation, or about 7.2 percent of the total number of possibly traded products
in 2018.
   Another important result from column (1) of Table 2 relates to our estimate of the impact
of WTO. We remind the reader that Montenegro is the only country in our sample, which
joined the WTO during the period of investigation. Thus, from a policy perspective, the
positive and significant estimate that we obtain (0.390, std.err. 0.054) implies that WTO
membership has benefited trade diversification for this country.
   The rest of the columns in Table 2 offer estimates from a series of sensitivity experi-
ments designed to test the robustness of our main findings. Broadly, we split our robustness
checks in two categories: (i) alternative estimators, which are reported in panel B of Table
2; and (ii) alternative samples, which are reported in panel C of Table 2. Specifically, the
results in columns (2) to (4) of panel B are obtained with the Tobit, the PPML, and the
OLS estimators, respectively. We also experiment with the following alternative estimating
samples: (i) the "Exporter-based Sample", as defined in the Data section, in column (5);
(ii) the "Importer-based Sample", in column (6); (iii) the main sample but only with pos-
itive observations, in column (7); (iv) a three-year interval sample, in column (8); (v) the
"Conservative-product Sample", in column (9); and (vi) the "Extended-country Sample",
in column (10). Based on the results from these experiments, we conclude that our main
findings of the impact of globalization on the extensive margin of trade are robust to the use
of alternative estimators and alternative estimating samples.
   The estimates in columns (11) and (12) of Table 2 are obtained with the "Export-based
DEM Sample", where the domestic extensive margin is constructed as the total number of
products exported by this country to any other country in the world. Two main findings


                                             33
stand out. First, we note that, overall, the results in column (11) confirm our main conclu-
sions. However, second, we notice that the monotonic increase in the globalization estimates
is violated in 2017, where the estimate on GLOB 2017 is still statistically significant but
smaller as compared to the estimates on GLOB 2016. Inspection of the underlying domestic
margin data reveals some unusual patterns. Specifically, as illustrated in Figure 1, which
graphs the yearly percentage changes in the domestic extensive margin for all countries in
our sample, there are four unusual spikes in 2017, which are for Cyprus, Malta, Iceland, and
Montenegro. Column (12) of Table 1 reproduces the results from column (11) but without
the outliers. The monotonically increasing pattern of the globalization estimates is restored.
       Finally, the estimates in the last column of Table 2 are obtained with an estimating
sample that does not include the domestic extensive margin. Consistent with our main
argument and contribution related to the benefits and importance of properly accounting for
the theory-consistent domestic extensive margin of trade, the estimates in column (13) reveal
that without the DEM observations we cannot identify neither the globalization effects that
we are after nor the country-specific impact of WTO on Montenegro's extensive margin. The
only covariate whose effects we can still identify is the bilateral EIA variable. It should be
noted, however, that even though our EIA estimates in column (13) and the main results in
column (1) of Table 2 are very similar, this does not necessarily need to be the case, as EIAs
may have a differential impact on the domestic vs. the external extensive margin.27


4.2       Country-specific Globalization Effects

Consistent with the theory, the main specification allows for differential, country-specific
effects of globalization. Thus we employ           i,t   i,t GLOBi,t×BRDRij , where the globalization
estimates, ^i,t , now vary not only for each year but also for each country in our sample. Due

to perfect collinearity with the country-pair fixed effects, we need to drop one border estimate
for each country and our choice are the country effects for 2008. Thus, all other country-
  27
    We believe that a detailed analysis of the impact of globalization on the domestic extensive margin would
be interesting and informative, but it is beyond the scope of this paper.

                                                         34
specific globalization estimates should be interpreted as deviations from the corresponding
border effect for the same country in 2008 and, by construction, the estimates for 2018 would
capture the total (cumulated) effects during the period 2008-2018. The results appear in
Table 3.
   The main implication of the estimates in Table 3 is wide heterogeneity of estimated
globalization effects, mostly statistically significant. To facilitate discussion, we focus on the
cumulative effects for 2018 from the last column of Table 3, and we plot them in Figure 2.
The figure enables us to group the countries in our sample in four categories.
   The first group includes five countries, Austria, Belgium, Sweden, France and Germany
­ the only countries for which we obtain negative globalization estimates for 2018. In fact,
Austria is the only country with a negative and statistically significant estimate of the impact
of globalization on the international extensive margin. (See Table 3 for statistical signifi-
cance). The negative estimates for five countries only (with only one of them statistically
significant) contrasts with the vast majority of countries in Europe that have enjoyed positive
globalization effects on the extensive margin between 2008 and 2018.
   The second distinct group in Figure 2 includes countries with positive but relatively
small estimates. Here, we find some of the other large economies in Europe, including Italy
and the United Kingdom, along with some smaller economies such as Norway, Finland, and
Greece. The absence of strong globalization effects on the extensive margin for the more
developed economies in this group and the first group suggests that they had reached their
extensive margin potential within Europe prior to the 2008-18 period. Combined with the
decreased domestic intensive margin that we documented in Section 3 and Table 1, the mod-
erate estimate for the United Kingdom suggests that the UK did not experience significant
international extensive margin growth between 2008 and 2018. A possible explanation for
the relatively small impact for Greece is that, as noted in Section 3 (see Table 1), Greece is
among the countries that experienced the largest increase in the domestic extensive margin.
Thus, the positive estimate for this country suggests very significant increase on the interna-


                                               35
tional extensive margin. In this group we also notice (i) some potential EU members,, e.g.,
Northern Macedonia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, that may have already gained access to
the large European market in preparation for joining the EU; and (ii) some old members
such as Ireland and Denmark.
   The countries in the third group in Figure 2 have enjoyed significant positive effects from
European integration. Almost all of these countries are recent EU members, e.g., Slovenia,
Poland, Bulgaria, Slovakia, Estonia, and Croatia. Integration within the EU is the natural
explanation for the large effects for the new members. The large gains for Iceland are
probably due to the fact that this country is heavily integrated with the EU (through its
membership in European Economic Area and the Schengen Agreement). Spain is also in
this group, and we find the estimates for this country particularly interesting because, as
discussed in the data description section, and as can be seen from Table 1, Spain is among the
countries with the highest and the most stable domestic extensive margin indexes. Thus, in
combination with the stable domestic extensive margin, the large and positive estimates for
Spain can plausibly be interpreted as absolute positive effects of the impact of globalization
on the extensive margin for this country.
   Finally, the group of countries that have enjoyed the largest effects of globalization and
integration within Europe includes some countries that joined the EU during, or close to the
period of investigation (e.g., Romania, Latvia and Lithuania) as well as the Netherlands and
Portugal. A tentative implication from Figure 2 is that the biggest winners from the impact
of globalization on the extensive margin within Europe tend to be the smaller and poorer
European economies, especially those that recently joined the European Union. The third
group and even the second group also contain such economies, so more detailed analysis
is required to explain the variation. Moreover, the fourth group contains the Netherlands,
relatively small and rich, and a founding member of European integration. A full analysis
requires more development of the structural implications of the theory. Nevertheless, this
initial exploration yields an encouraging message with clear implications for the impact of


                                             36
European integration for development and inequality.
   To test the robustness of our results, we reproduce the results from Table 3 with alterna-
tive estimators and with alternative samples. For clarity and simplicity of exposition, we do
not report all results but, instead, we focus on one representative country from each of the
three groups that we identified in Figure 2, and we present our findings graphically. Specif-
ically, we chose Sweden, Ireland, and Portugal. Figure 3 visualizes the estimates that we
obtain with the four alternative estimators. Panel A presents our main estimates from Table
3, which are obtained with the FLEX estimator. The estimates in Panel B are obtained
with the Tobit estimator. PPML estimates appear in Panel C. Finally, the results in Panel
D are obtained with the OLS estimator. Based on the estimates in Figure 3, we conclude
that our main findings about the (heterogeneous) impact of globalization on the extensive
margin are robust to the use of alternative estimators.
   The results in Figures 4 and 5 are obtained with alternative estimating samples. In
particular, Panel A of Figure 4 visualizes estimates from our "Exporter-based sample" as
described in the Data section. Panel B instead uses the "Importer-based sample" . The
results in Panel C are based only on the positive observations in the main sample. The
estimates in Panel D are obtained with three-year interval data. The estimates in Panel E
use the "Conservative-product" sample. Finally, the results in Panel F are obtained with
the "Extended-country" sample. Based on the estimates in Figure 4, we conclude that our
main findings about the (heterogeneous) impact of globalization on the extensive margin are
robust to the use of these alternative estimating samples.
   Figure 5 reports estimates that are based on two samples with alternative definitions of
the domestic extensive margin. Specifically, the estimates in Panel A of Figure 5 are obtained
with our main sample, where the DEM is constructed directly from the raw PRODCOM data,
while the results in Panel B are obtained from a sample where the DEM is constructed as the
total number of products that are exported based on the COMEXT export, as described in
Section 3. Two main findings stand out from Figure 5. First, we see that the estimates and


                                             37
their evolution over time is comparable, between the two panels, for Ireland and for Portugal.
However, second, the evolution of the globalization estimates for Sweden is quite different.
The natural explanation for this result is, of course, the difference in the construction of
the domestic extensive margin. Comparison between the evolution of DEM for Sweden
depending on the construction method reveals that the number of products that Sweden
produces has fallen in both cases. However, the decrease is almost three times larger (i.e., by
188 vs. 65 products) in the export-based DEM sample. This explains the difference between
the two panels and points to the importance of proper measurement of the domestic extensive
margin.


4.3    On the Heterogeneous Impact of EU Membership

We conclude the empirical analysis with an investigation of the extensive margin effects of
European integration on the new EU members. Given the period of investigation, we focus on
three countries, including Bulgaria and Romania, which both joined in 2007 (the year before
the start of our sample), and Croatia, which joined in 2013. Even though the sample of new
EU members is small, we find the analysis instructive both from a methodological and from
a policy perspective. In order to emphasize some important aspects of our specifications and
corresponding estimates, we develop the analysis sequentially, in three specifications. The
estimates are presented in Table 4. Each of the three panels in Table 4 reports estimates
from a different specification. The dependent variable is always the number of products sold
from exporter i to importer j , including domestic sales, and all estimates are obtained with
the Flex estimator of Santos Silva et al. (2014). All specifications include exporter-time,
importer-time, and pair fixed effects, whose estimates are omitted for brevity. The difference
between the three panels is in the set of covariates.
   The results in Panel A correspond to the estimates from our main specification from
column (1) of Table 2, which are obtained from equation (7). The difference between the
results in Tables 2 and 4 is that, in addition to the common globalization effects from Table


                                              38
2, we now introduce a set of border dummies for trade between the three new EU members
and the old EU members. For brevity, we only report the estimates of the globalization
effects on the extensive margin of trade between the new and the old EU members.28 By
construction, these estimates should be interpreted as deviations from the corresponding
common globalization estimates for the same year. The main message from the results in
Panel A is that we do not see stronger additional effects for trade between the new and the
old EU members until in the last three years in our sample.
       The results in Panel B Table 4 are obtained from the same specification as in Panel A,
with the only difference that we allow for asymmetric/directional extensive margin effects
for imports to the new from the old EU members (Imp.EU ) vs. exports from the new EU
to the old EU members (Exp.EU ).
       The results in Panel B tell a clear and interesting story. Specifically, we see that there
was a significant increase in the extensive margin of trade from the old to the new EU mem-
bers, but not the other way around. One implication, from a methodological perspective,
is that the common/symmetric effects from Panel A are masking significant directional het-
erogeneity. The implication from a policy perspective is that the new EU members were not
able to position their (possibly inferior) products very well in the developed West-European
market, however, the new EU members welcomed the significant increase in varieties from
Western Europe. We remind the reader that the negative estimates in column (3) should
be interpreted as deviations from the common globalization effects. Thus, they imply that
(i) there have still been some gains for the exports from the new to the old EU members,
and (ii) that the effects on the exports from the new to the old EU members have been
converging steadily toward the average common effects.
       Finally, the results in Panel C replicate the directional borders specification from Panel
B, but in addition we allow for country-specific effects for each of the three new EU members.
For consistency, this specification allows for country-specific border effects as in Table 3. The
  28
    The estimates of common globalization effects from Panel A of Table 2 are not statistically different
from the corresponding estimates in column (1) of Table 2, and they are available by request.


                                                   39
results in Panel C confirm the main conclusions from Panel B, i.e., that for each country
the effects on the extensive margin on the imports to the new from the old EU members are
significantly larger than the average effects, while the effects on the exports from the new to
the old EU members are small than the average but converging toward them.
    Two interesting patterns are revealed in Panel C. First, while the estimates for the imports
of Bulgaria and Romania are very similar, the effects on the extensive margin for Romanian
exports are more favorable. Second, in the first three years the estimates on EU exports
to Croatia are actually negative and marginally insignificant. This is an important result
because these are exactly the years when Croatia was not an EU member. After that, we see
that the results for Croatia mimic the evolution of the estimates for Bulgaria and Romania.
This confirms our implicit assumption that a significant fraction of the extensive margin
effects for the new EU members have been triggered by their accession to the European
Union.



5     Conclusion

This paper develops a short-run gravity theory of the extensive margin of production and
trade and introduces the concept of the domestic extensive margin (DEM). To demonstrate
our methods, we utilize the domestic extensive margin to quantify the impact of globaliza-
tion and European integration on the extensive margin of trade for 32 countries over the
period 2008-2018. The new DEM concept and the accompanying analysis reveal a series
of meaningful opportunities for future academic research and policy impact. We group this
opportunities in four related areas, including: (i) theoretical contributions; (ii) new data de-
velopment; (iii) the construction of new extensive margin and export diversification indexes;
and (iv) a series of applications. We elaborate on each of these directions with some specific
examples next.
    On the theory front, we see potential to use DEM and its relation to the international



                                               40
extensive margin in order to challenge the standard assumption in the trade literature that,
before exporting a given product, firms are already necessarily selling this product domesti-
cally. This idea is motivated by anecdotal evidence that points to alternative scenarios, e.g.,
where some products are simultaneously offered for sale on the domestic and on the foreign
markets, or even when products are first exported and only then they are sold domestically.
We believe that, in combination with theory, our new dataset that combines the international
and the domestic extensive margin can provide interesting insights in this direction.
       To perform the empirical analysis we constructed a dataset covering the domestic (and
international) extensive margin for the European economies. We see significant potential
benefits from expanding the dataset to cover all possible countries in the world. For example,
one clear advantage of such database would be that it will include the poorer and less-
developed economies, where export diversification and the extensive margin are particularly
important. We believe that the creation of such extended dataset is feasible and, in fact,
significantly easier and more reliable as compared to a corresponding dataset on the intensive
margin of trade. The reason is that in order to construct the the domestic extensive margin,
all we need is an indicator on whether a given product is produced or not, and we do not
need information on the actual volume of production (or trade), which is more problematic
for various reasons and especially at the very disaggregated levels.
       In addition to the Domestic Extensive Margin Index introduced in this paper (as the
ratio between the number of domestically produced products and the total number of possible
products that a country can produce), we see value in the construction of two related indexes.
The first one is an Export Diversification Index, defined as the ratio between the number of
exported products and the number of domestically produced products. We believe that this
index will complement the existing Export Diversification (or Concentration) indexes, which
are defined only based on export data and without taking into account the domestic extensive
margin.29 The second one is an Extensive Margin Openness to Trade Index, defined as the
  29
    See https://wits.worldbank.org/wits/wits/witshelp/Content/Utilities/e1.trade indicators.htm   and
https://www.imf.org/external/datamapper/datasets/SPRLU.


                                                 41
ratio between the sum of the number of exported products and the number of imported
products divided by the number of domestically produced products. We see this index as
the extensive margin counterpart of the standard Openness to Trade (OTT) index that is
widely used in both the academic literature and for policy purposes. Consistent with our
theory, each of these indexes can be constructed at the sectoral level.
   Finally, our methods offer opportunities to evaluate a series of exciting applications.
For example, the new DEM dataset calls for an analysis of the impact of the determinants
of the domestic extensive margin. We believe that an important contribution in this area
would be to use the data on the domestic extensive margin to perform a direct test for one
of the main implications of the seminal theory of Melitz (2003), according to which trade
liberalization leads to exit of the less productive firms. A descriptive look at our DEM data
offers supportive preliminary evidence for the general validity Melitz's theory, but also points
to potentially interesting heterogeneous effects.
   In addition, our methods allow for an evaluation of the impact of non-discriminatory
trade policies (e.g, export subsidies, export promotion, etc.) and country-specific character-
istics (e.g., institutional quality, country-specific taxes, etc.) on export diversification and
the extensive margin of trade. It is important to emphasize that without the domestic ex-
tensive margin one cannot identify the effects of any non-discriminatory trade policies and
country-specific characteristics on the international extensive margin in a properly specified
econometric model, i.e., with exporter(-time) and importer(-time) fixed effects that would
control for the theory-motivated multilateral resistances.




                                              42
References
Agnosteva, Delina E., James E. Anderson, and Yoto V. Yotov, "Intra-national Trade
 Costs: Assaying Regional Frictions," European Economic Review, 2019, 112, 32­50.

Anderson, James E., "A Theoretical Foundation for the Gravity Equation," American Economic
 Review, 1979, 69 (1), 106­116.

  and Eric van Wincoop, "Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border Puzzle," American
  Economic Review, 2003, 93 (1), 170­192.

Anderson, James E. and Yoto V. Yotov, "Short Run Gravity," Journal of International
 Economics, 2020, 126 (September).

Arkolakis, Costas, "Market Penetration Costs and the New Consumers Margin in International
 Trade," Journal of Political Economy, 2010, 118 (6), 1151­1199.

  , Arnaud Costinot, and Andr´ es Rodr´ iguez-Clare, "New Trade Models, Same Old Gains?,"
  American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (1), 94­130.

Berthou, A. and L. Fontagne, "The Euro effects on the firm and product-level trade margins:
 evidence from France," Working Paper # 2008-21, CEPII, 2008.

Besedes, Tibor and Thomas J. Prusa, "Product differentiation and duration of US import
 trade," Journal of International Economics, December 2006, 70 (2), 339­358.

Beverelli, Cosimo, Simon Neumueller, and Robert Teh, "Export Diversification Effects of
 the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement," World Development, 2015, 76 (C), 293­310.

Cadot, Olivier, C´ eline Carr`
                             ere, and Vanessa Strauss-Kahn, "Export Diversification:
 What's behind the Hump?," The Review of Economics and Statistics, May 2011, 93 (2), 590­605.

Chaney, Thomas, "Distorted Gravity: The Intensive and Extensive Margins of International
 Trade," American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (4), 1707­1721.

  , "The Network Structure of International Trade," American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (11),
  3600­34.

Coe, D., A. Subramanian, N. Tamirisa, and R. Bhavnani, "The Missing Globalization
 Puzzle," IMF Working Paper No. 171, 2002.

Crucini, Mario J. and J. Scott Davis, "Distribution capital and the short- and long-run import
  demand elasticity," Journal of International Economics, 2016, 100 (C), 203­219.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, "Technology, Geography and Trade," Econometrica,
  2002, 70 (5), 1741­1779.

Felbermayr, Gabriel and Wilhelm Kohler, "Exploring the Intensive and Extensive Margins
  of World Trade," Review of World Economics, 2006, 142 (4), 642­674.

Gourieroux, Christian, Alain Monfort, and Alain Trognon, "Pseudo Maximum Likelihood
 Methods: Applications to Poisson Models," Econometrica, May 1984, 52 (3), 701­720.


                                             43
Gurevich, Tamara and Peter Herman, "The Dynamic Gravity Dataset: 1948-2016," USITC
 Working Paper 2018-02-A, 2018.

Head, K., T. Mayer, and J. Ries, "The Erosion of Colonial Trade Linkages after Independence,"
 Journal of International Economics, 2010, 81 (1), 1­14.

Heid, Benedikt, Mario Larch, and Yoto V. Yotov, "A Simple Method to Estimate the Effects
 of Non-discriminatory Trade Policy within Structural Gravity Models," Canadian Journal of
 Economics, forthcoming.

Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz, and Yona Rubinstein, "Trading Partners and Trading
 Volumes," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2008, 123 (2), 441­487.

  , Oleg Itskhoki, and Stephen Redding, "Wages, Unemployment and Inequality with Het-
  erogeneous Firms and Workers," NBER Working Paper No. 14122, 2008.

Hummels, D. and Peter J. Klenow, "The Variety and Quality of a Nation's Exports," American
 Economic Review, 2005, 95 (3), 704­723.

Melitz, Marc J., "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
 Productivity," Econometrica, 2003, 71 (6), 1695­1725.

Mion, Giordano and Luca David Opromolla, "Managers' mobility, trade performance, and
 wages," Journal of International Economics, 2014, 94 (1), 85­101.

Papke, Leslie and Jeffrey Wooldridge, "Econometric Methods for Fractional Response Vari-
  ables with an Application to 401(K) Plan Participation Rates," Journal of Applied Econometrics,
  1996, 11 (6), 619­32.

Persson, Maria, "Trade facilitation and the extensive margin," The Journal of International
  Trade & Economic Development, August 2013, 22 (5), 658­693.

Ramondo, Natalia, Andr´    es Rodr´ iguez-Clare, and Milagro Saborio-Rodriguez, "Trade,
 Domestic Frictions, and Scale Effects," American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (10), 3159­3184.

Redding, Stephen J., "Theories of Heterogeneous Firms and Trade," Annual Review of Eco-
 nomics, September 2011, 3 (1), 77­105.

Sampson, Thomas, "Dynamic Selection: An Idea Flows Theory of Entry, Trade, and Growth,"
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016, 131 (1), 315­380.

Santos Silva, J. M. C., "A score test for non-nested hypotheses with applications to discrete
  data models," Journal of Applied Econometrics, 2001, 16 (5), 577­597.

Santos Silva, J.M.C. and Silvana Tenreyro, "The Log of Gravity," Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 2006, 88 (4), 641­658.

   and     , "Further Simulation Evidence on the Performance of the Poisson Pseudo-Maximum
  Likelihood Estimator," Economics Letters, 2011, 112 (2), 220­222.

  ,   , and Kehai Wei, "Estimating the extensive margin of trade," Journal of International
  Economics, 2014, 93 (1), 67­75.

                                               44
Yotov, Yoto V., "A Simple Solution to the Distance Puzzle in International Trade," Economics
  Letters, 2012, 117 (3), 794­798.




                                            45
                                             Table 1: The Domestic Extensive Margin, 2008-2018
     Country Name                  ISO     2008    2009      2010     2011    2012    2013    2014     2015    2016    2017    2018    %DEM         %IEM
     Austria                       AT       0.51    0.51     0.51     0.51    0.51     0.51    0.51    0.51     0.52   0.52     0.52      1.69         -6.32
     Bosnia and Herzegovina        BA         .       .        .      0.19    0.19     0.19    0.19    0.19    0.20    0.19     0.19      3.31         -1.05
     Belgium                       BE       0.49    0.49     0.48     0.48    0.49     0.49    0.49    0.49     0.49   0.50     0.50      2.63         -6.31
     Bulgaria                      BG       0.48    0.48     0.48     0.48    0.48     0.48    0.49    0.49     0.49   0.49     0.49      3.01          1.74
     Czechia                       CZ       0.65    0.65     0.65     0.65    0.65     0.66    0.65    0.66     0.66   0.66     0.66      2.05         -5.77
     Germany                       DE      0.90     0.89     0.89     0.89    0.90     0.90    0.90    0.90     0.90   0.90     0.90      0.69         -5.69
     Denmark                       DK      0.51     0.51     0.51     0.51    0.51     0.51    0.52    0.52    0.52    0.53     0.53      4.25         -5.56
     Estonia                       EE       0.32    0.32     0.33     0.34    0.34     0.34    0.34    0.34     0.33   0.34     0.34      5.47          2.84
     Spain                          ES      0.84    0.84     0.84     0.84    0.84     0.84    0.84    0.83    0.84    0.84     0.84      -0.21        -6.47
     Finland                        FI      0.53    0.52     0.52     0.52    0.51     0.51    0.51    0.51     0.50   0.51     0.51      -2.91        -4.39
     France                        FR       0.82    0.82     0.82     0.82    0.83     0.83    0.83    0.83    0.84    0.84     0.84      2.98         -6.84
     United Kingdom                GB      0.82     0.81     0.81     0.81    0.81     0.81    0.81    0.81     0.81   0.80     0.80      -2.08        -6.47
     Greece                        GR      0.33     0.33     0.33     0.32    0.32     0.34    0.34    0.34     0.34   0.35     0.35      6.17         -2.98
     Croatia                       HR       0.42    0.42     0.41     0.41      .      0.40    0.41    0.40     0.39   0.40     0.39      -6.60         5.19
     Hungary                       HU      0.52     0.52     0.52     0.53    0.55     0.55    0.56    0.57     0.57   0.57     0.57      10.94         6.55
     Ireland                        IE      0.29    0.29     0.30     0.29    0.29     0.29    0.29    0.29     0.29   0.30     0.30      1.94         -1.93
     Iceland                        IS      0.07    0.07     0.07     0.07    0.07     0.07    0.07    0.07    0.07    0.07     0.07      1.25          2.63
     Italy                          IT      0.85    0.86     0.86     0.86    0.86     0.85    0.85    0.84    0.85    0.86     0.83      -2.13        -6.66
     Lithuania                      LT     0.37    0.38      0.36     0.37    0.38     0.38    0.37    0.39    0.38    0.39     0.40      8.00          0.79




46
     Latvia                         LV     0.20     0.20     0.20     0.20    0.20     0.20    0.20    0.20    0.21    0.21     0.21      2.12          3.47
     Montenegro                    ME         .       .        .      0.03    0.02     0.02    0.02    0.02    0.02    0.02     0.02     -15.58        53.23
     North Macedonia               MK         .       .        .      0.11    0.11     0.11    0.11    0.11     0.11   0.11     0.11      1.40         13.15
     Netherlands                   NL      0.47     0.47     0.47     0.47    0.47     0.47    0.47    0.47     0.50   0.51     0.51      8.49         -6.33
     Norway                        NO       0.22    0.22     0.22     0.22    0.21     0.22    0.22    0.21     0.22   0.22     0.22      -0.47        -5.09
     Poland                         PL      0.74    0.75     0.75     0.75    0.75     0.75    0.75    0.75     0.75   0.76     0.75      2.23         -5.33
     Portugal                      PT       0.59    0.58     0.58     0.58    0.58     0.53    0.54    0.53     0.53   0.54     0.54      -9.57        -2.72
     Romania                       RO      0.42     0.42     0.43     0.43    0.43     0.43    0.43    0.43    0.43    0.44     0.44      2.88          2.35
     Sweden                         SE      0.46    0.47     0.46     0.47    0.47     0.47    0.47    0.47     0.48   0.48     0.48      2.99         -5.49
     Slovenia                       SI      0.36    0.36     0.36     0.36    0.36     0.36    0.36    0.36     0.36   0.37     0.38      6.52         -2.15
     Slovakia                       SK      0.31    0.31     0.31     0.31    0.31     0.32    0.31    0.31     0.31   0.33     0.32      3.23          2.58
     Turkey                        TR      0.44     0.44     0.45       .       .        .       .       .        .      .        .       0.95         -4.36
     Serbia                         XS        .       .        .      0.03    0.25     0.25    0.25    0.26    0.26    0.27     0.27      7.54          3.56
     Total Number of Products        .     3,890   3,877 3,860       3,827 3,818 3,816        3,814 3,811      3,811 3,756     3,756      -3.44           .
     Notes: This table reports the domestic extensive margin (DEM) indexes for the countries in the PRODCOM database over the period 2008-2018. The
     indexes are constructed as the ratio between the number of products that are produced by a country in a given year, Di,t , over the total number of
     possible products that could be produced in the same year, Ni,t : DEMi,t = Di,t /Ni,t . The total number of products are reported in the last row of
     the table. The second to last column of the table reports percentage changes in the DEM index between the first and the last year for which data were
     available. The exception is Serbia, for which the initial year for the percentage change in the past column is 2012. The last column of the table reports
     the percentage changes between 2008 and 2018 in the international extensive margin numbers, %IEM , which are constructed as the total number of
     exported products for each year. See text for further details.
                           Table 2: Globalization/European Integration and the Extensive Margin of Trade, 2008-2018
                     A. Main            B. Alternative Estimators                              C. Alternative Samples
                      FLEX         TOBIT           PPML         OLS     EXPRT         IMPRT       PSTV       INTLRV        PROD         CNTRY      DEMEXP NOOUTL NO DEM
                        (1)            (2)            (3)        (4)        (5)          (6)        (7)          (8)          (9)           (10)       (11)          (12)       (13)
     BRDR 2009        -0.009         -4.560         -0.000     -0.012     0.006        -0.026     -0.009       -0.027       -0.010        -0.011       0.017        0.017
                     (0.009)        (7.514)        (0.006)    (0.011)    (0.011)    (0.008)      (0.009)     (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.011)     (0.011)      (0.011)
     BRDR 2010        0.072         42.212          0.034       0.040     0.082        0.062      0.072                     0.068         0.070       -0.046       -0.045
                    (0.025)       (14.843)       (0.011)     (0.018)   (0.020)       (0.035)+   (0.025)                   (0.025)      (0.022)       (0.034)      (0.033)
     BRDR 2011        0.117         71.679          0.051       0.067     0.133        0.104      0.117                     0.122         0.106       0.064        0.065
                    (0.030)       (17.690)       (0.014)    (0.025)    (0.025)      (0.040)     (0.030)                   (0.030)      (0.027)      (0.034)+     (0.034)+
     BRDR 2012        0.154        102.959          0.067       0.076     0.175        0.141      0.154        0.146        0.171          0.142       0.292        0.289
                    (0.034)       (19.107)       (0.016)     (0.031)   (0.033)      (0.040)     (0.034)      (0.042)      (0.033)      (0.031)      (0.043)     (0.042)
     BRDR 2013        0.199        129.159          0.088       0.129     0.214        0.191      0.199                     0.224         0.189       0.326        0.323
                    (0.040)       (22.612)       (0.019)    (0.035)    (0.039)      (0.045)     (0.040)                   (0.039)      (0.037)      (0.044)     (0.044)
     BRDR 2014        0.229        145.953          0.102       0.150     0.255        0.212      0.229                     0.256         0.221       0.366        0.362
                    (0.043)       (24.266)       (0.021)    (0.036)    (0.043)      (0.047)     (0.043)                   (0.043)      (0.040)      (0.048)     (0.047)
     BRDR 2015        0.287        177.271          0.129       0.204     0.319        0.265      0.287        0.274        0.320          0.279       0.409        0.405
                    (0.047)       (26.322)       (0.025)    (0.040)    (0.049)      (0.051)     (0.047)      (0.052)      (0.048)      (0.044)      (0.048)     (0.047)
     BRDR 2016        0.325        198.697          0.147       0.255     0.367        0.296      0.325                     0.370         0.318       0.483        0.477
                    (0.052)       (28.392)       (0.029)    (0.047)    (0.055)      (0.055)     (0.052)                   (0.054)      (0.049)      (0.049)     (0.048)
     BRDR 2017        0.429        254.843          0.186       0.314     0.456        0.422      0.429                     0.495         0.422       0.399        0.492
                    (0.072)       (40.638)       (0.037)    (0.053)    (0.066)      (0.095)     (0.072)                   (0.081)      (0.071)      (0.077)     (0.066)




47
     BRDR 2018        0.456        268.345          0.200       0.339     0.479        0.454      0.456        0.466        0.525          0.449       0.579        0.574
                    (0.065)       (37.192)       (0.038)    (0.057)    (0.065)      (0.082)     (0.065)      (0.085)      (0.072)      (0.059)      (0.063)     (0.062)
     WTO               0.390        -16.522         0.396      0.389      0.391        0.373      0.390                     0.364         0.379       -0.032       -0.026
                    (0.054)        (15.460)      (0.051)    (0.070)    (0.059)      (0.050)     (0.054)                   (0.051)      (0.053)       (0.093)      (0.073)
     EIA              -0.067        -24.227         -0.063     -0.028     -0.131        0.004     -0.067        0.049       -0.051        -0.079      -0.087       -0.084      -.0651
                     (0.047)       (24.562)       (0.032)     (0.093)   (0.063)       (0.051)    (0.047)      (0.067)      (0.047)      (0.035)     (0.031)     (0.030)      (0.048)
     N                 9656           9656           9656       9656       9656         9656       9656         4284         9641         22807       12984        12743
     R2                                                        0.988
     Notes: This table reports gravity estimates of the impact of globalization/European integration on the extensive margin of trade. The dependent variable in all columns, except
     column (4), is the number of products sold from exporter i to importer j , including domestic sales. All estimates are obtained with exporter-time, importer-time, and pair fixed
     effects, whose estimates are omitted for brevity. Column (1) reports estimates that are obtained with the Flex estimator of Santos Silva et al. (2014). The estimator in column
     (2) is Tobit. The results in column (3) are obtained with PPML. Column (4) employs the OLS estimator, and the dependent variable here is the log of the number of products.
     Columns (5) to (10) employ the Flex estimator, but rely on alternative estimating samples. The dependent variable in column (5) is based on the original export values, where
     we have replaced the missing export observations with import values, i.e., we employ the "Exporter-based sample" as described in the Data section. Column (6) instead uses the
     import values as the base to construct the depended variable and replaces the missing import values with export values. i.e., we employ the "Importer-based sample" . Column (7)
     reports estimates based only on the positive observations in the main sample. The estimates in column (8) are obtained with three-year interval data. The results in column (9)
     are obtained with the "Conservative-product" sample. The results in column (10) are obtained with the "Extended-country" sample. Finally, the estimates in columns (11)-(13)
     are obtained with samples where the domestic extensive margin is constructed as the total number of products exported by this country to any other country in the world. The
     estimates in columns (11) are based on the our main estimating sample with the alternative domestic extensive margin observations. The estimates in column (12) are the same
     as those in column (11) but without four outliers (Cyprus, Malta, Iceland, and Montenegro). Finally, the estimates in the last column (13) are obtained from a sample that does
     not include observations on the domestic extensive margin. Standard errors are clustered by country pair and are reported in parentheses. + p < 0.10, * p < .05, ** p < .01. See
     text for further details.
                             Figure 1: Export-based DEM Indexes. Percentage Changes, 2008-2018
               100
    Percentage Change DEM
       0       -50   50




                            2008         2010          2012                   2014             2016                  2018
                                                                   Year

Notes: This figure visualizes the country-specific percentage changes in the domestic extensive margin indexes that are con-
structed based on export data. See text for discussion and further details.




                                                              48
Table 3: Country-specific Globalization Effects on the Extensive Margin of Trade, 2008-2018
     ISO      2009        2010        2011         2012        2013        2014       2015        2016        2017        2018
     AT      0.004       0.019       -0.018       -0.060      -0.057      -0.045     -0.055      -0.092      -0.133      -0.133
             (.013)      (.016)      (.021)      (.028)*     (.029)*      (.035)     (.036)     (.039)*    (.046)**    (.047)**
     BA                                           0.149       0.199        0.301      0.300       0.288       0.470       0.389
                                                 (.059)*    (.064)**    (.066)**   (.065)**    (.073)**    (.112)**    (.097)**
     BE       -0.013      -0.029      -0.026      -0.056      -0.060      -0.019     -0.046      -0.015      -0.083      -0.055
              (.012)      (.019)      (.026)      (.034)    (.032)+       (.035)     (.038)      (.041)      (.052)      (.053)
     BG       -0.071      0.044        0.262       0.350       0.333       0.391      0.474      0.510        0.587       0.675
            (.023)**       (.04)    (.047)**    (.049)**    (.047)**     (.05)**    (.05)**    (.048)**    (.055)**    (.061)**
     CZ        0.001      -0.009       0.035       0.103      0.139        0.182      0.261       0.334       0.366       0.428
              (.014)      (.019)      (.024)    (.031)**    (.032)**    (.034)**   (.041)**    (.044)**    (.053)**    (.055)**
     DE       0.361        0.297       0.017       0.152       0.197       0.168      0.085      0.009       -0.065      -0.036
            (.036)**    (.035)**      (.051)    (.053)**    (.055)**    (.058)**     (.054)      (.054)      (.063)      (.061)
     DK       -0.007       0.518       0.541       0.450       0.429       0.450      0.474      0.408       0.367        0.423
              (.012)    (.065)**    (.065)**    (.067)**    (.064)**    (.066)**   (.064)**    (.057)**    (.064)**    (.063)**
     EE       -0.057       0.031       0.146      0.222       0.329        0.313      0.425       0.550       0.641       0.725
             (.023)*      (.036)    (.039)**    (.052)**    (.061)**    (.065)**   (.077)**    (.081)**    (.092)**    (.102)**
     ES       -0.031       0.019       0.155       0.259       0.370       0.465      0.548      0.624       0.676        0.743
            (.011)**      (.013)    (.032)**    (.041)**    (.048)**    (.054)**    (.06)**    (.066)**    (.074)**    (.079)**
     FI       -0.035      -0.075      -0.057      -0.021      -0.027      -0.060     -0.023       0.043       0.060       0.101
            (.011)**    (.018)**     (.026)*      (.032)      (.034)    (.034)+      (.038)      (.037)      (.044)     (.048)*
     FR       -0.067      -0.025      -0.081      -0.120      -0.122      -0.097     -0.068      -0.063      -0.061      -0.048
            (.012)**      (.026)     (.035)*     (.048)*     (.048)*     (.05)+      (.052)      (.055)      (.066)      (.067)
     GB       -0.002      0.095        0.138       0.150       0.189       0.227      0.254      0.297        0.347       0.400
              (.015)    (.021)**     (.03)**    (.043)**    (.046)**    (.052)**   (.056)**    (.059)**     (.07)**    (.073)**
     GR       -0.010      -0.033      -0.027      -0.042      -0.090      -0.042     -0.017      0.038        0.116       0.207
              (.017)      (.028)      (.038)      (.042)     (.045)*      (.049)     (.053)      (.054)     (.058)*    (.066)**
     HR       -0.032      0.013        0.142                  0.275       0.149      0.334       0.539       0.639       0.788
            (.019)+       (.031)    (.048)**                (.063)**    (.077)+    (.072)**    (.077)**    (.085)**    (.088)**
     HU        0.050       0.244       0.224      0.199       0.242        0.237      0.278       0.326       0.297       0.355
            (.014)**     (.02)**    (.029)**    (.032)**    (.034)**    (.037)**   (.037)**    (.041)**     (.05)**    (.053)**
     IE       -0.002      -0.049       0.004      0.123        0.188       0.179      0.242       0.289       0.341       0.439
              (.018)      (.032)      (.036)    (.036)**    (.036)**    (.037)**   (.038)**    (.043)**    (.051)**    (.048)**
     IS       -0.196      -0.251      -0.145      -0.044       0.041       0.102      0.161      0.357        0.706       0.490
            (.055)**     (.06)**      (.091)      (.107)      (.106)      (.095)     (.104)    (.097)**    (.167)**    (.147)**
     IT       -0.079      -0.001      -0.023      -0.021      -0.006       0.019      0.106       0.091       0.048       0.070
            (.013)**      (.022)      (.032)      (.039)      (.043)      (.046)    (.049)*    (.052)+       (.061)      (.064)
     LT       -0.032       0.136       0.276       0.328      0.450        0.585      0.671       0.770       0.831       0.895
               (.02)    (.028)**    (.036)**    (.049)**    (.063)**    (.068)**   (.081)**    (.082)**     (.09)**    (.098)**
     LV        0.007       0.189       0.344       0.445       0.507       0.541      0.649      0.706       0.817        0.970
              (.029)    (.038)**    (.053)**    (.079)**    (.081)**    (.083)**   (.089)**    (.093)**    (.106)**    (.114)**
     ME                                           0.726       0.683       0.860      0.846       0.964       1.556       0.900
                                                (.149)**    (.087)**    (.125)**     (.1)**    (.116)**    (.283)**    (.114)**
     MK                                           0.138       0.208       0.254      0.336       0.457       0.585       0.402
                                                 (.059)*    (.076)**    (.089)**   (.091)**    (.094)**    (.097)**     (.12)**
     NL       -0.019      -0.007     -0.026       -0.078      -0.099      -0.093      0.068      -0.047       1.652       0.962
            (.011)+       (.017)     (.025)      (.032)*    (.034)**    (.036)**     (.043)      (.043)     (.13)**    (.106)**
     NO       -0.014      -0.006      0.079        0.149      0.184        0.263     0.255       0.262        0.263       0.188
              (.031)      (.035)     (.049)      (.062)*    (.061)**    (.067)**   (.061)**    (.065)**    (.069)**     (.075)*
     PL       -0.012       0.057      0.141        0.203      0.262        0.378     0.473       0.481        0.484       0.600
              (.011)    (.016)**    (.022)**    (.031)**    (.035)**    (.042)**   (.052)**    (.055)**    (.062)**    (.067)**
     PT       -0.020       0.113      0.189       0.294       0.539        0.532      0.659       0.755       0.870       0.918
              (.014)    (.021)**    (.029)**    (.038)**    (.045)**    (.048)**   (.055)**    (.057)**    (.069)**    (.068)**
     RO        0.110       0.269      0.372       0.453        0.511       0.607      0.673      0.704        0.727       1.006
            (.025)**    (.037)**    (.042)**    (.048)**    (.048)**    (.052)**   (.056)**    (.058)**    (.064)**    (.071)**
     SE       -0.063      -0.046     -0.048       -0.062      -0.071      -0.058     -0.065      -0.097      -0.106      -0.054
             (.01)**     (.018)*    (.025)+     (.032)+      (.033)*    (.035)+    (.037)+      (.039)*     (.045)*      (.046)
     SI        0.003       0.068      0.173       0.236        0.398       0.360      0.421      0.465        0.513       0.502
              (.014)    (.021)**    (.038)**    (.038)**    (.047)**     (.04)**   (.038)**    (.041)**    (.049)**    (.053)**
     SK        0.048       0.138      0.207       0.286       0.297        0.350      0.411       0.475       0.464       0.687
            (.018)**     (.02)**    (.028)**    (.034)**    (.037)**    (.044)**   (.048)**    (.049)**    (.055)**    (.067)**
     TR       -0.026      0.112
               (.02)     (.03)**
     XS                                                      0.077        0.183      0.226       0.303       0.438       0.383
                                                            (.031)*     (.035)**   (.041)**    (.051)**    (.072)**    (.075)**
     Notes: This table reports country-specific estimates of the impact of globalization/European integration on the extensive
     margin of trade. The estimates are obtained from equation (7). The dependent variable is the number of products sold from
     exporter i to importer j , including domestic sales and we use the Flex estimator of Santos Silva et al. (2014). The estimates
     are obtained with exporter-time, importer-time, and pair fixed effects, whose estimates are omitted for brevity. The two-letter
     country codes are listed in column (1) and the corresponding country names appear in column (1) of Table 1. Standard errors
     are clustered by country pair and are reported in parentheses. + p < 0.10, * p < .05, ** p < .01. See text for further details.




                                                                   49
       Figure 2: Globalization and the Extensive Margin. Country-specific Effects, 2018


                                    Country-specific Globalization Effects, 2018
                       Austria        Austria
                     Belgium            Belgium
                     Sweden             Sweden
                       France             France
                   Germany              Germany
                          Italy                               Italy
                      Finland                                   Finland
                      Norway                                         Norway
                      Greece                                          Greece
                     Hungary                                                    Hungary
                        Serbia                                                   Serbia
     Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                      Bosnia and Herzegovina
             United Kingdom                                                       United Kingdom
            North Macedonia                                                       North Macedonia
                    Denmark                                                        Denmark
                     Czechia                                                       Czechia
                       Ireland                                                     Ireland
                      Iceland                                                          Iceland
                    Slovenia                                                            Slovenia
                       Poland                                                                Poland
                     Bulgaria                                                                    Bulgaria
                     Slovakia                                                                    Slovakia
                      Estonia                                                                      Estonia
                         Spain                                                                      Spain
                      Croatia                                                                         Croatia
                    Lithuania                                                                              Lithuania
                 Montenegro                                                                                 Montenegro
                     Portugal                                                                                Portugal
                 Netherlands                                                                                   Netherlands
                        Latvia                                                                                 Latvia
                    Romania                                                                                      Romania

                                    -.3          -.1      .1      .3       .5       .7                        .9          1.1
                                                        Coutnry-Specific Gravity Estimate

Notes: This figure visualizes the country-specific estimates of the globalization effects on the extensive margin in 2018 for all
countries in our sample. The estimates are obtained from equation (7) and appear in the last column of Table 3. See text for
discussion and further details.




                                                              50
                              Figure 3: Country-specific Estimates, Robustness: Alternative Estimators
                                           A. Main Estimates: FLEX                                                                                      B. Robustness: TOBIT




                                                                                                        100 200 300 400 500 600
           1
  Gravity Estimates




                                                                                                          Gravity Estimates
            .5




                                                                                                                    0
           0




                                                                                                                    -100
                      2008   2009   2010   2011     2012    2013     2014   2015   2016   2017   2018                             2008   2009   2010   2011     2012    2013     2014   2015   2016   2017   2018
                                                            Year                                                                                                        Year

                                           Sweden          Ireland     Portugal                                                                        Sweden          Ireland     Portugal



                                            C. Robustness: PPML                                                                                          D. Robustness: OLS
           .5




                                                                                                                    .8
           .4




                                                                                                                          .6
  Gravity Estimates




                                                                                                        Gravity Estimates
               .3




                                                                                                                 .4
      .2




                                                                                                        .2
           .1




                                                                                                                    0
           0




                      2008   2009   2010   2011     2012    2013     2014   2015   2016   2017   2018                             2008   2009   2010   2011     2012    2013     2014   2015   2016   2017   2018
                                                            Year                                                                                                        Year

                                           Sweden          Ireland     Portugal                                                                        Sweden          Ireland     Portugal



Notes: This figure visualizes the country-specific estimates of the globalization effects on the extensive margin for a selected
group of countries including Sweden, Ireland, and Portugal. All estimates are obtained from equation (7), with exporter-time,
importer-time, and pair fixed effects in a panel setting for all years and all countries in the sample. The difference between the
four panels in the figure are due to the use of alternative estimators. Specifically, Panel A visualizes our main estimates, which
are obtained with the Flex estimator of Santos Silva et al. (2014). The estimates in Panel A are in fact those from Table 3.
The estimates in Panel B are obtained with the Tobit estimator. PPML estimates appear in Panel C. Finally, the results in
Panel D are obtained with the OLS estimator. See text for further details.




                                                                                                   51
                                   Figure 4: Country-specific Estimates, Robustness: Alternative Samples
                                     A. Robustness: Exporter-based Sample                                                                          B. Robustness: Importer-based Sample




                                                                                                                        .8
              1




                                                                                                                        .6
                      .8
    Gravity Estimates




                                                                                                              Gravity Estimates
                                                                                                                          .4
       .4       .6




                                                                                                                 .2
              .2




                                                                                                                        0
              0




                                                                                                                        -.2
                           2008   2009   2010   2011     2012    2013     2014   2015   2016   2017   2018                           2008   2009    2010   2011     2012    2013     2014   2015   2016   2017   2018
                                                                 Year                                                                                                       Year

                                                Sweden          Ireland     Portugal                                                                       Sweden          Ireland     Portugal



                                         C. Robustness: Positive Values Only                                                                        D. Robustness: Three-year Intervals
              1




                                                                                                                        .8      .6
    Gravity Estimates




                                                                                                              Gravity Estimates
                                                                                                                          .4
              .5




                                                                                                                 .2     0
              0




                                                                                                                        -.2




                           2008   2009   2010   2011     2012    2013     2014   2015   2016   2017   2018                           2008   2009    2010   2011     2012    2013     2014   2015   2016   2017   2018
                                                                 Year                                                                                                       Year

                                                Sweden          Ireland     Portugal                                                                       Sweden          Ireland     Portugal



                                  E. Robustness: Conservative-product Sample                                                                  F. Robustness: Extended-country Sample
                                                                                                                        1
              1




                                                                                                                        .8
    Gravity Estimates




                                                                                                              Gravity Estimates
                                                                                                                           .6
           .5




                                                                                                                   .4   .2
                                                                                                                        0
              0




                           2008   2009   2010   2011     2012    2013     2014   2015   2016   2017   2018                           2008   2009    2010   2011     2012    2013     2014   2015   2016   2017   2018
                                                                 Year                                                                                                       Year

                                                Sweden          Ireland     Portugal                                                                       Sweden          Ireland     Portugal



Notes: This figure visualizes the country-specific estimates of the globalization effects on the extensive margin for a selected
group of countries including Sweden, Ireland, and Portugal. All estimates are obtained from equation (7), with exporter-time,
importer-time, and pair fixed effects in a panel setting for all countries in the sample. The difference between the six panels of the
figure are due to the use of alternative estimating samples. Specifically, Panel A visualizes estimates from our "Exporter-based
sample" as described in the Data section. Panel B instead uses the "Importer-based sample" . The results in Panel C are based
only on the positive observations in the main sample. The estimates in Panel D are obtained with three-year interval data.
Panel E uses the "Conservative-product" sample. Finally, the results in Panel F are obtained with the "Extended-country"
sample. See text for further details.



                                                                                                         52
                                    Figure 5: Country-specific Estimates, Robustness: DEM Definition
                                           A. Main Estimates: FLEX                                                                        B. Robustness: Export-based DEM
           1




                                                                                                                 1
  Gravity Estimates




                                                                                                        Gravity Estimates
                                                                                                                      .5
            .5




                                                                                                         0
           0




                                                                                                                 -.5
                      2008   2009   2010   2011     2012    2013     2014   2015   2016   2017   2018                       2008   2009   2010   2011     2012    2013     2014   2015   2016   2017   2018
                                                            Year                                                                                                  Year

                                           Sweden          Ireland     Portugal                                                                  Sweden          Ireland     Portugal



Notes: This figure visualizes the country-specific estimates of the globalization effects on the extensive margin for a selected
group of countries including Sweden, Ireland, and Portugal. All estimates are obtained from equation (7), with exporter-time,
importer-time, and pair fixed effects in a panel setting for all countries in the sample. The difference between the two panels
of the figure are due to the definition/construction of the domestic extensive margin. Specifically, the estimates in Panel A are
our main estimates, which are obtained with a DEM measure based on production data from PRODCOM, while the results in
Panel B are obtained with a DEM measure that is constructed based on exports data, as described in Section 3. See text for
further details.




                                                                                                   53
  Table 4: European Integration and the Extensive Margin for New EU Members
Year    A. Symmetric        B. Asymmetric                                C. Country-specific
                                                    Bulgaria (2007)        Romania (2007)            Croatia (2013)
                          Imp.EU      Exp.EU      Imp.EU     Exp.EU     Imp.EU      Exp.EU      Imp.EU        Exp.EU
               (1)            (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)          (8)           (9)
2009        0.00200        -0.0270     0.0330     -0.00100     -0.192    0.0770      0.0560       -0.185         0.369
             (.015)         (.054)      (.059)     (.061)     (.099)+     (.069)     (.066)      (.088)*      (.095)**
2010         0.0260        -0.0200     0.0760      0.0400     -0.0230    0.0950      0.0370       -0.217        0.314
             (.019)         (.057)      (.058)     (.067)      (.094)     (.071)     (.076)      (.089)*      (.104)**
2011         0.0260         0.395       -0.339      0.499      -0.472     0.469      -0.273        0.168        -0.395
             (.024)       (.082)**    (.084)**    (.141)**   (.121)** (.154)**      (.143)+       (.104)      (.141)**
2012         0.0290         0.378       -0.322      0.393      -0.407     0.332      -0.228
             (.033)       (.069)**    (.077)**    (.107)**   (.113)** (.115)**      (.127)+
2013         0.0430         0.386       -0.297      0.407      -0.318     0.407      -0.197        0.188        -0.520
             (.026)        (.06)**    (.061)**    (.118)**   (.095)** (.133)**      (.104)+       (.1)+       (.122)**
2014       -0.00100         0.355       -0.356      0.477      -0.286     0.306      -0.230        0.109        -0.707
             (.034)       (.062)**    (.067)**    (.102)**   (.092)** (.102)**      (.115)*       (.107)      (.116)**
2015         0.0370         0.356       -0.282      0.401      -0.235     0.307      -0.198        0.175        -0.561
             (.034)       (.056)**    (.064)**    (.099)**    (.095)*   (.087)**    (.118)+       (.113)      (.112)**
2016         0.0740         0.401       -0.251      0.393      -0.226     0.324      -0.198        0.294        -0.466
            (.035)*       (.059)**    (.062)**    (.097)**    (.097)*   (.079)**    (.119)+      (.124)*      (.103)**
2017          0.136         0.428       -0.161      0.410      -0.120     0.311      -0.149        0.425        -0.305
            (.04)**       (.073)**     (.067)*    (.092)**     (.105)     (.1)**     (.137)     (.165)**      (.106)**
2018          0.160         0.424       -0.104      0.389     -0.0860     0.335     -0.0750        0.343        -0.295
           (.042)**       (.067)**      (.066)    (.103)**     (.103)   (.096)**     (.123)      (.137)*       (.11)**
Notes: This table reports estimates of the impact of European integration on the extensive margin of trade for
the three most recent EU members in our sample, i.e. Bulgaria (2007), Romania (2007), and Croatia (2013). Each
panel of the table reports estimates from a different specification. The dependent variable in each specification is
the number of products sold from exporter i to importer j , including domestic sales, and all estimates are obtained
with the Flex estimator of Santos Silva et al. (2014). All specifications include exporter-time, importer-time, and
pair fixed effects, whose estimates are omitted for brevity. The difference between the three panels is in the set
of covariates. Specifically, the results in Panel A are obtained from our main specification from column (1) of
Table 2, i.e., based on equation (7), where in addition to the common border effects we have introduced a set of
common (non-directional) border dummies that capture the EU effects on the three new EU members. For brevity
we omit the common border effects, which are not statistically different from the estimates in column (1) of Table
2. The results in Panel B are based on the same specification but allow for asymmetric/directional effects for
exports from the old EU to the new EU members (Imp.EU ) vs. exports from the new EU to the old EU members
(Exp.EU ). Once again, we omit the common border estimates. Finally, the results in Panel C allow for directional
and also country-specific effects for each of the three new EU members. For consistency, this specification allows
for country-specific border effects as in Table 3. The country-specific border estimates are omitted for brevity.
Standard errors are clustered by country pair and are reported in parentheses. + p < 0.10, * p < .05, ** p < .01.
See text for further details.




                                                         54
Appendix
This appendix includes details on the assumptions and derivations of our model.

       Heterogeneous small30 firms in an origin allocate capital to production and to distribution to

a set of destinations. The capital becomes specific once allocated. Subsequently, the firms draw

productivities from a Pareto distribution, and demand shocks are realized. The firms face iceberg

trade frictions in distribution as well as the cost of resources needed to serve the destinations.

The iceberg frictions include a fixed cost for each destination. The firms that can make operating

profits hire labor from a national market and deploy it efficiently to production and to distribution

to the various destinations. The description of the model is in terms of integrated production

and distribution firms but it applies equally to arms length relations between production and

distribution.

       The firms use capital and labor for production and distribution with the Cobb-Douglas tech-

nology K 1- L where K and L without indexing denote any firm's capital and labor allocated to

any activity. Competitive equilibrium requires that the value of sales net of distribution cost is

equal to the net value of production.

       Firms in origin i amplify their common ex ante technology by multiplicative productivity draws

from a Pareto distribution G( ) = 1 - ( /               - ,    
                                                min )              min   > 0. Simplify by setting min = 1.

Across origins i, the Pareto location parameter         min   can vary to allow origin-specific differences in

the productivity distribution. The firms face common iceberg frictions in distribution from origin

i to destinations j , effectively reducing productivity in delivered goods by 1/tij , tij > 1. The firms

also face a fixed cost in terms of labor for each market served, fj = waj where aj is the labor

required to enter the market.31 When sector differences are introduced (indexed by superscript h),

they appear in the iceberg frictions th
                                      ij , the Pareto location parameter
                                                                               h
                                                                               min
                                                                                     and the Pareto dispersion

parameter h > 0. It is convenient to temporarily suppress the origin and sector notation, and to

conduct the analysis with a continuum of firms.

       An exogenously given mass Mj of firms in an implicit origin have previously committed capital
  30
     The firms may be monopolistic or pure competitors. The CES demand setting implies constant markups
by small monopolistic competitors, markups that are absorbed into bilateral trade frictions.
  31
     The case where the fixed cost is a fixed Cobb-Douglas function of capital and labor is essentially the
same.


                                                    55
kj to each destination j . Distribution presupposes production denoted `destination' 0. (Firms have

identical per-firm capital kj because prior to receiving their productivities, all firms are identical.)

As the period of analysis opens each firm draws a Hicks-neutral productivity scalar . After the

productivities are drawn, firms hire labor at wage rate w to produce and distribute the good,

equating w to the value of marginal product of labor for production and for distribution to each

destination.

    Index the firms by their productivity draws . The profit of firm             on sales to j using variable

labor Lj ( ) is
                                       pj
                                          Lj ( ) [kj ]1- - wLj ( ).
                                       tj

Profit maximization on sales to j by a price taking firm        implies that the value of marginal product

of labor is equal to the wage, yielding demand for labor by firm :

                                                                1/(1-)
                                                         pj 1
                                      Lj ( ) = kj                        .                                   (8)
                                                         tj w


The resulting restricted profit function is              ¯j
                                                  1/(1-) R    where

                                      1/(1-)
                                pj
                        ¯j =
                        R                      w-/(1-) kj [/(1-) - 1/(1-) ]                                  (9)
                                tj


is the variable profit of the least productive active firm, equal to fixed cost.

    The zero profit cutoff value of    is


                                                          ¯ j ]1-
                                                  = [waj /R
                                              j



where fj = waj , aj > 0 is the fixed cost of each firm in the implicit origin choosing to export to
                                                                                              --1 d
destination j . The proportion of firms with               is given by 1 - G( ) =                     . The mass
                                                                                       j

of firms choosing to serve destination j is

                                                                               ( -)/
                                      1/(1-)--1                          waj
                  Mj Uj = Mj                        d = Mj                ¯j           ,  > .               (10)
                                                                -        R


Here the right hand expression uses  = 1/(1 - ) and Uj denotes the equilibrium utilization rate.


                                                      56
       The aggregate value sellers of trade shipped to destination j is given by integrating the value

of marginal product of variable labor over firms . Use (9) in (10) and simplify to yield the supply

function:
                                                            (- )/           -
                                                      kj              pj
                                     Xj = Akj Mj                                 .                                 (11)
                                                      aj              wtj

A is a constant function of the parameters , , . Uj is in constant proportion to (kj /aj )(-)/

with the constant being absorbed in A.

       Gravity is based on spatial arbitrage that generates equilibrium buyer prices pij for from each

origin i to each destination j . Demand is characterized by CES expenditure on goods from many

origin countries . Expenditure on good i in destination j is given by

                                                                1-
                                                       pi tij
                                              Xij =                  Ej                                            (12)
                                                        Pj


where Ej is total expenditure on goods from all origins, Pj = [                           1- ]1/(1- )
                                                                            i (pi tij )                 is the CES price

index and  > 1 is the elasticity of substitution.

       Market clearing bilaterally equates the right hand sides of (11) and (12). Solve this equation

for the bilateral market clearing price pij . This yields:

                                                    - -               1/(- + -1)
                                           Ej Pj-1 wi tij
                               pij =                                                  .                            (13)
                                        Akij Mij (kij /aij )(-)/

       Substitute the right hand side of (13) for pij in the right hand side of the demand equation

(12). After considerable simplification,32 this yields:

                                      (1- )                                                    1-
                               tij                (1- )
                      Xij =                   Ej wi         (kij /aij )(-)/ (Akij Mij )                            (14)
                               Pj


where   ( -  )/( -  +  - 1). Inside the square bracket, the term (kij /aij )(-)/ = Uij , the

equilibrium utilization rate of capital installed to serve shipments from i to j . Mij kij = Kij is the

total amount of capital installed for link ij . A > 0 is a collection of constant terms. Thus the

square bracket is A times the ex post utilized capital.
  32
       The simplification uses 1 -  = -(1 -  )/( -  +  - 1) in simplifying several complex exponents.



                                                           57
                                                                                                    (1- )
      Short run gravity is obtained by solving the market clearing equation for wi                          . First replace
 ( -1)               ~ (-1) in (14). Then sum (14) over j and solve:
Pj        Ej with Ej Pj


                              (1- )                             Yi /Y                     Yi /Y
                             wi          =                                    1-    =           .                     (15)
                                                        ~
                                                j (tij /Pj )
                                                               (1- ) (E /Y
                                                                       j     )ij         ~ (1-)
                                                                                          i


Here ij = Uij Mij kij /                                                    ¯i where ij = Kij /Ki , the ex
                                      Uij Mij kij . Note that ij = ij Uij /U
                                  j

                       ¯i =                                                                                      (1- )
ante capital share and U                  j   Uij ij , the average utilization rate of capital. Thus i                   =
             ~ (1-) (Ej /Y    1-
     j (tij /Pj )            )ij is the sellers multilateral resistance in the heterogeneous firms case.
                                                                  (1- )
      Substitute the right hand side of (15) for wi                        in (14). The result is short run gravity for

the heterogeneous firms case.

                                                                   (1- )           1-
                                            Yi Ej       tij                  Uij           -
                                      Xij =                                   ¯i         1
                                                                                         ij                           (16)
                                             Y         ~ iP
                                                          ~j                 U


Short run gravity in the heterogeneous firms case (14) differs from the homogeneous firms case

Anderson and Yotov (2020) in adding the action of the middle term

                                                      1-
                                               Uij                (kij /aij )(-)/
                                                ¯i          =                    (- )/
                                               U                   j (kij /aij )


and its knock-on effects on multilateral resistances. The short run trade elasticity remains the same

(1 -  ).

      Now consider investment. In this model the relative ex post return rij /r
                                                                              ¯i is given by differen-

tiating (16) with respect to kij and placing that result relative to the effect of a uniform rise in all

kij . The common exponent (1 - )/ cancels, hence


                                              rij      (sij /ij )(1 - ij )/kij
                                                  =                               .
                                              r
                                              ¯i        j (sij /ij )(1 - ij )/kij


It simplifies the extensive margin analysis down to its essence to consider starting from efficient

investment.

      Efficient investment in terms of realized (ex post ) returns implies that the right hand side is

equal to 1. If sij = ij , i, j , ex post efficiency is realized. Note, however, that ex ante expected



                                                                  58
returns may differ because utilization rates Uij may differ in this allocation.33 Fully efficient ex
                                                   = U   k =  a , i, j ;  > 1.  > 1 is
ante investment requires equal utilization rates Uij  i   ij i ij        i     i

required for the marginal product of capital to be positive, since effectively the period-by-period

fixed cost of labor absorbs a portion of capital in order to affect ex post utilization. Formalizing

the implications:

         Proposition 1

          kij = i aij , i > 1 and ij = sij is necessary and sufficient for ex ante efficiency.

       With ex ante efficient investment, long run gravity obtains. In (16), fully efficient investment

ij = Xij /Yi  implies a solution to (16) as if the exponent  = 1 and multilateral resistance

i , Pj revert to their interpretation in standard (long run) gravity. The fully efficient investment

equilibrium implies that at the margin the opportunity cost of reallocating 1 unit of capital from

the existing allocations is equal to 1.

       Now consider investment at the extensive margin j = n, where j < n denotes previously active

destinations. The alternative is efficient investment on infra-marginal destinations with opportunity

cost = 1. There is a one period cost of adjustment to be covered from a planned excess return

     ¯i = Fin  1. At Fin = 1, the excess return required for entry arises because the value of
rin /r

marginal product of capital rin = 0, kin  [0, ain ]. Fin allows for additional startup costs for

                                                            ¯i Fin  in . To cover this cost,
investment for shipment from origin i to destination n. Let r

^in /in  in is the entry condition, where s
s                                         ^in is the expected sales share to the extensive margin

destination. This implies in = s
                               ^in /in .

       A useful implication follows with perfect foresight, s
                                                            ^in = realized sin .

          Proposition 2

         Investment with perfect foresight at extensive margin in

                                                                     (1- )
                                                     En       tin
                                          in =                               .                                 (17)
                                                    Y in      i Pn
  33
       This technical possibility requires that Mij varies inversely proportionally to kij (kij /aij )(-)/ .




                                                         59
The proof follows from

                                                     (1- )
                                       En    tin
                      sin /in = in   =                       (in )1- /in  (17).||
                                       Y     i Pn


In the following period in is adjusted on the intensive margin to its efficient level in . The

opportunity cost of reallocating capital is equal to 1, in = 1 in equation (17) and thus

                                                             1-
                                              En    tin
                                       in   =                     ,
                                              Y     i Pn
                                                        



the long run efficient allocation of marketing capital.
                                                                                         h denotes
   Proposition 2 extends to characterize investment at the extensive margin of sectors. Si

the share of country i's sales by all sectors due to sales from HS product code h. Entry of country i

into extensive margin sector h = Hi requires entry into destination markets in MHi = [nHi , nHi ], the
                                                                              Hi
range of destinations for sector Hi to which allocation of marketing capital kin is efficient. Applying
                                                                                   Hi
(17) to extensive margin sector Hi for country i, the sectoral entry condition is Si     nMHi    sH
                                                                                                  in 
                                                                                                    i


                                                                                              1-Hi
(H i 1-Hi
 i )
                         Hi
           FHi  1 where Si  is sector Hi 's share of national sales in country i and Hi              =
           1-Hi
  nMHi   in       . FHi controls for any additional fixed one-time cost of investment in external

margin sector Hi . Note that i  MHi is not necessary, some new sectors may export only. This

happens frequently with intermediate goods.

   The extensive margin analysis above applies equally to exit on the assumption that exit costs

are equal to entry costs. Exit costs that differ are analyzed by replacing in with some in > 1.

   Imperfect information about future prospects and departures of the initial conditions from long

run equilibrium efficiency complicate the entry/exit condition. Also, learning how to produce and

serve new sector/destinations plausibly takes place over time, inducing partial adjustment and

correcting for mistakes. The treatment here abstracts from all such dynamic considerations to

simplify focus on the essential static logic: entry requires a lower than eventually efficient capacity

to raise next (and near) period returns above the opportunity cost of capital.

   The reduced form model of the text provides empirical regularities about the selection of sectors

in a setting consistent with the theoretical model. The empirical gravity model uses count data

as the dependent variable, the count being interpreted as the marginal sector-destination served.


                                                    60
Santos Silva et al. (2014) have a good discussion of the way in which their FLEX estimator applies

to the essentially similar firm selection gravity model of Helpman et al. (2008b).




                                                61
