                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          INTEGRATED EPI-ECON ASSESSMENT

                                        Timo Boppart
                                       Karl Harmenberg
                                        John Hassler
                                         Per Krusell
                                        Jonna Olsson

                                      Working Paper 28282
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28282


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




For feedback we thank seminar participants at the Institute for International Studies, the
University of Edinburgh, and the Institute for Future Studies. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Timo Boppart, Karl Harmenberg, John Hassler, Per Krusell, and Jonna Olsson. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Integrated Epi-Econ Assessment
Timo Boppart, Karl Harmenberg, John Hassler, Per Krusell, and Jonna Olsson
NBER Working Paper No. 28282
December 2020
JEL No. E10,I10

                                          ABSTRACT

We formulate an economic time use model and add to it an epidemiological SIR block. In the
event of an epidemic, households shift their leisure time from activities with a high degree of
social interaction to activities with less, and also choose to work more from home. Our model
highlights the different actions taken by young individuals, who are less severely affected by the
disease, and by old individuals, who are more vulnerable. We calibrate our model to time use data
from ATUS, employment data, epidemiological data, and estimates of the value of a statistical
life. There are qualitative as well as quantitative differences between the competitive equilibrium
and social planner allocation and, moreover, these depend critically on when a cure arrives. Due
to the role played by social activities in people's welfare, simple indicators such as deaths and
GDP are insuffcient for judging outcomes in our economy.

Timo Boppart                                     Per Krusell
Institute for International Economic Studies     Institute for International Economic Studies
Stockholm University                             Stockholm University
SE-106 91 Stockholm                              106 91 STOCKHOLM
Sweden                                           SWEDEN
timo.boppart@iies.su.se                          and NBER
                                                 per.krusell@iies.su.se
Karl Harmenberg
Department of Economics                          Jonna Olsson
Copenhagen Business School                       Department of Economics
Denmark                                          University of Edinburgh
kha.eco@cbs.dk                                   United Kingdom
                                                 jonna.olsson@ed.ac.uk
John Hassler
Institute for International Economic Studies
Stockholm University
Sweden
John.Hassler@iies.su.se
      1      Introduction
      We divide our introduction up into three pieces: a background, where we also describe
      our modeling approach and contribution, a results section, and a literature discussion.


      1.1     Motivation and model
      The current covid-19 pandemic has necessitated difficult decisions for politicians and
      government officials across the world. How should the public-health effects of the
      epidemic be mitigated and balanced against economic values such as economic output?
      To approach this difficult question, coherent quantitative theoretical frameworks are
      helpful if not necessary. Such frameworks take time to develop and test, but the
      endeavor is of obvious importance even if a fully satisfactory framework will not be
      available before the current epidemic has subsided: it will help us understand what
      happened during covid-19 and what alternative policy decisions could have led to, and
      it will prepare us for future epidemics.
          This paper has the broader goal of producing an integrated assessment model of
      epidemics and economics. In important ways, our goal parallels that in the area of
      climate change, where Nordhaus pioneered a merging of natural-science models of the
      climate and the carbon cycle with a standard neoclassical economic growth framework:
      what we argue for here is just that, merely in a different application.1 And to be sure,
      we are far from the first paper with this aim; we discuss the literature below in more
      detail—including the pre-covid contributions—but in terms of the rapidly expanding
      very recent literature, the main paper we want to build further on is Eichenbaum
      et al. (2020a). Our “epi-econ” integrated assessment model of an economy during
      an epidemic thus develops new model features that we believe are necessary in an
      assessment of the trade-offs involved in the decisions that politicians and government
      officials have to make during an epidemic. We propose a concrete framework and
      evaluate it quantitatively for the covid-19 case, i.e., we solve the model for parameter
      values that are selected to match key economic and epidemiological facts. We then
      evaluate policy using this quantitative model.
          A key feature of our epi-econ integrated assessment model is an element of sociol-
      ogy, i.e., an aspect of economic activity that describes how humans interact at work
      and while enjoying leisure. Thus, a more appropriate attribute than epi-econ might be
      epi-socio-econ, but since our proposed sociological elements are modeled with standard
      microeconomic tools—as opposed to through theory constructs used in sociology, such
1
    See, e.g., Nordhaus and Boyer (2000) and Golosov et al. (2014).


                                                    2
       as social networks—we prefer the more modest label. There are two main reasons for
       more explicit sociological elements. One is the obvious one: human interaction is key
       in epidemiology. The second and no less important reason is that we perceive social in-
       teraction to be very important in any welfare evaluation in this area. An example is the
       changed nature of leisure that materializes during times of restricted social activities.
       Concrete, extreme expressions of this concern include reports of increases in the num-
       ber of cases of domestic violence and sharply increased activity on suicide prevention
       help-lines.2 But more generally we believe that the costs of restricting behavior—that
       may be necessary during an epidemic—need to go beyond merely counting lives and
       GDP: we need to also factor in leisure and its nature.
          Our model builds a macroeconomic framework determining the allocation of pro-
       duction, consumption, and leisure based on market forces. An important task for us is
       to consider its efficiency properties, to be discussed extensively below. The framework
       features population heterogeneity both with respect to epidemic risk and economic
       productivity. Since many infections disproportionately hit specific subgroups of the
       population, and since subgroups of the population vary in productivity, this hetero-
       geneity matters for the quantitative assessment of the effects of an epidemic. Our
       framework models social activities explicitly. From the epidemic side, an epidemic
       spreads when people meet and socialize, either in the workplace or in their spare time,
       not when they consume goods in general. Moreover, we measure the intensity of in-
       teraction by the number of hours spent in different activities. Along the same lines,
       leisure can, but does not necessarily, have a social-activity component and we make
       this concrete but modeling the number of hours spent in leisure activities with different
       degrees of social content.
          The sociological elements we entertain in our setting obey standard, microeconomic
       principles. We distinguish goods by their degree of social interaction; for example,
       enjoying leisure at a live football game involves more social interaction than watching
       TV. Thus, we give goods a social-activity attribute. However, our formulation builds
       on the assumption that people do not care about this social activity per se: goods and
       leisure activities are merely enjoyed through the amounts by which they are consumed
       (e.g., the number of goods/services of different types and the number of hours of
       different kinds of leisure). In concrete terms: although there are more people around
       you in a football game, and you may in reality enjoy the game somewhat more in a
       packed stadium, we assume that consumers simply derive utility from how much time
   2
    This year (as of mid-December), the number of calls to the Swedish help-line for suicidal prevention has
increased by 35 percent compared to previous year. Isolation and loneliness due to corona measures are said
to be the main culprits. See https://sverigesradio.se/artikel/7623261.


                                                     3
they spend on going to football games. Our microeconomic formulation of different
degrees of social activity thus does not model what from another perspective would
seem like “externalities”: my going to a football game will increase the utility of other
people in the stadium (and in other contexts, of course, even the direction of this
externality is unclear). Our framework is simple—and, in this sense, it is a proof
of concept—in that we only consider two levels of social activity (zero and positive).
However, it is readily generalizable in this dimension. A convenient feature of our
setup is that, abstracting from epidemiological concerns, the market equilibrium is
efficient. Moreover, in the specific framework we employ, we use the construct of a
“representative family” (consisting of a large number members of different age as well
as health statuses). This means that welfare comparisons across different policies vis-
à-vis covid-19 can be made straightforwardly.
   An integrated assessment model of the economy during an epidemic needs to be
quantitative in nature. Our calibration uses the American Time Use Survey to match
the time spent on social leisure, non-social leisure and work (in the workplace or at
home), by young and old individuals. We argue that data on time allocations at this
level of disaggregation are necessary for studying the interaction between individual
behavior and epidemic spread.
   Furthermore, a quantitative model necessitates numerical solution methods if we
want to go beyond qualitative insights. Though the model we formulate is quite non-
linear, not just in its SIR dynamics, and many decisions are made and prices are set
within each model period, we offer a highly computationally tractable numerical routine
for computing both the social planner’s allocation and the market allocation. It builds
on two blocks. One is a standard computable general equilibrium (CGE) block for
every time period (a day in our calibration), with two added features. First, it takes as
given a population structure (overall population size and its health/age composition)
that of course in our dynamic model is generated by the past. Second, it takes as
given a vector of end-of-period “multipliers” that are forward-looking measures of the
utility value of each of the different types of agents: how much utility is generated
by the population structure that next period will inherit from today. Then, in our
dynamic model, periods are connected by envelope conditions and SIR dynamics and
computation can be performed in a straightforward algorithm that iterates over the
path for the multiplier vector.




                                           4
1.2     Key findings
Households reallocate their time substantially as a response to the epidemic–if they
are fully informed. In the case of covid-19, the death toll in a myopic scenario with
no cure is reduced by 80 percent by assuming rational expectations and endogenous
adjustments.
   Still, the comparison of the rational-expectations scenario and the social planner’s
optimal scenario shows that there is substantial scope for government policy to improve
reallocations and thus welfare beyond simply informing. A social planner would want
to reduce the number of lost years of life even further, and, importantly, distribute
the burden of behavioral adjustment more efficiently in the population. This would
come at a cost: output would fall substantially more in the social planner’s optimal
scenario. However, the cost in terms of per-capita flow utility is smaller: during the
worst month of the epidemic, the loss in flow utility is actually larger in the rational-
expectations scenario than in the social planner’s optimal scenario. It is tempting to
frame a discussion of epidemic policy as a trade-off between the economy, as captured
by output, and lives. This way of framing the trade-off misses that the social planner
is willing to sacrifice consumption utility not only in order to save lives but also save
leisure utility for the old. In the rational-expectation scenario, the old and thus vul-
nerable individuals are voluntarily staying home to protect their lives. However, this
minimization of social interactions comes at a large utility cost. The old alone bear the
burden of reducing lives lost in the rational-expectations scenario, while the burden is
more equally distributed by the social planner.
   In the baseline scenario when no cure is expected to arrive, the social planner
optimum is best described as a “protect the healthcare system” strategy. The number
of infected is kept low enough so that the health system is never over-burdened, and
so that “overshooting” in terms of number of infected before herd immunity is reached
is minimized. However, the optimal approach can be qualitatively different depending
on two crucial assumptions.
   First, the optimal strategy depends qualitatively on when a cure arrives. The
sooner a cure to the disease is expected to arrive, the more likely it is that a social
planner chooses to adopt a strategy best described as “suppress”: to keep the number
of infections low by lowering social activity (and thus output) to a very large extent.
The longer it takes until the cure arrives, the more likely it is that the optimal scenario
tilts over to the “protect the health care system”.
   Second, the optimal strategy depends crucially on what we assume about the value
of a statistical life. We exemplify this in a scenario that assumes that a cure arrives


                                            5
       after 18 months. If the social planner uses a value of a statistical life on the higher end
       of estimates in the literature, the optimal strategy is to suppress the epidemic while
       waiting for the cure. However, if the value of a statistical life is on the lower end, the
       optimal strategy tilts over to the “protect the health care system” strategy. Thus, the
       value of a statistical life and the expected arrival of the cure are two crucial assumptions
       that impact the optimal strategy not only quantitatively but also qualitatively.
          To validate the model, we simulate two other diseases: a seasonal flu and SARS.
       This exercise helps validating our assumptions, especially the critical assumption of the
       intrinsic value of a statistical life. There are numerous estimates in the literature, and
       we do not (and should not!) take a stance on the correct value. However, we show that
       a value of a statistical life from the higher end of the spectrum implies that a social
       planner would want to slow the economy substantially to stop the spread of a seasonal
       flu, by lowering output by 4.6 percent during a critical quarter, and by 3.4 percent over
       a year. This, as far as we can tell, is not how policy makers react. Thus, although we
       cannot say whether a chosen values of a statistical life is the correct one, we can say
       that a value from the lower range is more in line with observed policy actions. When
       we test our model by simulating SARS, a disease both more contagious and more lethal
       than covid-19, we get that a social planner would impose a very strict lock-down even
       with the lower value of a statistical life (assuming a year until we can end the epidemic
       exogenously).
          Finally, an important part of our motivation of this work is that we perceive the
       focus on deaths and GDP alone to be too narrow. What does our model then tell us in
       this respect? The difference between just a crude consumption measure and a broader
       measure of utility, including socially active leisure, is clear from the experiments. In
       the main scenario, a social planner reduces output by 9.7 percent the first year of the
       epidemic while the utility loss incurred during the first year corresponds to a consump-
       tion fall of 9.9 percent.3 Thus, in the social planner scenario, these two measures are
       reasonably close. In the rational-expectation scenario, output falls by a mere 1.5 per-
       cent the first year. However, utility falls by an amount that is equivalent to a fall in
       consumption of 8.1 percent, i.e., more than 5 times higher! The reason is the severe
       utility loss the old experience during the epidemic in the rational-expectation scenario,
       in which it is simply too dangerous for them to go out and enjoy social leisure.
          Note that this is a utility measure that does not take into account the future utility
       loss due to lost lives, but only the utility in the economy during the first year of the
   3
   Calculated as the change in consumption level for all types of goods that, given constant time allocations,
would give the same welfare loss during the first year of the epidemic.



                                                      6
epidemic. The social planner saves years of life and therefore the total utility in the
social planner’s scenario is (of course) higher.


1.3     Related literature
The task of reviewing the exploding literature on economics and epidemiology is daunt-
ing, especially since many papers are still preliminary (and yet relevant for us). As a
consequence, we will confine ourselves here to making a few comments on some ways
in which we believe that our approach overlaps with that taken elsewhere.
   Atkeson (2020) describes the core model developed by epidemiologists that we use
here (Kermack and McKendrick, 1927). Epidemiological models had been used in
economics prior to covid-19 in analyses of other viruses (e.g., Geoffard and Philipson
(1996), Kremer (1996), Adda (2007), Chan, Hamilton and Papageorge (2016), and
Greenwood, Kircher, Santos and Tertilt (2019)), but Eichenbaum, Rebelo, and Tra-
bandt (2020; ERT) was as far as we can tell the first application of epidemiology that is
also macroeconomic in the sense that it describes a whole economy of forward-looking
agents and market determination of prices. ERT build a wholly microeconomic struc-
ture (including rational consumers and firms with objectives explicitly described) and
the interventions they consider involve fully described policy instruments and com-
parisons between laissez-faire and fully optimal policy. It is also quantitative in that
the model’s economic parameters are selected to match (standard) characteristics of
macroeconomic data—and the epidemiological parameters are chosen to match known
estimates pertaining to the specific features of covid-19.
   The features of ERT just described are, in our view, hallmarks of an appropriate
way forward in this literature, and we thus follow ERT in many ways. Our main addi-
tion, in terms of our modeling and quantitative approach, is to move toward explicitly
describing time use. In so doing, we are taking steps toward a development of a socio-
economic framework describing how people interact and how they derive utility from
it; we use their observed time-use choices, moreover, to construct utility functions that
describe these valuations. Here, our work has overlaps with Brotherhood et al. (2020),
Glover et al. (2020), and Kaplan et al. (2020).
   We also emphasize heterogeneity: people’s vulnerability toward covid-19 as well as
their economic detail (such as productivity) differ in our model, and there are different
sectors (differing in the degree of social activity). At least one of these features are
captured not only in the papers just mentioned but also in Acemoglu et al. (2020a),
Acemoglu et al. (2020b), Bodenstein et al. (2020), Giagheddu and Papetti (2020),
Krueger et al. (2020), van Vlokhoven (2020), Kapicka and Rupert (2020), and Aum

                                            7
       et al. (2020).4
           We conduct a systematic comparison between a laissez-faire market allocation and
       a social optimum: many other papers have the same aim.5 Perhaps the closest to ours
       is Farboodi et al. (2020); many of their qualitative results also resemble ours. Our
       analysis of externalities in social activities is closely related to that in Garibaldi et al.
       (2020).
           To us, surprisingly few papers include an explicit account of the value of a statistical
       life; even fewer discuss it in detail and provide robustness analysis with respect to it.6
       Relatedly, as far as we could tell, none of the studies relate policy prescriptions for
       covid-19 to those that would be implied for other known (and experienced) viruses.
       Finally, in our setting we take a representative-family perspective, thus not considering
       compensatory transfers across groups in the population. A few of the papers in the
       literature have this focus, e.g., Glover et al. (2020) and Kaplan et al. (2020).
           Clearly, our paper misses some important elements. One is the connection to data
       that is now available on social and economic activity during the covid crisis. Here, Aum
       et al. (2020), Bognanni et al. (2020), Farboodi et al. (2020), Giagheddu and Papetti
       (2020), and Krueger et al. (2020) stand out. Second, we do not review new and relevant
       contributions to epidemiological modeling here (some of which have been made by
       economists). Third, we do not allow analysis of individual awareness of health status;
       clearly, such studies are key for allowing us to analyze test-trace-and-isolate strategies,
       and we aim to develop our current framework further in this direction. Existing papers
       with such elements include Acemoglu et al. (2020a), Acemoglu et al. (2020b), Alvarez
       et al. (2020), Aum et al. (2020), Bethune and Korinek (2020), Brotherhood et al.
       (2020), Eichenbaum et al. (2020b), Farboodi et al. (2020), Kapicka and Rupert (2020),
       Krueger et al. (2020), and Piguillem and Shi (2020).
   4
     van Vlokhoven (2020) allows heterogeneity in the propensity to pass the virus on to others.
   5
     These include Acemoglu et al. (2020a), Acemoglu et al. (2020b), Alon et al. (2020), Alvarez et al. (2020),
Aum et al. (2020), Bethune and Korinek (2020), Bodenstein et al. (2020), Brotherhood et al. (2020), Chang
and Velasco (2020), Eichenbaum et al. (2020b), Farboodi et al. (2020), Garibaldi et al. (2020), Giagheddu
and Papetti (2020), Giannitsarou et al. (2020), Glover et al. (2020), Kapicka and Rupert (2020), Kaplan
et al. (2020), Krueger et al. (2020), Jones et al. (2020), and van Vlokhoven (2020). Some papers perform
maximization based formulations of social welfare that are not explicitly microeconomic rooted and although
they contain interesting insights, we do not list them here.
   6
     The sole focus in Hall et al. (2020) is on this issue; other nice contributions include Alvarez et al. (2020),
Alon et al. (2020), Glover et al. (2020), and Krueger et al. (2020)




                                                        8
                     in-priVate sector              in-puBlic sector
               Work from home                  Work from home




               Work in the workplace           Produce and consume together




               Consume




               The areas marked in red are where the virus spreads.

                             Figure 1: Illustration of the model.



1.4    Roadmap for the rest of the paper
We formalize our epi-econ integrated assessment model in steps. In Section 2 we
describe the economic model without any epidemic and its calibration to pre-pandemic
time-use data and production data. Thereafter, in Section 3, we add an epidemic
dimension to a static version of the model. Then, in Section 4, we present the full
dynamic version of the model. For all steps, we describe the social planner’s problem,
and in the end comment on the differences between the social planner’s solution and
a decentralized market solution. Section 5 contains the results. Finally, Section 6
concludes.



2     The pre-pandemic economic model
Figure 1 schematically illustrates the model we have in mind. There are two types of
individuals, young and old. They can spend their leisure in a sector we label as the in-
priVate sector (illustrated by the figures in the bottom left in the figure). When people
spend their time on this type of leisure they are on their own (e.g., they are at home
watching Netflix). In other words: they do not interact with others and hence there is
no risk of getting infected. The goods and services used for the in-priVate leisure are
produced in the workplace or at home (illustrated by the upper half of the left side


                                              9
of the figure, where people are, e.g., in the studio producing a Netflix show or in the
Amazon warehouse shipping a new TV set). When people work in the workplace, they
interact with their colleagues, and there is a risk of spreading the virus.
   The right hand side of the figure illustrates what we label as the in-puBlic sector.
In this sector, consumption and work take place jointly, and the virus can be spread
between those enjoying their leisure (e.g., customers in the restaurant) and those work-
ing in the sector (e.g., waiters in the restaurant). However, even in this sector there
is a possibility (for at least some employees, e.g., the restaurant’s accountant) to work
from home without physically interacting with others.
   In the beginning of the epidemic, a small fraction of the population is infected,
while the majority are still susceptible, and no-one has yet recovered. As the epidemic
spreads, susceptible individuals become infected, while some infected individuals re-
cover and a fraction of the infected dies. The infection fatality rate is higher for the old
than for the young, and it increases if the hospitals become overcrowded. We assume
full immunity, so that once an individual has recovered, he/she cannot be re-infected.
   Individuals in the model receive utility from leisure, from consumption, and from
the intrinsic value of being alive.
   We will describe the model outlined above stepwise. As a first step, we in this
Section describe the economy before the epidemic, and discuss how we calibrate the
model to pre-pandemic data.


2.1     Formal description of the pre-pandemic economic model
The formal description of the economic model without any epidemiological consider-
ations is straight-forward. The economy consists of a continuum of identical families.
Each family consists of a continuum of young individuals, with mass φy , and a contin-
uum of old individuals, with mass φo . Individual utility is a function of consumption
(c) and leisure (h). Leisure is of two sorts: leisure involving social interactions (e.g.,
restaurants or movies) and leisure not involving social interactions (e.g., watching TV,
reading the newspaper); we use the indexes B (in-puBlic) and V (in-priVate) for these,
respectively.
   The consumption good is also of two sorts: goods and services consumed while being
socially active (e.g., restaurants or movies), cB , and goods and services consumed in
private (e.g., television), cV .
                                                   i u(ci , hi , ci , hi )
                                      P
   The family utility function is      i∈{y,o} φ        B    B V       V     and the social planner




                                            10
maximizes the utility of the families,
                                                X
                                        max             φi u(ciB , hiB , ciV , hiV )
                                              i∈{y,o}


subject to

                      1 = hiB + hiV + niBh + niBw + niV h + niV w ,                                    i ∈ {y, o},   (1)
                               Fj (φy nyjh , φy nyjw , φo nojh , φo nojw ),
         X
                  φi cij   =                                                                       j ∈ {B, V },      (2)
        i∈{y,o}


and non-negativity constraints for both time and consumption quantities. Constraints
(1) are the time constraints. Both young and old have one unit of time at their disposal,
and can spend time on leisure (hB and hV ) or working (n).
   Hours worked can take place in two different locations: either at home (indexed h)
or in the workplace (indexed w) and each of these types of work can be carried out
in two sectors: producing goods and services for the in-puBlic sector (e.g., restaurants
or movies, indexed by B), or producing goods and services for the in-priVate sector
(everything else, indexed by V ).
   The constraints (2) are the resource constraints. Production in both sector B and
in sector V is a function of the labor worked from home and the labor in the workplace,
for both young and old.
   We now turn to the calibration of this model.


2.2    Parametrization of the economic model
Utility function: The flow utility for an individual is given by

                               u(cB , hB , cV , hV ) = log CES(c̃B , c̃V ; λ, ε),                                    (3)
                                                  c̃B = CES(cB , hB ; λB , εB ),                                     (4)
                                                  c̃V    = CES(cV , hV ; λV , εV ),                                  (5)

where the constant-elasticity aggregator CES(•) is defined by
                                                                                            ε
                                                              ε−1                  ε−1       ε−1
                           CES(x1 , x2 ; λ, ε) =            λx1ε
                                                                    + (1 − λ)x2     ε
                                                                                                   .                 (6)

The nested CES structure captures that the consumer needs to spend leisure time to
derive utility from a good or a service irrespective of whether the activity is social or


                                                             11
       non-social.

       Production function: Production in both the B and the V sector is given by a
       Cobb-Douglas function of CES aggregates,

                         Fj (nyjh , nyjw , nojh , nojw ) = kjα ñνjh ñ1−α−ν
                                                                       jw    ,                  (7)
                                                ñjh =       CES(φy nyjh , φo nojh ; ϕ, θ),     (8)
                                               ñjw =        CES(φy nyjw , φo nojw ; ϕ, θ),     (9)

       where the CES function is given by (6). Given our focus on short-run analysis, the
       sector-specific capital stocks kB and kV are fixed.


       2.3     Calibration of the economic model
       We define young as individuals aged 15-60, while old refers to individuals above 60.
       We assume a unit mass of people, thus, calibrating to US demography, we set φy , the
       young population share, to 0.73 and φo = 1 − φy .

       Calibration targets from the ATUS: For the calibration targets for the al-
       location of time, we turn to the American Time Use Survey (ATUS) which provides
       nationally representative estimates of how and where Americans spend their time. Im-
       portantly, it includes data on the full range of nonmarket activities, from relaxing at
       home to restaurant visits and attending sports events.
          We divide the 24 hours a day into three mutually exclusive and complementary ex-
       haustive broad categories: sleep, work, and leisure. Sleep is defined as the time spent
       either sleeping or experiencing sleeplessness. We define work as the sum of the following
       activities: market work, core housework (meal preparation and cleanup, doing laundry,
       ironing, dusting, cleaning, etc.), other home production (home maintenance, outdoor
       cleaning, vehicle repair etc.), necessity shopping (grocery shopping, going to the bank,
       etc.), and time spent in education. We also add all travel time associated with any of
       those activities. Leisure, lastly, is defined as the sum of the following activities: enter-
       tainment/social activities/relaxing, child care and caring for other adults, gardening,
       time spent with pet, personal care, eating and drinking, recreational shopping, civic
       and religious activities, and own medical care. Again, all travel time associated with
       any of those activities is added to the total.7 With these definitions, we compute the
   7
    This definition of leisure is close to leisure “Measure 4” used by Aguiar and Hurst (2007). Compared
to that definition, our leisure concept adds recreational shopping, gardening and time spent with pet, but


                                                        12
        1,500




                                                                                          1,500
            1,000




                                                                                              1,000
  minutes per day




                                                                                    minutes per day
 500




                                                                                   500
        0




                                                                                          0
                    2003      2006      2009       2012       2015     2018                           2003   2006   2009       2012      2015   2018

                                         Sleep            Work                                                       Sleep            Work
                                         Leisure                                                                     Leisure




                                       (a) Young                                                                    (b) Old
                                                          A full day is 24 · 60 = 1, 440 minutes.
                                                          Source: ATUS.

                                     Figure 2: Time spent on sleep, work, and leisure over time.



                    share of sleep, work, and leisure for the young and the old respectively, with the result
                    shown in Figure 2. For the calibration, we ignore sleep and focus on the work–leisure
                    trade off.
                           With this classification, we also want to know the share of leisure time spent on
                    socially intensive activities (hB vs. hV ) and the share of work time at the work place
                    (nBw and nV w vs. nBh and nV h ).
                           We define socially intensive activities as activities spent outside the home. and
                    correspondingly activities as not socially intense if they take place in the respondent’s
                    home or yard. We prefer this classification to the alternative “with whom” criterion,
                    since we consider, e.g., the activity of going to the mall for recreational shopping to
                    be a socially intense activity, even though the individual may go there on his/her own.
                    Figure 3 shows the time spent in socially intense leisure vs. not socially intense leisure
                    for young and for old. As can be seen, despite spending much more time on leisure in
                    total, the old spend approximately the same amount of time on socially intense leisure,
                    i.e., leisure outside their home, as the young.8
                           Our definition of work includes market work, household work, core housework and
excludes sleeping and education. In the category leisure shopping we include “Shopping, except groceries,
food, and gas”, “Comparison shopping”, and “Researching purchases, n.e.c.”.
   8
     For more details about how people spend their time in in-puBlic and in-priVate leisure, see Appendix
A.



                                                                              13
                             800     600
                    m inut es per day
                         400 200
                             0




                                                        young                             old

                                                            in-puBlic leisure   in-priVate leisure


                                           Socially intense activities include associated traveling.
                                           Source: ATUS 2018.

Figure 3: Average minutes per day spent in socially intense leisure activities and not socially
intense activities.



     home production, necessity shopping, and time spent in education. In the same way as
     for leisure, we classify all work activities according to where they were performed: in the
     home or outside home. Figure 4 shows how many minutes of the average working day
     is spent at home (112 minutes on average) and outside home, mainly at the workplace
     (255 minutes on average). As Figure 4 also shows, there is no clear time trend in how
     large fraction of the working time that is spent at home. The slight downward trend
     in work done outside home can mainly be attributed to a compositional effect: the
     fraction of old individuals has increased slightly during this time period (21% in 2003
     compared to 27% in 2018), and they work less, especially outside the home.

     Calibration target for the size of the socially intense sector: We use
     employment statistics on the 4-digit NAICS level from BLS to classify sectors in the
     US. The classification is based on if the sector is assumed to provide goods/services
     to the socially intense consumption-leisure bundle (and consequently if the workforce
     interact with customers). The extent to which the sector can be classified as socially
     intense can be fully (100%), to a high extent (75%), to a somewhat smaller extent
     (50%) or not at all (0%). We then sum up the affected workforce, and get that out of
     the total workforce (161,037,700 workers), 20% work with producing for the socially
     active bundle. The lion’s share (43%) of the workforce working in the socially intense


                                                                         14
               300
               250
               200
               150
               100




                     2003   2006         2009         2012      2015   2018

                                        not at home          home



                                    Source: ATUS.

  Figure 4: Average minutes per day spent working home vs. not from home.



sector is working in the accommodation and food services provision, followed by “all
other retail” (18%) and “non-agricultural self-employed” (14%). An example of how
the classification is done is given in Appendix B.

Calibration of the production functions: The parameters of the production
functions are externally calibrated. We assume α = 1/3 for standard reasons and
θ = 10, reflecting a high but finite substitutability between young and old workers. In
the data, working hours are on average distributed between work from home (nh ) vs. in
the workplace (nw ) such that nw /nh = 2.3 (as seen in Figure 4). In the absence of an
epidemic, the marginal products of nh and nw are equal, delivering (1−α−ν)nh = νnw .
Hence we obtain that ν ≈ 0.202. The output elasticity of work that can be done from
home is 0.202 whereas it is 0.465 for work that can only be done at the workplace.
   We can use these values to assess how much production would be lost if nw /nh were
forced to fall from 2.3 to, say, 1. Then output would be

                                   3.30.465 3.30.202
                                                     ≈ 0.95,
                                    4.60.465 20.202

i.e., output would fall by 5 percent. This is sizable, though not a huge amount. If
nw /nh falls to 1/3 (2 hours worked at the workplace plus 6 hours worked from home
out of a 8 hours workday) the output loss is 25 percent. We find these losses reasonable


                                                15
  Target                                                                  Parameter
                                                                          
  Marginal product of capital equal across sectors
                                                                            kB , kV
  Marginal product of capital net of depreciation = interest rate
  Output share of public sector = 0.2                                     λ
                                                                          
  Leisure young = 0.56                                                    
  Leisure old = 0.74                                                          λB , λV , ϕ
  in-puBlic leisure/in-priVate leisure for young = 0.45
                                                                          

 The parameters associated with each target are the parameters which primarily determine
 the target.


Table 1: Calibration targets for the internally calibrated economic parameters.


in magnitude, supporting a choice of ν = 0.202.

Remaining internally calibrated parameters: Aside from the preference
elasticities ε, εB , and εV , the rest of the economic parameters are jointly internally
calibrated, with targets summarized by Table 1.
   Based on employment figures in the two types of goods/services production, we
target an aggregate production share of the B good of 0.2. This target is primarily
determined by the parameter λ, the utility weight on the B good.
   Choosing the capital stocks kB and kV is simply a normalization. Changing the
units of, e.g., kB necessitates adjusting the utility weights λB and λ but leaves the
maximization problem of the planner intact. For ease of interpretability, we set kB and
kV such that the implicit price of the B good and the V good are equal and the return
on capital is equalized across sectors, which means that kB is 0.2 of the total capital
stock (i.e., kB /kV = 1/4).
   The young spend 56% of their non-sleeping time on leisure. We therefore impose
that hyB + hyV = 0.56. The old population spend more of their available time on leisure,
74%. We therefore impose that hoB + hoV = 0.74. We classify leisure time as spent
either at home, which is thought of as leisure of the non-socially-intense V type, or
spent outside home, which is then classified as leisure of the socially intense B type.
The young spend 31% of total leisure time on the active B type of leisure, while 69% is
spent on the non-active V type. This gives us an additional constraint: hyB /hyV = 0.45
(the corresponding ratio for the old is endogenous). These three time-use moments
primarily determine the utility weights on leisure, λB and λV , as well as the relative
productivity of the old, ϕ.
   Given that the young and old are imperfect substitutes, ϕ does not directly cor-

                                           16
       respond to the difference in marginal productivity. Our calibrated value of ϕ is 0.62,
       yielding a marginal productivity of the old which is 72 percent of the marginal pro-
       ductivity of the young. To compare this estimate directly to the data is difficult, since
       the low labor force participation, especially for the old, makes the selection bias severe:
       remember that our group of old contains everyone above the age of 60, and in the group
       of the oldest old, say above 80, we have extremely few wage observations, and it is easy
       to argue that the few observations we see is not a random selection of the population.
       A raw estimate of the average observed wages in the same age groups from the CPS
       (pooling data from 2003 − 2017) gives an average wage for the old of 0.92 (normalizing
       the youngs’ average wage to 1), which we argue is well in line with our estimate, given
       the extremely few wage observations in the ages above 70.

       Elasticities in the utility function:            Above we took as given the elasticities
       in the utility function. In this section we discuss how ε, εB and εV are chosen. The
       outer elasticity, ε, controls the elasticity between in-puBlic consumption and in-priVate
       consumption, but it also controls the elasticity between in-puBlic consumption and in-
       priVate leisure as well as between in-puBlic leisure and in-priVate consumption. How
       should the marginal utility of in-puBlic leisure be affected if I buy a new TV? We think
       a reasonable benchmark is not at all, which motivates the benchmark ε = 1.0, yielding
       additive separability between the two consumption-leisure bundles.9
          To pick εB and εV , we put additional restrictions on the utility function. First, we
       require that the income effect should dominate the substitution effect in a realistic way:
       we require that if the economy grows by 2%, hours worked should fall by approximately
       0.4% (Boppart and Krusell, 2020). Second, we require that the young should spend
       a larger fraction of their leisure in the socially intense B activity, since that is what
       the data tells us. These two restrictions narrow down the set of permissible εB -εV
       combinations substantially. As our benchmark calibration, we use εB = 0.41 and
       εV = 0.80.10
          As a sanity check of our calibration of the utility function we examine the implied
       Frisch elasticity for the young, which turns out to be 1.1. This might at first sound
       rather high, but given that the model includes also the very young (our definition of
       young starts already at the age of 15) and that the Frisch elasticity should correspond
   9
     We acknowledge that this is not an obvious conclusion, and therefore perform robustness checks with
respect to the value of ε, found in Appendix D. Even though the details of the reallocation of time in the
event of an epidemic change, the substantive conclusions remain. Moreover, we argue that the reallocations
with the benchmark ε = 1.0 seem plausible.
  10
     See Appendix C for more details.



                                                   17
      Parameter     Description                                          Value
      Preference parameters
            λ       Weight on c̃B                                          0.25
          λB        Weight on cB                                           0.93
          λV        Weight on cV                                           0.69
            ε       Elasticity between c̃B and c̃V                          1.0
           εB       Elasticity between cB and hB                           0.41
           εV       Elasticity between cV and hV                           0.80
      Technology
            α       Capital share                                           1/3
            ν       Home work labor share                                 0.202
            θ       Elasticity of substitution between young and old         10
            ϕ       Production weight on young                             0.62
        kB /kV      Relative capital stock                                 0.25
      Demographics
           φy       Fraction young                                         0.73
                See text for description of sources and methodology.


                   Table 2: Summary of economic parameters.


to not only the intensive margin elasticity but the aggregate elasticity including also
the extensive margin, we think a value of 1.1 sounds reasonable.
    We summarize the parameters used in the economic model in Table 2.



3     A static version of the model with an epi-
demic
Before we describe the full dynamic model, we unpack how the model works by con-
sidering a static version of the model with a reduced-form epidemic side. The static
model provides important insight and will also be a key step in the solution of the
dynamic model. We simply assume that the utility costs of additional infections are
                                   y        o
exogenously given and equal to ξ T and ξ T for young and old respectively. Moreover,
we assume that the SIR state in the economy, i.e., the fraction of the young and the
old population being susceptible, infected, and recovered, is given exogenously. The
planner knows the SIR state, but cannot observe who is susceptible, infected, or recov-
ered. Given this information, the social planner maximizes total utility net of the cost




                                           18
of infections
                                   X                                        i
                                                                                     
                                            φi u(ciB , hiB , ciV , hiV ) − ξ T T i
                                 i∈{y,o}

subject to the economic constraints

                      1 = hiB + hiV + niBh + niBw + niV h + niV w                         i ∈ {y, o},    (10)
                              Fj (φy nyjh , φy nyjw , φo nojh , φo nojw ),
           X
                   φi cij =                                                              j ∈ {B, V },    (11)
         i∈{y,o}

                     φi = S i + I i + R i                                                  i ∈ {y, o}    (12)

and the transmission equations,

         Ti = π
              bB (hiB + niBw )S i + π
                                    bV niV w S i                                           i ∈ {y, o},   (13)
                                      m m        m
                          P
                             m∈{y,o} I (hB + nBw )
         π
         bB = πB P          
                                m     m        m  m   m
                                                        ,                                               (14)
                    m∈{y,o} (S + I + R )(hB + nBw )
                                      m m
                          P
                             m∈{y,o} I nV w
         π
         bV = πV P          
                                m     m        m m
                                                                                                        (15)
                    m∈{y,o} (S + I + R )nV w


as well as non-negativity constraints for both time and consumption quantities.
   Constraints (10) and (11) are the same as in the static economic problem. Con-
straint (12) is an accounting identity, the population of type i is composed of sus-
ceptible, infected, and recovered individuals. Constraint (13) gives the number of
transmissions T i for type i, depending on the infection risks (per time unit) π
                                                                               bB and
bV , the time spent socially in the B sector (hiB + niBw ) and in the V sector (niV w ), as
π
well as the number of susceptible individuals S i of type i. Finally, constraints (14) and
(15) describe how the infection risks depend on the parameters πB and πV as well as
the share of infected individuals, weighted by time spent in the sector.
   The two new parameters, πB and πV , capture how likely it is that the disease
is transmitted, given the amount of time spent on the contagious activities. These
parameters will be calibrated once we have a dynamic model with a full SIR block.
For now, we set πB = πV = 0.24, which we later will show is a reasonable calibration
for covid-19 in this model if we assume that a period in the model corresponds to one
day.




                                                         19
       3.1         Static externalities
       We can characterize the effect of the epidemic on the (static) economy with four wedges.
       For expositional purposes, assume that type i works from home as well as in both the
       B work place and the V work place (i.e., the solution is interior). By taking the first-
       order conditions in the social planner’s problem with respect to nih , niBw , niV w , we get
                                                                                          i
       the following relationships between the marginal productivities at the work place wBw
       and wVi w compared with the marginal productivities working from home whi , as well
       as the marginal utility of puBlic and priVate leisure,

                                              i
                                             wBw = whi + τBi ,                                      (16)
                                             wVi w = whi + τVi ,                                    (17)
                                             ∂ui    ∂ui
                                                  =      + τBi ,                                    (18)
                                             ∂hiB   ∂hiV

              i         ∂u ∂FB
       where wBw =     ∂cB ∂niBw is the marginal utility productivity of office work in the B sector
                            ∂u ∂FV
       for type i, wVi w = ∂c       i
                              V ∂nV w
                                      is the marginal utility productivity of office work in the V
                                  i    ∂u ∂FB     ∂u ∂FV
       sector for type i, and wh = ∂c       i
                                        B ∂nBh
                                               = ∂c      i
                                                    V ∂nV h
                                                            is the marginal utility productivity of
       home work for type i.    11

          The wedges τBi and τVi (which differ by age) are the implied costs, per time unit, of
       being in the puBlic area (either as a worker or as a consumer) and the priVate-sector
       office, summarizing the entire epidemic dimension of the social planner’s problem.
       Explicitly, the wedges are given by

                   Sti             i
       τBi =    i   i     i
                            bB ξ T
                            π                                                                       (19)
               S + It + Rt
               |t      {z         }
                  Infection-risk B wedge
                                                                         P m m                      !
              B          Iti                    1                            It (hB + nm  )             B
       +π            i    i    i
                                 ·P     m    m    m    m    m    − P       m           Bw
                                                                                                  2   ξπ ,
                    St + It + Rt    m (St + It + Rt )(hB + nBw )
                                                                        m    m     m   m    m
                                                                                                
                                                                    m (St + It + Rt )(hB + nBw )
          |                                                {z                                           }
                                               Static epidemiological externality B wedge
                                                                                                      y      o
  11                                                                                                 ∂u    ∂u
     Since the social planner ensures that marginal utilities are equalized for young and old, e.g., ∂cy =
                                                                                                           ∂co ,
                                                                                                       V     V
we omit superscripts on the marginal utilities. Further, since the social planner ensures that the marginal
utility productivity from home work is equalized across the two sectors, we omit the sector subscript for
home work marginal utility productivity.




                                                       20
and

            Sti             i
τVi =    i   i     i
                     bV ξ T
                     π                                                                    (20)
        S + It + Rt
        |t      {z         }
          Infection-risk V wedge
                                                               P m m                !
                       Iti                1                        I
                                                                 m t n                   V
    + πV           i    i    i
                               ·P    m    m    m    m  − P             Vw
                                                                                  2   ξπ
                  St + It + Rt   m (St + It + Rt )nV w
                                                              m    m     m m
                                                                                
                                                          m (St + It + Rt )nV w
        |                                         {z                                     }
                                       Static epidemiological externality V wedge

              B           V
where ξ π and ξ π             are the Lagrange multipliers on Constraints (14) and (15) respec-
tively.
     The infection-risk wedges are intuitive, and they are both present in the rational-
expectations allocation and in the social planner’s allocation. The infection-risk cost of
spending time in, e.g., the B sector is the product of the probability of being susceptible
     Sti                                                                            i
Sti +Iti +Rti
              ,                             bB , and the cost of infection ξ T .
                  the hourly infection rate π
     The perhaps more straightforward epidemiological externality, that an infected in-
dividual may infect other individuals in the future, is a dynamic externality and it is
                                                                                             i
therefore only implicitly captured in the static model by the cost of an infection, ξ T .
The static epidemiological externality wedges capture the effect that the behavior of
a household has on the infection risk for other households. Under the maintained as-
sumption that the social planner does not know who is infected, it is readily seen that
the static epidemiological externality wedge is zero if the young and old are identical,
in particular if the share of infected is the same in the two groups. Since the meeting
technology of the standard SIR model is linear, it does not matter for the individual
how many other people are in the public area, what matters is the share of infected
individuals. If everyone double the time they spend in the public area, the share of in-
fected individuals in the public area remains the same. For a discussion of this feature
of the SIR model and alternative assumptions on the meeting technology, see Garibaldi
et al. (2020).
     Our model features age heterogeneity so the static epidemiological externality is
not zero. Assuming a higher share of infected young people, the static epidemiological
externality wedge is positive for the young and negative for the old. When a young
person spends more time in the public area, she raises the share of infected in the
public area and therefore the infection risk for the other individuals in the public area.
Conversely, when an old person spends more time in the public area, she lowers the
share of infected in the public area and thereby lowers the infection risk for the other
individuals in the public area.


                                                     21
                                                                  Static pandemic possibility frontier
                                                     0.225
                new infections (percentage points)   0.200
                                                     0.175
                                                     0.150
                                                     0.125
                                                     0.100
                                                     0.075
                                                     0.050
                                                     0.025
                                                             0    10          20             30     40                50
                                                                           utility loss (percent)        stat_covid_base_vsl30_eps99_2000


                                                       Figure 5: Static pandemic possibility frontier.



3.2       Insights from a static epidemic model
For concreteness, assume that two percent of both the old and the young are infected
and that everyone else is susceptible. Furthermore, assume that the cost of an old
individual becoming infected is twice as large as the cost of a young individual becoming
infected.
      Figure 5 displays how total utility and infections vary with the cost of an infec-
tion. The relation between infections and utility trace out a convex static pandemic-
possibility frontier. A social planner that completely disregards the epidemic (i.e., sets
  y         o
ξ T = ξ T = 0), maximizes utility resulting in 0.22 percentage points of new infections
in one day. At this point, the static pandemic possibility frontier is vertical. By the
envelope theorem, the social planner can, at the margin, reduce infections at no (first-
order) utility cost. However, if the social planner has a higher cost of infections, i.e.,
wants to significantly reduce the number of infections, then this reduction comes at a
substantial utility loss.
      Figure 6 displays how the optimal time allocations of the young and old vary with
the cost of an infection. Absent epidemic considerations, with the cost of infections
equal to zero, both the young and the old work in the workplace. They also spend time
on leisure both in private and in public. As the cost of infections increases, the old
reduce the amount of work they do in the workplace. Recall that we assumed that the
cost of an old person becoming infected is twice the cost of a young person becoming


                                                                                  22
                                             Time allocation (young)                                                                                        Time allocation (old)
                     1.0        leisure V                                                                                           1.0       leisure V
                                leisure B                                        leisure                                                      leisure B                                       leisure
                                work V (workplace)                                                                                            work V (workplace)
                     0.8        work B (workplace)                                                                                  0.8       work B (workplace)
                                work from home                                                                                                work from home
  Fraction of time




                                                                                                                 Fraction of time
                     0.6                                                                                                            0.6


                     0.4                                                                                                            0.4
                                                                                 work
                     0.2                                                                                                            0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                              work
                     0.0                                                                                                            0.0
                            0         200            400        600    800             1000                                               0         200            400        600   800             1000
                                                           Ty                                                                                                            Ty
                                                                             stat_covid_base_vsl30_eps99_1000                                                                             stat_covid_base_vsl30_eps99_1000




                                                (a) Young                                                                                                          (b) Old
                      Two percent of the population is assumed to be infected and the remaining population is suscep-
                      tible. The cost of a new infection for the old is assumed to be twice as large, ξ To = 2ξ Ty . The
                      model is specified in the next section.

 Figure 6: Time allocations as a function of the cost of new infections for the young, ξ Ty .



                           infected so the planner therefore prioritizes sending the old to work from home. As the
                           cost of infections increases further, both the old and the young reduce the amount of
                           leisure they spend in public and eventually also the young reduce the amount of time
                           they spend at the workplace.
                                In this simple exercise we illustrated how the model works statically.12 As the
                           cost of new infections increases, the social planner gradually reduces epidemiologically
                           dangerous activities. The conceptual and computational challenge is to find the true
                           time-varying cost of an infection, taking the entire dynamic of the epidemic into ac-
                           count. The cost of becoming infected today depends not only on the fatality risk but
                           also on whether it is likely that the individual would have become infected in the fu-
                           ture anyway and whether it is likely that the individual may infect someone else in
                           the future. In the next section, we include these dynamic considerations in the social
                           planner’s problem.
  12
    In Appendix D we discuss how the choice of outer elasticity in the nested utility function, ε, affects these
results.




                                                                                                            23
4     The full dynamic model
We first describe the state variables in the dynamic problem, and then state the max-
imization problem of the planner.

State variables: Sti is the number of susceptible of type i ∈ {y, o} (young/non-
vulnerable and old/vulnerable, respectively) at time t; similarly Iti is the number
of infected and Rti the number of recovered. The total population size in time t
   P     i   i    i
                                                         y    o           i
is   i St + It + Rt , with initial conditions satisfying I0 + I0 = 0.001, R0 = 0 for
i ∈ {y, o} and S0y + S0o = 0.999. We assume that the fraction initially infected is
equal in the young and the old population. In the absence of an epidemic, all young
individuals live until period T y and all old individuals live until period T o < T y .

Law of motion for the state variables:                                  The law of motion for the state
variables is then given by,

                                      i
                                     St+1 = Sti − Tti                                              (21)
                                       i
                                      It+1 = Iti (1 − πr − πd,t
                                                            i
                                                                ) + Tti                            (22)
                                      i
                                     Rt+1 = Rti + πr Iti ,                                         (23)

    where

                                                i
                                               πd,t = H(Ity + Ito ).                               (24)

                     i is a function of the total number of infected individuals in the
    The death rates πd,t
economy, since it depends on whether the hospital system is overcrowded or not.

The maximization problem: The epidemic is over at time T (either endoge-
nously or by assuming that a cure instantaneously arrives at this point in time). The
planner chooses all the control variables up until time T − 1 and maximizes

              T
            X X
                       β t (Sti + Iti + Rti )v(ciB,t , hiB,t , ciV,t , hiV,t )
                                                                              

         i∈{y,o} t=0
                                           o
                         β T +1 − β T +1 o
                       +                (ST + ITo + RTo )v(coB,T , hoB,T , coV,T , hoV,T )
                              1−β
                                     y
                         β T +1 − β T +1 y
                       +                (ST + ITy + RTy )v(cyB,T , hyB,T , cyV,T , hyV,T ).
                              1−β



                                                        24
subject to the additional condition that the choice variables in period T maximize
static period utility as in the static economic model previously described.
   The epidemic is short compared to the remaining life span of the individuals: the
epidemic is over at time T , while the individuals who survive live until time T y (for
the young) and T o (for the old). Thus, the total utility is the sum of the flow utility
during the epidemic plus the remaining life span utility for the surviving individuals.
We assume that the consumption and time allocations stay on their time T levels after
the epidemic. This implies, perhaps somewhat unrealistically, that the continuation
utility of all surviving individuals after T is unaffected by what happens during the
pandemic. The above formulation of the maximization problem incorporates the entire
life span of the young and the old into the analysis without explicitly modelling birth,
ageing, and non-epidemic death.
   The maximization problem is subject to the law of motion given by equations (21)
to (24) and

                   1 = hiB,t + hiV,t + niBh,t + niBw,t + niV h,t + niV w,t           i ∈ {y, o},   (25)
             φit cij,t = Fj (φyt nyjh,t , φyt nyjw,t , φot nojh,t , φot nojw,t ),
      X
                                                                                    j ∈ {B, V },   (26)
   i∈{y,o}

                 φit = Sti + Iti + Rti ,                                             i ∈ {y, o},   (27)
                Tti = π
                      bB,t (hiB,t + niBw,t )Sti + π
                                                  bV,t niV w,t Sti ,                 i ∈ {y, o},   (28)
                                                 m m            m
                                   P
                                      m∈{y,o} It (hB,t + nBw,t )
              π
              bB,t = πB P            h                                   i,                        (29)
                                         m       m       m      m      m
                            m∈{y,o} (St + It + Rt )(hB,t + nBw,t )
                                                 m m
                                   P
                                      m∈{y,o} It nV w,t
              π
              bV,t = πV P            h                               i                             (30)
                                         m       m       m     m
                            m∈{y,o} (St + It + Rt )nV w,t


   for all t ≤ T and non-negativity constraints for time and consumption quantities.
Constraints (25) to (30) are the same as in the static model with an epidemic in the
previous subsection, except for the time subscripts on all variables.


4.1       Calibration of the dynamic model
For most parts, the calibration of the full dynamic model is already described in the
previous sections. However, there are a few new elements that we describe in turn.
First of all, a period in the model corresponds to a day. We set the discount factor β
such that β 365 = 0.96.
   We also need to adjust the utility function to add an intrinsic value of life, add


                                                               25
information about the expected life length of individuals in the case of no epidemic,
and calibrate the epidemic spread, recovery rate and fatality rate. We cover these three
points in the following sections.

Instantaneous utility and the value of a statistical life:                            To properly
assess the value of lost lives due to the epidemic, we need to add a “value of life” to the
value function. I.e., people derive utility from merely being alive, in addition to the
value they experience from leisure and consumption. Utility is additive in two terms
where the first term summarizes the benefits experienced from consumption of various
goods and the enjoyment of various active leisure choices. The second term is then
the separate value of a statistical life, i.e., the value of being alive during that period
of time. Young individuals are (naturally) assumed to live longer after the pandemic
than old individuals. Thus, a planner loses more utils if a young individual dies from
covid-19 than if an old individual dies, as the former loses more years of remaining
life-time. We define

                           v(cB , hB , cV , hV ) = u(cB , hB , cV , hV ) + u

with u(•) being defined as before in equation (3). We set u to be consistent with
estimates of the value of a statistical life, using the formula

                                     V SL   1 − β T +1 v(c)
                                          =                  ,                                (31)
                                       c      1 − β cv 0 (c)

where V SL, the value of a statistical life, is expressed in period-0 units of consumption,
see, e.g., Conley (1976) and Shepard and Zeckhauser (1984).
    The intuition for the equation is straightforward: The utility value of an additional
                      1−β T +1
statistical life is     1−β v(c),   with T being the number of expected remaining periods
of life and v(c) being the per-period flow utility. The utility value of an additional unit
of consumption is v 0 (c). The marginal value of an additional statistical life, in terms
                             1−β T +1 v(c)
of consumption, is thus        1−β v 0 (c) .   V SL/c is the value of a statistical life, expressed
as a multiple of per-period consumption.
    The value of a single time period, in our case a day, V ST P , is given by V ST P =
  1−β
1−β T +1
         V   SL. We therefore arrive at the formula

                                          V ST P   v(c)
                                                 = 0 .                                        (32)
                                             c    cv (c)

    We use the young generation’s equilibrium allocations of goods and time and adjust


                                                    26
       u so that the above equation is satisfied for a given estimate for VSTP.13
          We use two values for the value of a statistical time period, one higher and one
       lower. For the higher value, we follow Glover et al. (2020) who calculate that a value of
       a statistical year of life is 11.4 times yearly per capita consumption, based on data from
       The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Department of Transportation
       in the US. This is a high value, relative to VSL numbers used in other contexts. Hall
       et al. (2020), also based on numbers from EPA, use a value of 6: a year of life is worth
       six times annual consumption. Others use even lower numbers. We therefore also use
       a number from the lower range of different estimates, and set this to 4.0: a year of life
       is worth roughly 4 times annual consumption, a number that is well within the range
       of values discussed in Viscusi and Aldy (2003).

       Life span:        We assume that the young and old live up to period T y and T o , re-
       spectively. We calibrate T y and T o to match the remaining life expectancies based on
       the group definition.14 Note that a perfect estimate of this would take into account
       the mortality profile by age within each age group, and weight the conditional life
       expectancy by that. However, to make such an estimate requires many more assump-
       tions. We crudely assume that the average age of a deceased in the young group is 50
       years, and the corresponding age in the old group is 80. This implies a remaining life
       expectancy of 31.6 years for the young, and 9.2 years for the old (Arias and Xu, 2019),
       which is then the average years of life lost per death by group.

       Epidemiological side of the model:                   We now turn to the calibration of the
       epidemiological parameters for the epidemic part of our model, which builds on the
       classical SIR model by Kermack and McKendrick (1927).
          The pre-pandemic behavior implies an R0 that we restrict our key spread parame-
       ters πB and πV to match. To distinguish πB from πV amounts to drawing distinctions
       between the social interactions in the leisure activity (including for those who work
       in that activity) and the social interactions in the workplace in the production of the
       good used in the in-priVate composite. We consider all interactions equally contagious
       and set πB = πV .
          The estimates of R0 for covid-19 are uncertain and range between at least 1.4
  13
      Given that the young and the old have different time and goods allocations, in theory it matters which
type is selected. In practice, however, the difference between u based on the allocations of the young or the
allocations of the old is small.
   14
      The life expectancy at birth in the US is 78.6 years. However, the life expectancy, conditional on turning
60, is 83.3 (period life tables in Arias and Xu (2019)).



                                                      27
       and 3.9; we use 2.0 in our benchmark simulations. We simulate the simplest possible
       SIR model with a homogeneous population given this estimate of R0 (and a recovery
       rate πr and a death rate πd to be specified below). This gives us a measure of the
       final number of recovered (which is 78%) if the epidemic were to play out unhindered.
       Thereafter we use the steady-state time allocations in our economic model and find
       the πB = πV which give the same final number of recovered in the economy, if there
       were no endogenous behavioral responses.15
          In line with Atkeson (2020) and Eichenbaum et al. (2020a) we set the average time
       from infection to recovery to be 18 days. This time also corresponds to the time from
       symptom to recovery in Glover et al. (2020). Since our model is daily, πr , the recovery
       rate, is set to 1/18.
          We assume that the death rate of the illness is an increasing function of the number
       of infected. πdi is a logistic function for which the midpoint of the logistic curve–where
       the increase in death probability is the highest–occurs at the point where the hospitals
       are getting over-crowded. This point is assumed to happen when the fraction of infected
                                 ˆ The current death rate in any time period is thus a function
       in the population reaches I.
       of the current total number of infected:
                                                            i
                                                           πd,high    i
                                                                   − πd,low
                                 i               i
                                πd,t = H(It ) = πd,low +                ˆ
                                                                                                 (33)
                                                            1 + e−k(It −I)

          with It denoting the sum of the young and the old infected. Based on US data,
       there were 29.4 intensive care units (ICUs) per 100,000 people at the onset of the covid
       crisis so we assume one ICU per 3,400 people.16 Further, we assume that three percent
       of the infected individuals require hospitalization, and, based on estimates for Sweden,
       that 29% of the hospitalized are in need of intensive care.17 Taken together, this gives
       us an Iˆ = 1/(0.03 × 0.29 × 3400) ≈ 0.034. In other words, we assume that the death
       rate will quickly increase when the number of infected reaches 3.4% of the population.
          The probability of dying (on a given day) conditional on being infected, when there
       is no over-crowding in the hospitals, is set to 0.001×1/18 for the young and 0.025×1/18
       for the old, following Glover et al (2020). This means that the average infection fatality
  15
      The resulting epidemiological spread is very close but not exactly the same as the SIR model with
homogeneous population simulated initially, since young and old have slightly different time allocations and
slightly different death rates.
   16
      Based on information from Society of Critical Care Medicine,                        downloaded from
https://sccm.org/getattachment/Blog/March-2020/United-States-Resource-Availability-for-
COVID-19/United-States-Resource-Availability-for-COVID-19.pdf?lang=en-US at June 24.
   17
      Glover et al (2020) assume a hospitalization rate of 2% for the young and 12.5% for the old, which with
our population shares would give a weighted average of 4.9%.


                                                     28
                                                      Case fatality rate
                           5          young
                                      old

                           4


                           3
                 percent




                           2


                           1


                           0
                               0.00      0.01       0.02        0.03       0.04     0.05   0.06
                                                Fraction infected in the population

               Figure 7: Infection fatality rate for young and old.




Parameter      Description                                                                                  Value
Epidemic variables
     R0       Spread factor standard SIR model                                                                2.0
 πB = πV      Spread factor economic model                                                                   0.24
      πr      Recovery rate                                                                                  1/18
     i
   πd,low     Death rate (before overcrowding) [young, old]                                 [0.001, 0.025] · 1/18
    i
  πd,high     Death rate (when overcrowded) [young, old]                                    [0.002, 0.050] · 1/18
Health care system
     ιh        Fraction of infected in need of hospitalization                                                0.03
     ιi        Fraction of hospitalized in need of ICU                                                        0.29
     ιb        Inhabitants per ICU bed                                                                       3,400
     Iˆ        Midpoint logistic function (fraction infected)                                     1 / (ιh · ιi · ιb )
     k         Steepness parameter                                                                           1,000
                    See text for description of sources and methodology.


                Table 3: Summary of epidemiological parameters.




                                                             29
rate in the population is 0.7% (if the young and the old were infected at the same rate).
When the health care system is completely overburdened, the probabilities are assumed
to be twice as high and thus set to 0.002 × 1/18 for the young and 0.05 × 1/18 for the
old. The steepness of the curve, k, is set to 1000. The resulting mortality rates are
shown in Figure 7.
   A summary of the epidemiological parameters is given in Table 3.


4.2       Solution method
In Appendix E, we state the recursive reformulation of the planner’s problem. The
planner’s problem, in a given period, can be separated into a dynamic epidemic problem
and, conditional on the epidemic problem, statically computing the optimal economic
allocation, as in our static model with an epidemic, described in Section 3.
                                   i
   The cost of a new infection ξ T for type i depends on the difference in the marginal
continuation value for the social planner between a susceptible and an infected indi-
vidual,
                                                              
                                   i           ∂V     ∂V
                               ξT = β                − i0          .
                                               ∂S i0  ∂I

The epidemic dimension of the problem in a given time period is therefore reduced to
                                   ∂V            ∂V
the marginal continuation values   ∂S i0
                                           and   ∂I i0
                                                       .   The planner’s static economic problem
is to compute the optimal economic allocation, conditional on these marginal values.
   The dynamics are described by an application of the envelope theorem. The enve-
lope theorem is here used to compute the marginal value of an additional susceptible,
infected or recovered individual. This marginal value includes the within-period flow
utility of the individual, the within-period net contribution of the individual to the
aggregate budget (young are net contributors and old are net receivers of resources
in the optimal allocation), the continuation value of having the additional individual
in future periods, as well as the marginal effect of the individual on the epidemic.
Note that we use the envelope theorem to compute the marginal value of an additional
household member, which is why the expression involves the level of flow utility rather
than marginal utility. We show the explicit expressions in Appendix E. There are two
dynamic externalities. First, an infected individual may infect other individuals in the
future. Second, an infected individual may use hospital resources, increasing the death
risk for other infected individuals. The social planner takes both these externalities
into account.



                                                 30
4.2.1    Solution algorithm
The model we have written down has a high-dimensional state space (six epidemio-
logical states and the time dimension) and many choice variables (12 time allocations
and 4 consumption allocations). Furthermore, the epidemic dynamics are distinctly
non-linear. Standard approaches such as linearization or a direct application of value-
function iteration are therefore not suitable for solving the model. Our method uses
                                                                    i
the insight that, within a period, the costs of infections ξ T together with the epidemi-
ological state summarize the intertemporal dimension.
                                                              i
   Given the cost of an infection for both types, ξ T for i ∈ {y, o}, and the epidemic
state Ω = (S y , I y , Ry , S o , I o , Ro ), the optimal (static) allocation is straightforwardly
                                                                                    i
computed. The challenge is thus to find the correct time path for {ξ T }i∈{y,o} and
the correct time path for the epidemic state Ω. Our algorithm, described in detail in
Appendix E, proceeds as follows. Start with a guess for the path of the costs of an
              i
infection {ξtT }Tt=0 for i ∈ {y, o}.
   Given the initial epidemic state Ω0 and the guess for the initial-period costs of
                  i
an infection ξ0T , compute the time allocations in time 0. Use the law of motion for
the epidemic and the time allocations to get the epidemic state at time 1, Ω1 . Keep
“rolling forward” the epidemic, using the epidemic state Ωt and the t-period costs of
                  i
an infection ξtT to compute the epidemic state at time t + 1, Ωt+1 .
   Once we have the entire time path of the epidemic, time allocations and consump-
tion allocations, we use the envelope theorem to iterate backwards. Compute the
marginal continuation values at time T under the assumption that the epidemic is
over. Given the marginal continuation values at time t + 1 and the allocations at time
t, use the envelope theorem expressions to get the marginal
                                                            continuation values at time
                                       i       ∂V          ∂V
t. Finally, use the relationship ξtT = β      ∂St+1   −   ∂It+1   to arrive at an implied path of
                              Ti
the costs of an infection {ξt }Tt=0 for i ∈ {y, o}.
   The new guess for the costs of an infection is a weighted average of the old guess
and the implied path. Start over and iterate until convergence.


4.3     The market solution
Here we describe how individual families decide on their own time allocations. To
abstract from concerns regarding redistribution of consumption between young and
old, we assume that the decision unit in the market allocation is a representative family
with both old and young individuals. The family does not know who is susceptible,
infected, or recovered but knows how many individuals are susceptible, infected, or


                                               31
recovered.
   We begin by describing the rational-expectations equilibrium. We then introduce
a myopic equilibrium where households do not realize that their time allocations affect
their death probabilities.


4.3.1      Rational-expectations equilibrium
The representative family (consisting of both young and old individuals) works in the
two sectors of the economy as well as accrues income from owning the capital stock.
It uses the income to finance consumption from the two sectors, and spends time on
leisure.
   The family’s objective function is

                          Ti
                        X X
                                    β t (Sti + Iti + Rti )v(ciB,t , hiB,t , ciV,t , hiV,t ) .
                                                                                          

                      i∈{y,o} t=0


The family faces a sequence of budget constraints
                                                X
                                                       (Sti + Iti + Rti )(pB,t ciB,t + pV,t ciV,t ) =
                                              i∈{y,o}
      X
             (Sti + Iti + Rti )(wBh,t
                                 i              i
                                      niBh,t + wBw,t niBw,t + wVi h,t niV h,t + wVi w,t niV w,t )
     i∈{y,o}
                                                                                 +rB,t kB + rV,t kV

and the time constraints

                        hiB,t + hiV,t + niBh,t + niBw,t + niV h,t + niV w,t = 1

for i ∈ {y, o}.
   In addition, the family takes into account how the family size and composition
evolve over time:
                            Tti = π
                                  bB,t Sti hiB,t + niBw,t + π
                                                            bV,t Sti niV w,t
                                                         


for i ∈ {y, o}, where π
                      bB,t and π
                               bV,t are probabilities beyond the control of the family;
their equilibrium determination is described below. The stocks then evolve as

                                               i
                                              St+1 = Sti − Tti

                                      i
                                     It+1 = Iti (1 − πr − πd,t
                                                           i
                                                               ) + Tti


                                                        32
                                         i
                                        Rt+1 = Rti + πr Iti ,
                       i is also a probability beyond the control of the family; its
again for i ∈ {y, o}. πd,t
equilibrium determination is described below. This completes the description of the
family planner’s maximization problem.
   Firms act in perfectly competitive markets and maximize profits. Hence B firms
                    y     o , N y , N o ) to maximize
at t choose labor (NBh , NBh   Bw    Bw

                       y     y     y
                                                           X
                                                                   i     i     i     i
             pB,t FB (NBh , NBw , NBh , NBwo ) −                 (wBh,t NBh + wBw,t NBw )
                                                             i


and, similarly for V firms, where a different combination (NVy h , NVo h , NVy w , NVo w ) is
chosen to maximize

             pV,t FV (NVy h , NVy w , NVy h , NV wo ) −
                                                           X
                                                                 (wVi h,t NVi h + wVi w,t NVi w )
                                                             i

Each of these problems result in standard conditions. The profits of the firms, which we
denote by rB,t kB and rV,t kV respectively, are paid out as dividend to the representative
household.
   In equilibrium, total hours worked per age group and work type is equal to the
hours per-capita times population size,

                                    i
                                   NBh = (Sti + Iti + Rti )niBh

and similarly for the other variables. The resource constraints in this economy are the
same as those stated for the planner.
   We now use bars (e.g., x̄) to indicate aggregate variables (taken as given by the
family; all families are identical so in equilibrium this distinction is dropped). The key
equilibrium probabilities taken as given by the family are
                                         P          ¯m m             + n̄m
                                            m∈{y,o} It (h̄B,t            Bw,t )
                 π
                 bB,t = πB P               h                                         i,
                                 m∈{y,o}       (S̄tm + I¯tm + R̄tm )(h̄m
                                                                       B,t + n̄ m )
                                                                                Bw,t

                                                P          ¯m m
                                                   m∈{y,o} It n̄V w,t
                       π
                       bV,t = πV P                h                                  i,
                                       m∈{y,o}        (S̄tm + I¯tm + R̄tm )n̄m
                                                                             V w,t

                                         i
                                        πd,t = H(I¯ty + I¯to ),

with H(•) given by equation (33).


                                                      33
       4.3.2    Myopic equilibrium
       In the myopic equilibrium, there is no feedback between the epidemic and the economy.
       All economic decisions are taken as if there was no connection between activities,
       risk of infections and deaths. Thus, the distribution of individuals over the three
       epidemiological states does not matter. All the decision problems, though occurring
       over time, are static.



       5       Results
       We consider two scenarios for the end of the epidemic. Either the epidemic ends
       endogenously and gradually when the population eventually reaches the herd immunity
       threshold so that the effective reproduction number goes below one, or there is an
       exogenous end to it. We model the exogenous end to the epidemic as an arrival of a
       perfect cure which is instantaneously distributed, which means that we assume that
       everyone infected is immediately cured from the disease once the cure arrives. Two
       alternative endings to the epidemic are an instantaneous arrival and distribution of
       a vaccine or a perfect implementation of testing and tracing.18 From a modelling
       perspective, both scenarios are very similar to the arrival of a cure, with the difference
       that with the arrival of a vaccine or testing and tracing, those infected at the point of
       the arrival can still die from the disease. In practice, this makes a very small difference
       in the model.
           In the result section that follows we first focus on the case of an endogenous end of
       the epidemic to facilitate the understanding of the mechanisms at work. We thereafter
       consider a scenario with a cure arriving. Then we discuss the importance of the value
       of a statistical life. The section concludes with a discussion of what we can learn from
       testing our model on two very different epidemics: a seasonal flu and SARS.


       5.1     Results with no cure of the epidemic
       5.1.1    Evolution of the epidemic
       In Figure 8, we show the evolution of the epidemic under the myopic market allocation,
       the rational-expectations market allocation, and the social planner’s allocation under
  18
    When a social planner is capable of perfectly identifying who is infected, the planner would in our model
framework let the infected stay at home until they are recovered, and the epidemics would die out quickly.




                                                     34
                                                    Evolution of the epidemic: infections                                                                                                                                  Evolution of the epidemic: infections
                                   0.16                                                                                              young                                                            0.16                                                                       young
                                                                                                                                     old                                                                                                                                         old
                                   0.14                                                                                                                                                               0.14
 fraction of population infected




                                                                                                                                                                    fraction of population infected
                                   0.12                                                                                                                                                               0.12
                                   0.10                                                                                                                                                               0.10
                                   0.08                                                                                                                                                               0.08
                                   0.06                                                                                                                                                               0.06
                                   0.04       Health system capacity                                                                                                                                  0.04        Health system capacity

                                   0.02                                                                                                                                                               0.02
                                   0.00                                                                                                                                                               0.00
                                          0      100      200     300      400                                     500    600        700                                                                      0         100         200         300        400   500   600        700
                                                                        days                                                covid_base_vsl40_eps99_myopic_730
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        days                 covid_base_vsl40_eps99_ce_730


(a) The evolution of the epidemic under the my- (b) The evolution of the epidemic under the ra-
opic market allocation.                         tional expectations market allocation.

                                                                                                                                Evolution of the epidemic: infections
                                                                                                            0.16                                                                                                              young
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              old
                                                                                                            0.14
                                                                          fraction of population infected




                                                                                                            0.12
                                                                                                            0.10
                                                                                                            0.08
                                                                                                            0.06
                                                                                                            0.04         Health system capacity

                                                                                                            0.02
                                                                                                            0.00
                                                                                                                     0      100         200          300           400                                  500       600         700
                                                                                                                                                                days                                                    covid_base_vsl40_eps99_sp_730


                                                    (c) The evolution of the epidemic under the social planner’s allocation.

Figure 8: The evolution of the epidemic under the social planner’s allocation and the two
different market allocations.




                                                                                                                                                           35
       the assumption that no cure arrives.19 A first observation is that the social-planner
       scenario is qualitatively different compared to the myopic or the rational-expectations
       scenarios.

       Observation 1 The social planner “protects the health-care system” and prolongs the
       epidemic.

          The epidemic under the myopic market allocation is close to standard SIR dynamics.
       The health system is overloaded, many young and old get infected, and the epidemic
       is essentially over because of herd immunity after 300 days.
          The evolution of the epidemic under the rational-expectations market allocation
       may at first pass seem similar. The health system is overloaded and the epidemic is
       essentially over after 300 days. However, under rational expectations, few old become
       infected. The epidemic is primarily a risk for the old and under rational expectations
       they shift their behavior away from activities associated with infection risk. The young
       also do so, but to a much lesser extent both because their risk is lower and because the
       labor-market wages give a compensating differential to the young.
          Under the social planner’s allocation, the evolution of the epidemic is qualitatively
       different. The social planner internalizes the effects of an overloaded health system
       and keeps infections below the threshold for overloading. Therefore, it takes a longer
       time to reach herd immunity, and the epidemic is essentially over after 400 days.

       Observation 2 The social planner’s allocation avoids “overshooting”.

       In Figure 9, we show the evolution of the susceptible, infected, and recovered for the
       three scenarios. As expected, the final number of recovered is the lowest in the social
       planner scenario: a social planner ensures that the herd immunity threshold is reached
       with the smallest amount of people getting infected in total. In the social planner
       scenario, the final fraction of recovered is 53%, to be compared to 63% in the rational-
       expectations scenario and 78% in the myopic scenario. In other words, a social planner
       avoids “over-shooting” in the number of infected and subsequently recovered.20
  19
     In this section, we show results from the lower value of life assumption. Results from the higher value
of a statistical life assumption can be found in Appendix F. The importance of the value of a statistical life
assumption will be discussed further in Subsection 5.3.
  20
     Note that in a standard SIR model without heterogeneity and deaths, the minimum number of recovered
needed to reach herd immunity is 1 − 1/R0 . With a basic reproduction number R0 = 2.0 this implies 50%
recovered, close to the value in our model, 53%.




                                                     36
                            Evolution of the epidemic                                                                                                Evolution of the epidemic
            1.0                                                                                                        1.0                                                               Susceptible
                                                                                                                                                                                         Infected
                                                                                                                                                                                         Recovered
            0.8                                                                                                        0.8                                                               Dead


            0.6                                                     Susceptible                                        0.6
                                                                    Infected
 fraction




                                                                                                            fraction
                                                                    Recovered
            0.4                                                     Dead                                               0.4

            0.2                                                                                                        0.2

            0.0                                                                                                        0.0
                  0   100   200   300      400              500   600       700                                               0         100         200         300        400   500   600        700
                                        days                       covid_base_vsl40_eps99_myopic_730
                                                                                                                                                                        days                 covid_base_vsl40_eps99_ce_730


(a) SIR dynamics under the myopic market allo- (b) SIR dynamics under the rational expectations
cation.                                        market allocation.

                                                                                 Evolution of the epidemic
                                                      1.0                                                                           Susceptible
                                                                                                                                    Infected
                                                                                                                                    Recovered
                                                      0.8                                                                           Dead


                                                      0.6
                                           fraction




                                                      0.4

                                                      0.2

                                                      0.0
                                                              0    100         200          300           400           500       600         700
                                                                                                       days                             covid_base_vsl40_eps99_sp_730


                                  (c) SIR dynamics under the social planner’s allocation.

Figure 9: SIR dynamics in the social planner’s allocation and the two different market
allocations.




                                                                                                  37
                                           Time allocation (young)                                                                                      Time allocation (young)
                    1.0       leisure V                                                                                          1.0       leisure V
                              leisure B                                         leisure                                                    leisure B                                         leisure
                              work V (workplace)                                                                                           work V (workplace)
                    0.8       work B (workplace)                                                                                 0.8       work B (workplace)
                              work from home                                                                                               work from home
 Fraction of time




                                                                                                              Fraction of time
                    0.6                                                                                                          0.6


                    0.4                                                         work                                             0.4                                                         work


                    0.2                                                                                                          0.2


                    0.0                                                                                                          0.0
                          0     100     200        300      400   500   600        700                                                 0     100     200        300      400   500   600        700
                                                         days                 covid_base_vsl40_eps99_ce_730
                                                                                                                                                                      days                 covid_base_vsl40_eps99_sp_730


(a) Work under the rational expectations market (b) Work under the social planner’s allocation.
allocation.

Figure 10: Time allocation in the social planner and the rational expectation scenario for
the young.




                                              Time allocation (old)                                                                                        Time allocation (old)
                    1.0       leisure V                                                                                          1.0       leisure V
                              leisure B                                         leisure                                                    leisure B                                         leisure
                              work V (workplace)                                                                                           work V (workplace)
                    0.8       work B (workplace)                                                                                 0.8       work B (workplace)
                              work from home                                                                                               work from home
 Fraction of time




                                                                                                              Fraction of time




                    0.6                                                                                                          0.6


                    0.4                                                                                                          0.4


                    0.2                                                         work                                             0.2                                                         work


                    0.0                                                                                                          0.0
                          0     100     200        300      400   500   600        700                                                 0     100     200        300      400   500   600        700
                                                         days                 covid_base_vsl40_eps99_ce_730
                                                                                                                                                                      days                 covid_base_vsl40_eps99_sp_730


(a) Work under the rational expectations market (b) Work under the social planner’s allocation.
allocation.

Figure 11: Time allocation in the social planner and the rational expectation scenario for
the old.




                                                                                                         38
       5.1.2    Time allocations during the epidemic
       In Figures 10 and 11 we unpack the time allocations under the rational-expectations
       and social-planner scenarios. Under the myopic market allocation, the time allocations
       do not change over time and are therefore not shown.21

       Observation 3 In the rational-expectations scenario, the old avoid all social activities.

       Under the rational-expectations market allocation, the old completely stop working in
       the workplace from the beginning of the epidemic. They also largely stop spending
       time on in-puBlic leisure, their time is instead spent working from home and enjoying
       a little bit more in-priVate leisure. Recall that our definition of work includes various
       household activities such as cleaning and cooking. The young adjust their behavior as
       well, but to a much smaller degree. During the peak of the epidemic, when the health
       system is overloaded, they reduce their work in the workplace but otherwise they keep
       their behavior relatively constant.

       Observation 4 In the social planner scenario, the old can enjoy some social leisure.

       Under the social planner’s allocation, the time allocations are fine tuned to not overload
       the hospital system. From very early on in the epidemic, the old stop working in
       the office. However, because infection rates are kept at a moderate level, they can
       still spend time on in-puBlic leisure, and they therefore spend considerably less time
       working from home compared with the rational-expectations market allocation. The
       young work less in the office as well, internalizing the externality of them becoming
       infected and subsequently infecting others.


       5.1.3    Aggregate variables during the epidemic
       In Figure 12, we compare the aggregate impact of the three different allocations.

       Observation 5 Both the rational-expectations allocation and the social planner’s al-
       location substantially reduce the number of deaths.

          In Figure 12a, we plot the number of cumulative deaths under the three scenarios.
       Under the myopic market allocation, approximately one percent of the population dies.
       The rational-expectations allocation improves on this outcome significantly, reducing
       the number of deaths to 0.21%. The well-informed self interest of the old is sufficient
  21
     Technically, time allocations do change slightly even in the myopic scenario, due to deaths in the popu-
lation. However, these changes are so small that they are not visible in these graphs and can be disregarded.

                                                     39
                                       Cumulative deaths                                                                                          Output
           1.0       myopic                                                                                  0.0
                     full info
                     optimal                                                                                 2.5
           0.8                                                                                               5.0
                                                                                                             7.5
           0.6
 Percent




                                                                                                  Percent
                                                                                                            10.0
           0.4                                                                                              12.5
                                                                                                            15.0
           0.2
                                                                                                            17.5                                                           myopic
                                                                                                                                                                           full info
           0.0                                                                                              20.0                                                           optimal
                 0      100      200     300      400           500   600    700                                    0         100         200   300      400   500   600    700
                                               days                                                                                                   days

(a) Cumulative deaths under the three different (b) Output drop under the three different scenar-
scenarios.                                      ios.

                                                                                   Flow utility per capita
                                                            0

                                                            1

                                                            2

                                                            3
                                                  Percent




                                                            4

                                                            5

                                                            6                                                                   myopic
                                                                                                                                full info
                                                            7                                                                   optimal
                                                                  0    100    200      300      400           500       600         700
                                                                                             days

                                       (c) Drop in flow utility under the three different scenarios.

                                          Figure 12: Comparing the three different scenarios.




                                                                                             40
       to significantly reduce the number of deaths. In the social planner scenario, the total
       death toll is just slightly below the rational expectation scenario: 0.20%. However, the
       composition of deaths during the epidemic is very different. In the rational expectation
       scenario 54% of the deaths are in the young population. In the social planner scenario,
       24% of the deaths are in the young population. As we saw in Figure 9, the final number
       of recovered is lower in the social-planner scenario than in the rational-expectations
       scenario. Thus, even though the total number of individuals who have once been
       infected is lower in the social-planner scenario, the death rate is almost equal since
       there were more old individuals among the infected, and the old have a higher death
       rate. The difference in death rates between young and old is larger than the effect of
       hospital over-crowding on the death rates of the young. A social planner saves young
       lives compared to a rational-expectations scenario, which translates into more years of
       life saved.

       Observation 6 Output falls only modestly under the rational-expectations allocation,
       and substantially more in the social planner’s allocation.

           Figure 12b shows the corresponding responses of aggregate output.22 Under the
       myopic market allocation, output is virtually unaffected throughout the epidemic. As
       the population shrinks, mechanically output falls marginally. The rational-expectations
       market allocation implies a modest fall in output during the peak of the epidemic but
       the annual drop in output is a mere 1.5 percent. The social planner is willing to reduce
       output much more than either market allocation. During the peak of the epidemic,
       output drops by 20 percent and during the first year of the epidemic, output falls by
       9.7 percent.

       Observation 7 The policy trade-off is not only output vs. deaths, social leisure is also
       an important dimension.

           Figure 12c shows the percentage drop in per-period per-capita utility. The myopic
       flow utility is essentially unaffected by the epidemic, increasing slightly due to the
       deaths (and the constant capital stock, leading to higher output per capita). For both
       the rational-expectations market allocation and the social planner’s allocation, flow
       utility per capita drops substantially during the epidemic. Note however that the social
       planner’s allocation implies a smaller fall in flow utility than the rational-expectation
       market allocation. In the rational-expectation market allocation, the old are essentially
       prohibited from any socially active activity and their utility is significantly reduced.
22
     Note that our measure of output is broader than only GDP, it also includes home production.

                                                   41
                               Flow utility per capita                                                                      Flow utility per capita
           0                                                                                             0

            5                                                                                             5

           10                                                                                            10
 Percent




                                                                                               Percent
           15                                                                                            15

           20                                                                                            20
                                                                    Young                                         Young
           25                                                       Old                                  25       Old
                                                                    Total                                         Total
                 0     100   200   300      400    500   600        700                                       0     100   200   300      400    500   600        700
                                         days                  covid_base_vsl40_eps99_ce_730
                                                                                                                                      days                  covid_base_vsl40_eps99_sp_730


(a) Flow utility under the rational expectation (b) Flow utility under the social planner alloca-
market allocation.                              tion.

Figure 13: Flow utility under the rational-expectations and the social planner’s allocations.

                Their utility loss is not captured by output since it is a loss of valuable leisure, not
                consumption, but it is an economic loss nonetheless. It is tempting to frame a discussion
                of epidemic policy as a trade-off between the economy, as captured by output, and lives.
                This way of framing the trade-off misses that the social planner is willing to sacrifice
                consumption utility not only in order to save lives but also to save leisure utility for
                the old.

                Observation 8 The social planner’s allocation benefits the flow utility of the old at
                the expense of the young compared to the rational-expectations allocation.

                     Figure 13 unpacks the flow utility for the young vs. the old for the rational-
                expectations scenario and the social planner’s scenario.23 It should be noted that
                the flow utility per capita is calculated as the flow utility per person alive in respec-
                tive group, thus the effect of deaths are not visible from these graphs, but only the
                instantaneous utility for the individuals that are alive. In the rational-expectations
                scenario, shown in Figure 13a, it is clear that the loss in average per-capita flow utility
                is completely driven by the old, whose flow utility decreases by more than 25% during
                some critical weeks when the infection rate in the society is at its peak. During those
                critical weeks, the old have to stay at home and hardly enjoy any in-puBlic leisure at
                all, which drives down their utility substantially. As the old drastically reduce their
   23
     Under the myopic market allocation, the flow utility hardly changes and is therefore not shown. Techni-
cally, it increases slightly due to deaths in population (and the fixed capital stock), however the magnitude
is so small (0.1%) that it is not visible in this graph and can be disregarded.

                                                                                          42
B good consumption, the price of the B good falls. This benefits the young, and they
even see a slight increase in utility.
   Further, Figure 13b shows the flow utility in the social planner solution. The social
planner distributes the burden of behavioral adjustment more efficiently. The young
now also take a hit, with flow utility decreasing during the pandemics. However, since
the old are so much better off relative to the rational-expectations scenario, the drop
in average flow utility conditional on survival during the peak of the epidemic is not
as severe as in the rational-expectations scenario.

                                                                                 i
5.1.4 Resulting paths for the multipliers on transmissions ξ T and the
corresponding wedges
                                                                                     i
Figure 14 shows the optimal path for the multipliers on transmissions ξ T and the
resulting wedges in the in-puBlic and the in-priVate sector for the young and the old
respectively under the social planner’s allocation.

Observation 9 The social planner puts a substantial multiplier on both young and
old, and the wedges distort behavior of both.

   Already in the beginning of the epidemic, the Lagrange multiplier on a newly in-
fected old individual is high. Although the Lagrange multiplier on a newly infected
young is lower than the multiplier for the old, it is also substantial.
   The Lagrange multipliers are difficult to interpret directly and it is informative
to translate them into “wedges”. The wedges (described in equations (19) and (20))
are the hourly implied costs of being in the in-puBlic area or in the in-priVate sector
workplace. As can be seen, it is generally more costly for the social planner to let old
people be in those situations where they can be infected, due to their higher infection
fatality rate. It is also slightly more costly to place an old individual in the workplace in
the in-priVate sector than in an in-puBlic area. The reason is the different composition
of people in those two areas. There is a higher concentration of infected individuals
in the in-priVate workplace (in practice only young individuals work in the workplace
during the height of the epidemic if the social planner were to decide), while in the in-
puBlic areas there is a mix of old and young people, and the infection rate is therefore
slightly lower.
   In the beginning, there are extremely few infected in the economy, so even though
the cost of a newly infected is high, the implied wedge is low. When the number of
infected in the economy increases, the wedge also increases, even though the cost of


                                             43
       a newly infected actually has a non-monotonic behavior for the first 100 days of the
       epidemic.
          Towards the end of the epidemic, the Lagrange multipliers on newly infected in-
       creases again, but the implied wedges are lower than during the peak of the epidemic.
       The reason is of course that towards the end, the epidemic is virtually gone, and hence
       there are not many infected left to infect others.

       Observation 10 The rational-expectations allocation implies large multiplier on the
       old and large distortion of behavior of the old only.

          It is informative to compare the wedges from the social planner’s allocation with
       the implied wedges from the rational-expectations scenario, shown in Figure 15. In
       this scenario, the multipliers and the resulting wedges are only functions of the direct
       infection risk not including the externalities. As can be seen, the differences in multi-
       pliers and wedges for the old and the young is larger. The wedges for the young are
       very small, while for the old, it is all but prohibitively costly to go out to enjoy any
       in-puBlic leisure during the height of the epidemic.


       5.2        What if a cure arrives?
       All previous results were under the assumption that a cure of the disease does not
       arrive in the foreseeable future. Now we consider what happens if a cure of the disease
       arrives.

       Observation 11 If a cure is expected to arrive early enough, the social planner’s
       solution shifts qualitatively towards suppression.

       We consider a scenario where it is known that a cure of the disease arrives after one
       year. The epidemic evolution for the rational-expectations market allocations and the
       social-planner allocations under this scenario is shown in Figure 16.24 The rational-
       expectations market allocations are, for all intents and purposes, unaffected by the
       arrival of the cure, since it arrives after the epidemic is finalized anyhow.25 However, the
       social planner’s allocation qualitatively shifts towards full suppression of the epidemic
       if the cure arrives early enough. As can be seen in Figure 16, if the cure arrives within
       a year, the social planner’s strategy shifts qualitatively: from a strategy best described
       as “protect the health care system” to a “suppression” strategy.
  24
   The myopic dynamics are unaffected by the arrival of a cure, so we do not show them.
  25
   If the cure were expected to arrive in the midst the epidemic, also the rational-expectation allocations
would adjust when the cure is close.

                                                    44
                           Resulting      Ti                                                                                                                                     Wedges in optimal scenario
   600       Young                                                                                                                            2.5                                                               B sector young




                                                                                           Wedge (as multiple of steady state young wage)
             Old                                                                                                                                                                                                V sector young
                                                                                                                                                                                                                B sector old
   500                                                                                                                                                                                                          V sector old
                                                                                                                                              2.0

   400
                                                                                                                                              1.5
   300
                                                                                                                                              1.0
   200
                                                                                                                                              0.5
   100

    0                                                                                                                                         0.0
         0     100   200   300      400        500   600        700                                                                                                    0   100   200    300      400   500      600     700
                                 days                      covid_base_vsl40_eps99_sp_730
                                                                                                                                                                                              days
                     i
(a) Resulting ξ T path for young and old respec- (b) Resulting wedges for young and old in the two
tively.                                          sectors.
                                                      i
              Figure 14: Paths for ξ T and the wedges in the social planner scenario.
                           Resulting      Ti                                                                                                                                     Wedges in full info scenario
                                                                Young                                                                                                                                           B sector young
                                                                                                                  Wedge (as multiple of steady state young wage)




   500                                                          Old                                                                                                6                                            V sector young
                                                                                                                                                                                                                B sector old
                                                                                                                                                                   5                                            V sector old
   400
                                                                                                                                                                   4
   300
                                                                                                                                                                   3
   200
                                                                                                                                                                   2
   100
                                                                                                                                                                   1

    0                                                                                                                                                              0
         0     100   200   300      400        500   600        700                                                                                                    0   100   200    300      400   500      600     700
                                 days                      covid_base_vsl40_eps99_ce_730
                                                                                                                                                                                              days
                     i
(a) Resulting ξ T path for young and old respec- (b) Resulting wedges for young and old in the two
tively.                                          sectors.
                                                 i
         Figure 15: Paths for ξ T and the wedges in the rational-expectations scenario.




                                                                                      45
                                                      Evolution of the epidemic: infections                                                                                      Evolution of the epidemic: infections
                                   0.16                                                           young                                                         0.16                                                         young
                                                                                                  old                                                                                                                        old
                                   0.14                                                                                                                         0.14
 fraction of population infected




                                                                                                                              fraction of population infected
                                   0.12                                                                                                                         0.12
                                   0.10                                                                                                                         0.10
                                   0.08                                                                                                                         0.08
                                   0.06                                                                                                                         0.06
                                   0.04         Health system capacity                                                                                          0.04       Health system capacity

                                   0.02                                                                                                                         0.02
                                   0.00                                                                                                                         0.00
                                           0     50       100     150       200   250   300        350                                                                 0    50       100     150       200   250   300        350
                                                                         days                 covid_base_vsl40_eps99_ce_365
                                                                                                                                                                                                    days                 covid_base_vsl40_eps99_sp_365


(a) The evolution of the epidemic under the ra- (b) The evolution of the epidemic under the social
tional expectations market allocation.          planner’s allocation.

Figure 16: The evolution of the epidemic under the rational expectations scenario and the
social planner’s allocation when a cure arrives after one year.


                                          5.3         The importance of the value of a statistical life
                                          In the results above, we have used a value of a statistical life from the lower range of
                                          estimates used in the literature. If we instead choose a higher value of a statistical life,
                                          optimal policy can qualitatively change.

                                          Observation 12 The choice of value of a statistical life can qualitatively change the
                                          social planner’s solution.

                                               We illustrate this by assuming that a cure will arrive after 18 months. When we
                                          use the lower value of a statistical life, the optimal strategy is to “protect the health
                                          care system”, in other words, to flatten the curve so that it never goes above what the
                                          health care system can handle, and so that overshooting of the number of infected is
                                          avoided. However, if we instead use the higher value of a statistical life, the optimal
                                          strategy is to suppress the infection by harsher measures. This is illustrated in Figure
                                          17, which shows the different approaches taken by a social planner assuming the lower
                                          value of a statistical life vs. the higher value of a statistical life.
                                               The latter strategy saves lives: only 0.023 percent dies in the “suppress” scenario.
                                          When the social planner has a lower value of a statistical life the final death toll is
                                          0.195 percent. However, the suppress strategy is of course costly in terms of output
                                          (and utility). Output falls by 22.5 percent in the suppression scenario over the first
                                          year, while the output fall in the “protect” scenario is 10.3 percent during the first

                                                                                                                         46
                                                     Evolution of the epidemic: infections                                                                                      Evolution of the epidemic: infections
                                   0.16                                                          young                                                         0.16                                                          young
                                                                                                 old                                                                                                                         old
                                   0.14                                                                                                                        0.14
 fraction of population infected




                                                                                                                             fraction of population infected
                                   0.12                                                                                                                        0.12
                                   0.10                                                                                                                        0.10
                                   0.08                                                                                                                        0.08
                                   0.06                                                                                                                        0.06
                                   0.04        Health system capacity                                                                                          0.04       Health system capacity

                                   0.02                                                                                                                        0.02
                                   0.00                                                                                                                        0.00
                                           0        100        200         300    400        500                                                                      0        100        200         300    400         500
                                                                        days                 covid_base_vsl40_eps99_sp_548
                                                                                                                                                                                                   days             covid_base_vsl114_eps99_sup_sp_548


 (a) Assuming the low value of a statistical life.                                                                           (b) Assuming the high value of a statistical life.

Figure 17: The evolution of the epidemic under the social planner’s allocation, assuming a
cure arrives after 18 months, assuming different values of life.

                                          year.


                                          5.4        Testing different epidemics
                                          One way to discipline the exercise and validate our model is to test it with different
                                          epidemics than covid-19. We choose a regular seasonal flu in order to test an epidemic
                                          that we actually see every year, and SARS to test one that is substantially worse than
                                          covid-19. We test both epidemics under the assumption that the epidemic is over
                                          after one year, either because the population has reached herd immunity, or because a
                                          cure/vaccine/perfect test and trace arrives and puts an end to the epidemic.
                                               To simulate a “seasonal flu” we set the basic reproduction number, R0 , to 1.3,
                                          use a death rate of 0.045%, and an average number of days until recover of 10. This
                                          corresponds to a regular normal flu season, not to a year with a particularly severe
                                          instance of the flu.26 For SARS, we use R0 = 2.4, death rates of 8% and 52% for the
                                          young and old respectively, and an average number of days until recover of 12, following
                                          Petersen et al. (2020).
                                               A short summary of the most important insights are:

                                          Observation 13 The seasonal flu simulations indicate that a relatively low value of a
                                          statistical life is more in line with observed policy actions.
              26
    We also verify that the chosen parameters are reasonable by comparing the death toll in our model to the
actual number of deaths due to the flu in the US each year, for more details and sources for our parameters
see Appendix G.

                                                                                                                        47
When simulating a seasonal flu with the higher value of a statistical life, a social planner
would want to lower output by 4.6 percent during the second quarter of the epidemic,
and the annual drop would be 3.4 percent. As far as we can tell, this is not how
policy makers have reacted historically. With the lower value of life, the annual drop
in output is substantially lower: 0.8 percent.

Observation 14 In the case of SARS, the effective reproduction number hovers around
1 in the rational-expectations allocation. This is in contrast to covid-19, which, with
age-heterogeneity, is not dangerous enough for the young to create this type of response.

SARS is perceived as dangerous enough so that individuals endogenously choose to
lower the amount of infectious activities. The precautionary behavior is increasing in
the infection risk, which is increasing in the number of infected. However, the number of
infected is decreasing in the strength of the precautionary response. The infection rate
therefore stabilizes around a level which is consistent with the precautionary behavior.
The same type of qualitative effect, that the effective reproduction number hovers
around 1 in a rational expectations scenario, is also reported by Farboodi et al. (2020)
and Bognanni et al. (2020).
   In our calibration of the covid-19 epidemic, we do not find that the effective re-
production number stabilizes around 1 in the rational-expectations scenario. Including
age heterogeneity in the model is important for our result. For the young, the risk
of a covid infection does not provide a sufficiently strong motive for a precautionary
response to stabilize the infection rate.

Observation 15 In the case of SARS, the social-planner allocation both saves lives
and leads to a smaller fall in output compared to the rational-expectations allocation.

A social planner would quickly lower the amount of infectious activities to get the
epidemic under control, and would thereafter not have to reduce the activities as much.
In the rational-expectations scenario people would carry on with their activities until
the number of infected has increased substantially. At that point individuals would be
so afraid of the epidemic so they would endogenously restrict their activities to very
large extent. The total fall in output would be higher in the rational-expectations
scenario. Qualitatively, this is the same type of mechanism as found in Aum et al.
(2020). Again, in our calibration of the covid-19 epidemic, we do not find this effect
since the covid epidemic is not perceived as dangerous enough by the young.
   For more information about these experiments, including details about calibration
and simulation results, see Appendix G for the seasonal flu and Appendix H for SARS.

                                            48
6     Concluding remarks
In this paper we have proposed an integrated epi-econ assessment model with visible
sociological elements and we have calibrated it to pre-covid data. Aside from generating
a number of insights that are specific to covid-19 policy, our quantitative model tells us
that our instinct that leisure, and the extent of its social components, is quantitatively
important was borne out in our experiments. We find, in particular, that this channel
is very important for welfare evaluation and for designing optimal policy. That is, a
mere focus on counting deaths and/or economic output leads one far astray. Let us
stress that these conclusions were far from obvious at the outset: we do include this
possibility in our model but the quantitative statements are entirely restricted by our
calibration, which is to back out parameter values for key preference parameters using
U.S. time-use data.
    Of course, our framework is still restrictive in many ways. One is our modeling of
the covid-19 epidemic, which is rather rudimentary. For example, cluster outbreaks, the
importance of super-spreaders, and the way in which covid-19 interacts with weather
and seasons seem important to consider.
    Another important restriction is that we do not model the extent to which one can
detect health status. In our model, if health status were publicly observable, it would
be “easy” to put an end to the epidemic, so easy in fact that we do not even have to
compute it: immediate isolation of all infected individuals away from social activities
for a few weeks will suffice. In practice, there still seems to be a lack of consensus on
how easy it is to detect covid-19; for example, what is the fraction of people who are
asymptomatic but still can infect others? From the perspective of our model, thus,
we would need to introduce into our framework a degree of detectability, as in some
papers in the literature (see our initial literature review). This is a rather challenging
task that we have postponed for future work.
    One would also want to extend the model to include more heterogeneity. In our
representative-family setting, this is rather straightforward. In its current version, our
model distinguishes between young and old. A third subgroup that would be important
to model explicitly to fully capture the impact of covid-19 is the very old (or most
vulnerable). Individuals living in retirement or nursing homes cannot withdraw from
social interaction with staff or nurses even if they would want to. Thus, these vulnerable
individuals are exposed to the virus to the extent that the virus is present in the
population working in these homes. In an attempt to stop the spread of the epidemic
in nursing homes in Sweden, visitors were banned, which meant that many elderly did
not see their loved ones for many months. This further underlines the broader message:

                                           49
       to fully evaluate the impact of more infected in the young and healthy population, we
       need to take into account the externalities. By how much does the risk of spreading
       the infection to the more vulnerable increase? But also, what is the cost of pre-emptive
       measures to stop the spread in terms of lost utility from social interaction?27
          It would also seem critical from many perspectives to consider inequality, including
       how it interacts with the extent to which people are informed of the epidemic; our
       myopic equilibrium assumes that no one knows what is happening, but in reality a
       fraction of people is probably very well informed whereas many others are not or
       remain sceptical. Relatedly, we could explicitly introduce easy-to-adopt measures,
       such as hand-washing, keeping distances while at work, and mask wearing, that would
       then be used differentially in the population. These inclusions are urgent but also
       challenging (though not impossible).
          Uncertainty also seems important to include. First, key features of the epidemic
       are only learned gradually, and second, when a cure/vaccine arrives is not only un-
       known initially but—as we show here—very important. We have chosen not to model
       this uncertainty explicitly at this point. However, we believe that it can be studied
       straightforwardly using recent computational methods, at least to a first order: see
       Boppart et al. (2018). I.e., it is possible to examine how information shocks (say,
       about an epidemiological parameter) at different points in time affect the economic
       and epidemiological evolution; these effects would depend on when they hit, but the
       methods allow for such analysis.




  27
   Note also that other viruses may turn out to be particularly harmful to different groups that are also
unable to protect themselves; one such group could be smaller children.


                                                   50
References
Acemoglu, D., Chernozhukov, V., Werning, I., Whinston, M.D., 2020a. A multi-risk
  SIR model with optimally targeted lockdown. Technical Report. National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Acemoglu, D., Makhdoumi, A., Malekian, A., Ozdaglar, A.E., 2020b. Testing, volun-
  tary social distancing and the spread of an infection. Technical Report. National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Adda, J., 2007. Behavior towards health risks: An empirical study using the “Mad
  Cow” crisis as an experiment. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 35, 285–305.

Aguiar, M., Hurst, E., 2007. Measuring trends in leisure: The allocation of time over
  five decades. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122, 969–1006.

Alon, U., Baron, T., Bar-On, Y., Cornfeld, O., Milo, R., Yashiv, E., 2020. COVID-19:
  Looking for the Exit. Technical Report. working paper.

Alvarez, F.E., Argente, D., Lippi, F., 2020. A simple planning problem for covid-19
  lockdown. Technical Report. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Arias, E., Xu, J., 2019. United states life tables, 2017. National Vital Statistics Reports
  68.

Atkeson, A., 2020. What Will Be the Economic Impact of COVID-19 in the US? Rough
  Estimates of Disease Scenarios. Technical Report. National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Aum, S., Lee, S.Y.T., Shin, Y., 2020. Inequality of fear and self-quarantine: Is there
  a trade-off between GDP and public health? Technical Report. National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Bethune, Z.A., Korinek, A., 2020. Covid-19 infection externalities: Trading off lives
  vs. livelihoods. Technical Report. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Biggerstaff, M., Cauchemez, S., Reed, C., Gambhir, M., Finelli, L., 2014. Estimates of
  the reproduction number for seasonal, pandemic, and zoonotic influenza: a system-
  atic review of the literature. BMC infectious diseases 14, 480.

Bodenstein, M., Corsetti, G., Guerrieri, L., 2020. Social distancing and supply disrup-
  tions in a pandemic .

                                            51
Bognanni, M., Hanley, D., Kolliner, D., Mitman, K., 2020. Economic activity and
  covid-19 transmission: Evidence from an estimated economic-epidemiological model.

Boppart, T., Krusell, P., 2020. Labor supply in the past, present, and future: a
  balanced-growth perspective. Journal of Political Economy 128, 118–157.

Boppart, T., Krusell, P., Mitman, K., 2018. Exploiting MIT shocks in heterogeneous-
  agent economies: the impulse response as a numerical derivative. Journal of Eco-
  nomic Dynamics and Control 89, 68–92.

Brotherhood, L., Kircher, P., Santos, C., Tertilt, M., 2020. An economic model of the
  covid-19 epidemic: The importance of testing and age-specific policies .

Chan, T.Y., Hamilton, B.H., Papageorge, N.W., 2016. Health, risky behaviour and the
  value of medical innovation for infectious disease. The Review of Economic Studies
  83, 1465–1510.

Chang, R., Velasco, A., 2020. Economic policy incentives to preserve lives and liveli-
  hoods. Technical Report. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Conley, B.C., 1976. The value of human life in the demand for safety. American
  Economic Review 66, 45–55.

Dushoff, J., Plotkin, J.B., Viboud, C., Earn, D.J., Simonsen, L., 2006. Mortality due
  to influenza in the United States–An annualized regression approach using multiple-
  cause mortality data. American Journal of Epidemiology 163, 181–187.

Eichenbaum, M.S., Rebelo, S., Trabandt, M., 2020a. The macroeconomics of epidemics.
  Technical Report. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Eichenbaum, M.S., Rebelo, S., Trabandt, M., 2020b. The Macroeconomics of Testing
  and Quarantining. Technical Report.

Farboodi, M., Jarosch, G., Shimer, R., 2020. Internal and external effects of social
  distancing in a pandemic. Technical Report. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Faust, J.S., Del Rio, C., 2020. Assessment of deaths from covid-19 and from seasonal
  influenza. JAMA Internal Medicine .

Garibaldi, P., Moen, E.R., Pissarides, C.A., 2020. Modelling contacts and transitions
  in the sir epidemics model. Covid Economics 5, 1–20.


                                         52
Geoffard, P.Y., Philipson, T., 1996. Rational epidemics and their public control. In-
  ternational economic review , 603–624.

Giagheddu, M., Papetti, A., 2020. The macroeconomics of age-varying epidemics.

Giannitsarou, C., Kissler, S., Toxvaerd, F., 2020. Waning immunity and the second
  wave: Some projections for sars-cov-2 .

Glover, A., Heathcote, J., Krueger, D., Rios-Rull, J.V., 2020. Health versus wealth:
  On the distributional effects of controlling a pandemic. PIER Working Paper .

Golosov, M., Hassler, J., Krusell, P., Tsyvinski, A., 2014. Optimal taxes on fossil fuel
  in general equilibrium. Econometrica 82, 41–88.

Greenwood, J., Kircher, P., Santos, C., Tertilt, M., 2019. An equilibrium model of the
  african HIV/AIDS epidemic. Econometrica 87, 1081–1113.

Hall, R.E., Jones, C.I., Klenow, P.J., 2020. Trading off consumption and covid-19
  deaths. Technical Report. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Jones, C.J., Philippon, T., Venkateswaran, V., 2020. Optimal mitigation policies in a
  pandemic: Social distancing and working from home. Technical Report. National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Kapicka, M., Rupert, P., 2020. Labor markets during pandemics. Manuscript, UC
  Santa Barbara .

Kaplan, G., Moll, B., Violante, G., 2020. The great lockdown and the big stimulus:
  Tracing the pandemic possibility frontier for the US. Technical Report. National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Kermack, W.O., McKendrick, A.G., 1927. A contribution to the mathematical theory
  of epidemics. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Containing
  papers of a mathematical and physical character 115, 700–721.

Kremer, M., 1996. Integrating behavioral choice into epidemiological models of AIDS.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, 549–573.

Krueger, D., Uhlig, H., Xie, T., 2020. Macroeconomic dynamics and reallocation in an
  epidemic. Technical Report. National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                            53
Nordhaus, W.D., Boyer, J., 2000. Warming the world: economic models of global
  warming. MIT press.

Petersen, E., Koopmans, M., Go, U., Hamer, D.H., Petrosillo, N., Castelli, F., Stor-
  gaard, M., Al Khalili, S., Simonsen, L., 2020. Comparing sars-cov-2 with sars-cov
  and influenza pandemics. The Lancet infectious diseases .

Piguillem, F., Shi, L., 2020. Optimal covid-19 quarantine and testing policies .

Rolfes, M.A., Foppa, I.M., Garg, S., Flannery, B., Brammer, L., Singleton, J.A., Burns,
  E., Jernigan, D., Olsen, S.J., Bresee, J., et al., 2018. Annual estimates of the
  burden of seasonal influenza in the United States: a tool for strengthening influenza
  surveillance and preparedness. Influenza and other respiratory viruses 12, 132–137.

Shepard, D.S., Zeckhauser, R., 1984. Survival versus consumption. Management Sci-
  ence 30, 423–439.

Viscusi, W.K., Aldy, J.E., 2003. The value of a statistical life: A critical review of
  market estimates throughout the world. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 27, 5–76.

van Vlokhoven, H., 2020. Policy during an epidemic with super-spreaders. Available
  at SSRN 3600441 .




                                          54
       A      Leisure spent at home vs. outside home
       This section provides more details on leisure time spent in the two categories in-puBlic,
       i.e., socially intense, and in-priVate.
           We classify activities as not socially intense if it took place in the respondent’s home
       or yard. Moreover, we classify personal care activities (e.g., grooming and personal
       activities) coded with location code “Blank” in the survey as not socially intense.
       Lastly, 0.3% of the observations in the data are coded with “Unspecified place”. For
       these observations, we code those where it is plausible that the activity took place in
       the home as not socially intense.28
           The socially intense activities are consequently the activities that took place out-
       side home. Examples of locations for these activities include someone else’s home,
       store/mall, restaurant or bar, and gym/health club.
           To understand what these broad categorizations mean in practice, Figure 18 shows
       socially intense leisure and not-socially-intense leisure broken down on a finer level. For
       instance, the category “Eating and drinking” shows up in both types of leisure: young
       spend on average 34 minutes per day eating and drinking outside their home (socially
       intense leisure), and 35 minutes on eating and drinking at home (not-socially-intense
       leisure). The largest category for leisure is “Socializing, relaxing, and leisure”, both
       when it comes to socially intense leisure and not-socially-intense leisure. On a finer
       classification level, the most common subcategory within “Socializing, relaxing, and
       leisure” for the socially intense type is “Socializing and communicating”, while it for
       the not socially intense type is “Relaxing and leisure”, which roughly translates to
       watching television at home.




  28
    As an example, we code the activity “Caring for and helping household children” as not socially intense,
while “Participating in sports” is classified as socially intense.


                                                    55
                 Personal care                                                       Personal care
                  HH Activities                                                       HH Activities
        Helping HH members                                                  Helping HH members
   Helping non-HH members                                              Helping non-HH members
         Consumer purchases                                                  Consumer purchases
  Prof/personal care services                                         Prof/personal care services
              Civic obligations                                                   Civic obligations
          Eating and drinking                                                 Eating and drinking
 Socializing, relaxing, leisure                                      Socializing, relaxing, leisure
 Sports, exercise, recreation                                        Sports, exercise, recreation
   Religious and spiritual act                                         Religious and spiritual act
           Volunteer activities                                                Volunteer activities
               Telephone calls                                                     Telephone calls
                    Data codes                                                          Data codes

                                  0   20            40         60                                     0   100        200        300     400
                                       Minutes per day                                                          Minutes per day

                                         young           old                                                      young           old




          (a) Socially intense in-puBlic leisure                          (b) Not socially intense in-priVate leisure
                     “Data codes” refer to observations where the respondent couldn’t remember or
                     refused to answer. A full day is 24 · 60 = 1440 minutes. Source: ATUS, 2018.

Figure 18: Average minutes per day spent in socially intense leisure activities and not socially
intense activities, by two-digit categories (includes associated traveling).




                                                                    56
B     Sector classification
Table 4 gives an example of how different sectors are classified as being fully, to a
high extent, somewhat, or not at all employing people who are in social contact with
customers.

2017 NAICS    Description                                                 Employees     Active sector
                                                                          Thousands     production?
    211       Oil and gas extraction                                           683.3    No
     ···
    441       Motor vehicle and parts dealers                                 2,021.2   No
    445       Food and beverage stores                                        3,087.1   High extent
    452       General merchandise stores                                      3,104.9   High extent
     ···
    711       Performing arts, spectator sports, and related industries        506.0    Yes
     ···
    7131      Amusement parks and arcades                                      211.0    Yes
    7132      Gambling industries (except casino hotels)                       120.4    High extent
     ···
    721       Accommodation                                                   2,028.4   Yes
    722       Food services and drinking places                              11,926.3   Yes
     ···
    8121      Personal care services                                           727.8    Yes
    8122      Death care services                                              137.1    No
     ···
      -       Non-agriculture self-employed                                   9,453.4   Somewhat
              Total number of employees                                     161,037.7



              Table 4: Illustrative example of sector classification.




                                                  57
                       Combinations giving hours fall between -0.38 and -0.42 percent
                     0.90

                     0.85

                     0.80

                     0.75
                 N




                     0.70

                     0.65

                     0.60

                            0.2   0.3     0.4     0.5       0.6   0.7      0.8
                                                        A

       Criterion a) A realistic income/substitution effect is defined as if a TFP increase
       of 2% leads to hours worked falling by between 0.38 and 0.42 percent. Criterion
       b) Young spend a larger fraction of their leisure time in the socially intense type
       than the old do.

  Figure 19: Combinations of εB and εV that satisfy both criterion a) and b).



C      Choosing elasticities: εB and εV
To pin down our choice of εB and εB , the elasticities for the consumption-leisure
bundle in the socially intense B sector and the non-social V-sector respectively, we
put the two following restrictions on our utility function: a) the income effect should
dominate the substitution effect in a realistic way, and b) the young should spend a
larger fraction of their leisure in the socially intense B activity. These two restrictions
narrow down the set of εB /εV we can choose from substantially. Figure 19 shows a
number of combinations of elasticities that satisfies those two restrictions. In the graph,
combinations that lie “south-east” of the marked area are combinations for which the
second requirement is not fulfilled.
    As our base case, we pick εB = 0.41 and εV = 0.8, but note that for basically all
permissible combinations, we have that εB < εV and both elasticities being smaller
than 1. This means that for any of the combinations we could choose as an alternative,
the model behaves extremely similar and no insights of the working of the economy
change.
    To understand why these elasticities affect how leisure is distributed between the
socially intense B type and the not-social V type, think about a marginal increase in


                                                   58
leisure: how should it be split up between the two types of leisure? The answer is of
course so that the marginal utilities of the two types still are equalized. The marginal
utility with respect to the socially intense B type of leisure is given by:

                     ∂u ∂euB
            uhB =       ·
                    ∂e
                     uB ∂hB
                                                                     !     1
                                 εB −1                      εB −1        εB −1
                    ∂u            εB                         εB
                                                                                          − ε1
                 =     ·     λB cB        + (1 − λB )hB                          (1 − λB )hB   B
                   ∂e
                    uB

   Thus, the elasticity of the marginal utility with respect to leisure (i ∈ {B, V }):
                                   "
              d log uhi       d          ∂u
                        =            log      + log(1 − λi )
              d log hi    d log hi       ∂e
                                          ui
                                       εi −1                εi −1 
                                                                              #
                             1              εi                εi      1
                        +        log λi ci     + (1 − λi )hi         − log hi
                          εi − 1                                      εi
                                               ε −1
                                                         
                                                       i
                                                       εi
                        1             (1 − λi )hi                   1
                       =            εi −1                  εi −1   −
                        εi            εi                     εi        εi
                               λi ci         + (1 − λi )hi
                                                            εi −1
                                                                             
                                                              εi
                            1                   (1 − λi )hi
                       =−      1 −
                                                                             
                                              εi −1                  εi −1
                            εi
                                                                             
                                               εi                     εi
                                         λi ci        + (1 − λi )hi

   Hence, the elasticity of the marginal utility with respect to leisure depends on
the CES elasticity (and the consumption/leisure terms within the respective bundles).
The relative size of the terms in the bundles are primarily determined by the other
exogenously set calibration targets and do not depend on εi to any larger extent. The
relationship between εB and εV is therefore crucial for determining where to spend
a marginal increase in leisure. With εB < εV , a marginal increase in leisure is spent
proportionally more on the not-social V good (had the bundles been exactly the same).




                                                  59
       D      More on the choice of ε
       To get more insights on how the outer elasticity in the nested CES utility function
       impacts the time allocations in a model with a pandemic, we simulate the same type
       of graphs as we did in section 3.2, using different values of ε.
           Recall from section 2.3 that the flow utility for an individual is given by

                             u(cB , hB , cV , hV ) = log CES(c̃B , c̃V ; λ, ε),               (34)
                                             c̃B = CES(cB , hB ; λB , εB ),                   (35)
                                             c̃V   = CES(cV , hV ; λV , εV ).                 (36)

           The nested CES structure captures that to consume a good, both social and non-
       social, involves spending time with the good.
           For concreteness, assume that eight percent of the population is infected, and the
       rest is susceptible. The infected are evenly spread out in the young and the old pop-
       ulation. Moreover, assume that the cost of an infected old is 50 times the cost of an
       infected young (this might sound high, but as shown in the full dynamic model this
       outcome is not at all extreme compared to the outcome in the rational expectations
       scenario).
           Figure 20 shows the time allocations for the young and the old as a function of the
       cost of a young infection for our baseline scenario ε = 1.0. As discussed in section 3.2,
       as the cost of infections increases, individuals reallocate their time. In this example,
       very soon the old stop working in the workplace and all work is done from home. They
       also gradually reduce their in-puBlic leisure time.
           In Figure 21 we show the same graphs from the same experiment, but setting
       ε = 0.4.29 Here we see that the reallocation pattern for the old is qualitatively different.
       When it becomes very costly to be infected, they cut down on work in the workplace
       first, just as before. Then the old cut down on leisure in-puBlic, also as before. However,
       with an elasticity below one, the composite in-puBlic good and the composite in-priVate
       good are complements, and therefore the marginal utility from in-priVate leisure falls.
       Thus, if the old are prevented from enjoying in-puBlic leisure, their time spent watching
       TV will eventually fall as well. This implication we argue is implausible, and therefore
       advice against an ε < 1.
           Figure 22 shows the same experiment setting ε = 1.3. The in-puBlic and the in-
       priVate composite goods are now substitutes, and thus the reallocation from in-puBlic
  29
    Using another outer elasticity means that we also have to recalibrate the other remaining parameters,
which we also do. See Section 2.3.


                                                    60
                                              Time allocation (young)                                                                                      Time allocation (old)
                    1.0        leisure V                                                                                          1.0       leisure V
                               leisure B                                          leisure                                                   leisure B                                        leisure
                               work V (workplace)                                                                                           work V (workplace)
                    0.8        work B (workplace)                                                                                 0.8       work B (workplace)
                               work from home                                                                                               work from home
 Fraction of time




                                                                                                               Fraction of time
                    0.6                                                                                                           0.6


                    0.4                                                                                                           0.4
                                                                                  work
                    0.2                                                                                                           0.2                                                        work


                    0.0                                                                                                           0.0
                           0      5      10         15   20    25       30   35           40                                            0      5      10         15   20    25     30   35           40
                                                         Ty                                                                                                           Ty
                                                                             stat_covid_base_vsl40_eps99_40                                                                             stat_covid_base_vsl40_eps99_40




                                                (a) Young                                                                                                        (b) Old
                                   Assuming that eight percent of the population infected and the remaining pop-
                                   ulation susceptible. The cost of a new infection for the old is assumed to be 50
                                                                                o       y
                                   times as large as the cost for the young, ξ T = 50ξ T .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    y
Figure 20: Time allocations as a function of the cost of new infections for the young, ξ T .
ε = 1.0.



                          leisure to in-priVate leisure is somewhat stronger than in our base case. However, the
                          difference compared to our base case is relatively small, and does not translate into
                          any meaningful difference in results from the full model.




                                                                                                          61
                                             Time allocation (young)                                                                                       Time allocation (old)
                    1.0       leisure V                                                                                           1.0       leisure V
                              leisure B                                           leisure                                                   leisure B                                         leisure
                              work V (workplace)                                                                                            work V (workplace)
                    0.8       work B (workplace)                                                                                  0.8       work B (workplace)
                              work from home                                                                                                work from home
 Fraction of time




                                                                                                               Fraction of time
                    0.6                                                                                                           0.6                                                         work

                    0.4                                                                                                           0.4

                                                                                  work
                    0.2                                                                                                           0.2


                    0.0                                                                                                           0.0
                          0      5      10         15   20    25       30    35           40                                            0      5      10         15   20    25     30    35           40
                                                        Ty                                                                                                            Ty
                                                                             stat_covid_base_vsl40_eps40_40                                                                              stat_covid_base_vsl40_eps40_40




                                      (a) Young, ε = 0.4.                                                                                             (b) Old, ε = 0.4.
                                  Assuming that eight percent of the population infected and the remaining pop-
                                  ulation susceptible. The cost of a new infection for the old is assumed to be 50
                                                                               o       y
                                  times as large as the cost for the young, ξ T = 50ξ T .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     y
Figure 21: Time allocations as a function of the cost of new infections for the young, ξ T .
ε = 0.4.

                                             Time allocation (young)                                                                                       Time allocation (old)
                    1.0       leisure V                                                                                           1.0       leisure V
                              leisure B                                           leisure                                                   leisure B                                         leisure
                              work V (workplace)                                                                                            work V (workplace)
                    0.8       work B (workplace)                                                                                  0.8       work B (workplace)
                              work from home                                                                                                work from home
 Fraction of time




                                                                                                               Fraction of time




                    0.6                                                                                                           0.6


                    0.4                                                                                                           0.4
                                                                                  work

                    0.2                                                                                                           0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                              work

                    0.0                                                                                                           0.0
                          0      5      10         15   20    25       30    35           40                                            0      5      10         15   20    25     30    35           40
                                                        Ty                                                                                                            Ty
                                                                            stat_covid_base_vsl40_eps130_40                                                                             stat_covid_base_vsl40_eps130_40




                                      (a) Young, ε = 1.3.                                                                                             (b) Old, ε = 1.3.
                                  Assuming that eight percent of the population infected and the remaining pop-
                                  ulation susceptible. The cost of a new infection for the old is assumed to be 50
                                                                               o       y
                                  times as large as the cost for the young, ξ T = 50ξ T .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     y
Figure 22: Time allocations as a function of the cost of new infections for the young, ξ T .
ε = 1.3.



                                                                                                          62
E      Solution method
E.1      Recursive formulation of the planner’s problem
We denote the complete SIR state by Ω, so that Ω = (S y , I y , Ry , S o , I o , Ro ). The full
recursive problem of the planner is to maximize
                     (                                                                                )
                         X
                                                                                                0
                              (S i + I i + Ri )v(ciB , hiB , ciV , hiV ) + βVt+1 Ω
                                                                                                  
      Vt (Ω) = max                                                                                                     t<T
                          i

subject to the production technologies and resource constraints (with the bracked vari-
ables indicating the Lagrange multiplier for the different constraints, and using the
short-hand notation φi = S i + I i + Ri ),

                     FB (φy nyBh , φy nyBw , φo noBh , φo noBw ) =
                                                                           X
                                                                                     φi ciB ,                  [λyB ]          (37)
                                                                             i

                     FV (φy nyV h , φy nyV w , φo noV h , φo noV w )
                                                                           X
                                                                       =             φi ciV ,                  [λyV ]          (38)
                                                                             i

the time-allocation constraints (for both young and old),

                                                                                                                       i
                      1 = hiB + hiV + niBh + niV h + niBw + niV w ,                                         [λn ]              (39)
                                                                                                                hiB
                                                                       hiB   ≥ 0,                          [κ              ]   (40)
                                                                                                               hiV
                                                                       hiV   ≥ 0,                          [κ              ]   (41)
                                                                                                            niBh
                                                                      niBh   ≥ 0,                         [κ               ]   (42)
                                                                                                                   i
                                                                      niV h ≥ 0,                          [κnV h ]             (43)
                                                                                                               i
                                                                   niBw ≥ 0,                          [κnBw ]                  (44)
                                                                                                               i
                                                                   niV w ≥ 0,                         [κnV w ]                 (45)

    the evolution of the epidemic (for both young and old),

                                                                                                               i
                              T i = (b
                                     π B (hiB + niBw ) + π
                                                         bV niV w )S i ,                              [ξ T ]                   (46)
                                                            i     i          i0                            Si
                                                         S −T =S ,                                    [ξ ]                     (47)
                                                                             i0                             Ii
                                        (1 −   πdi          i      i
                                                     − πr )I + T = I ,                                    [ξ ]                 (48)
                                                                                 0                             i
                                                       πr I i + R i = R i ,                           [ξ R ]                   (49)
                                                                                                               i
                                                      πdi = H(I y + I o ),                            [ξ πd ]                  (50)




                                                       63
and the infection rates
                                             i i    i
                                        P
                        B      B         i I (hB + nBw )                                 B
                       π
                       b =π P          i    i    i  i    i
                                                              ,                       [ξ π ]   (51)
                                   i (S + I + R )(hB + nBw )
                                               P i i
                                 V     V           In                                    V
                               b = π P i i i V wi i .
                               π                                                      [ξ π ]   (52)
                                           i (S + I + R )nV w

   The terminal period value is given by
                               o
                      1 − β T −T +1 o
             VT (Ω) =              (S + I o + Ro )v(coB,T , hoB,T , coV,T , hoV,T )
                          1−β
                             y
                      1 − β T −T +1 y
                    +              (S + I y + Ry )v(cyB,T , hyB,T , cyV,T , hyV,T )
                          1−β

where the allocations are given by the solution to the static problem without an epi-
demic.


E.2      Separating the problem into a dynamic and a static
dimension and the dynamic externalities
The planner’s problem, in a given period, can be separated into a dynamic epidemic
problem and, conditional on the epidemic problem, statically computing the optimal
economic allocation. The dynamic problem generates the cost of an individual infection
(which differs for young and old). Taking these costs into account, the economic
problem consists of statically optimizing the economy subject to these costs, given the
current number of susceptible, infected, and recovered young and old. Hence, doing
this reduces the problem in each period to exactly the static problem we described in
Section 3.
   Formally, we back out the Lagrange multipliers on the infection rate from the
                                      π B and π
Lagrange multiplier on transmissions (b       bV denote the risk of becoming infected
per time unit spent in the B and the V sectors respectively, see equations (51) and
(52)),

                                               B                                i
                                                     X
                    πB :
                   ∂b                        ξπ =         (hiB + niBw )S i ξ T ,               (53)
                                                      i
                                                          V                     i
                                                              X
                   πV :
                  ∂b                                 ξπ =           niV w S i ξ T .            (54)
                                                                i

The Lagrange multiplier on transmissions in turn depends on the Lagrange multipliers




                                              64
on the number of susceptible and infected individuals,

                                                             i        i        i
                          ∂T i :                           ξT = ξS − ξI .            (55)

Finally, the Lagrange multipliers for susceptible and infected individuals depend on
the marginal continuation values,

                                0                                          i
                           ∂S i :                             βVS i0 = ξ S ,         (56)
                               i0                                         Ii
                            ∂I :                                 βVI i0 = ξ .        (57)

   The epidemic dimension of the problem in a given time period is therefore reduced
to the marginal continuation values VS i0 and VI i0 . The planner’s economic problem
is to compute the optimal economic allocation, conditional on these marginal values.
This economic problem, conditional on VS i0 and VI i0 , is a standard static optimization
problem.

   The dynamics are described by an application the envelope theorem. We get the
following marginal values of susceptible, infected, and recovered individuals (with the
               i and N i are the total amount of hours for type i in sector j, e.g.,
notation that Njh     jw
the per-capita hours worked times population size).
   First, the derivative of the value function with respect to S i :

     ∂V
            = v(ciB , hiB , ciV , hiV )                                              (58)
     ∂S i
                      ∂FB yB i     ∂FB yB i     ∂FV yV i       ∂FV yV i
                 +      i
                          λ nBh +    i
                                       λ nBw +    i
                                                     λ nV h +        λ nV w
                     ∂NBh         ∂NBw         ∂NV h          ∂NVi w
                 −(λyB ciB + λyV ciV )
                                                       i     i
                   π B (hiB + niBw ) + π
                 −(b                   bV niV w )ξ T + ξ S
                               P j j
                                  I (hB + njBw )                                 B
                 +π B P                        j      j
                                                                (hiB + niBw )ξ π
                      ( j (S j + I j + Rj )(hB + nBw ))2
                               P j j
                    V            j I nV w                     V
                 +π P                        j
                                                    niV w ξ π
                             j     j     j
                      ( j (S + I + R )nV w )      2




                                                  65
       Second, the derivative of the value function with respect to I i :

∂V
         = v(ciB , hiB , ciV , hiV )                                                                                                    (59)
∂I i
                   ∂FB yB i     ∂FB yB i     ∂FV yV i       ∂FV yV i
              +      i
                       λ nBh +    i
                                    λ nBw +    i
                                                  λ nV h +        λ nV w
                  ∂NBh         ∂NBw         ∂NV h          ∂NVi w
              −(λyB ciB + λyV ciV )
                                       i                    j                 i
                                                   (πdj )0 ξ I Itj + πr ξ R
                                               X
              +(1 − πdi − πr )ξ I −
                                               j

                                                                                           I j (hjB + njBw )
                                                                                      P                                                 !
                   B              (hiB + niBw )                                        j                                                         B
              −π                              j
                                                      − P                                                           (hiB   +   niBw )       ξπ
                                                                njBw )
                                                         ( j (S j + I j + Rj )(hjB + njBw ))
                           P j      j    j                                                                        2
                            j (S + I + R )(hB  +
                                                         P j j                    !
                                  niV w                    j I nV w                    V
              −π V         P j             j
                                               − P                      j
                                                                             niV w ξ π
                                    j   j              j     j     j       2
                            j (S + I + R )nV w   ( j (S + I + R )nV w )

       Third, the derivative of the value function with respect to Ri :

        ∂V
               = v(ciB , hiB , ciV , hiV )                                                                        (60)
        ∂Ri
                            ∂FB yB i     ∂FB yB i     ∂FV yV i       ∂FV yV i
                       +      i
                                λ nBh +    i
                                             λ nBw +    i
                                                           λ nV h +        λ nV w
                           ∂NBh         ∂NBw         ∂NV h          ∂NVi w
                       −(λyB ciB + λyV ciV )
                       +ξ Ri
                                               I j (hjB + njBw )
                                           P
                            B              j                                                        B
                       +π   P j                 j     j
                                                                (hiB + niBw )ξ π
                                      j     j
                           ( j (S + I + R )(hB + nBw ))      2
                                   P j j
                         V          j I nV w                  V
                       +π P                   j
                                                    niV w ξ π
                                 j    j     j
                           ( j (S + I + R )nV w ) 2


       The first line in each equation captures the flow utility of the individual. The second
and third line capture the economic contribution of the individual (marginal produc-
tivity times hours worked), and the economic cost of the individual (the individual’s
consumption). The subsequent lines in each equation describe the dynamic effect that
the individual has on the the evolution of the epidemic. Note that the dependence
on the future is summarized by the Lagrange multipliers on the continuation value
function, ξ Si , ξ Ii and ξ Ri and the Lagrange multiplier on transmission, ξ Ti .
                                                                                  B             V
       There are two dynamic externalities. First, since ξ π                          and ξ π       are in general non-
zero, the behavior of an individual also has an effect on the infection risk for others.
Second, since the derivative (πjd )0 is non-zero there is an externality from becoming
infected as well. If an individual becomes infected, this increases the death risk for other


                                                                66
infected individuals. The social planner takes both these externalities into account.


E.3      Solving the decentralized market equilibria
Rational expectations: The rational-expectations market allocation problem is
equivalent to the planner’s problem, with two important differences. First, the rational-
expectations family planner takes the infection rates as given, i.e., lines (51) and (52)
                    B       V
are replaced by ξ π = ξ π = 0. Second, the death rate πdi , is taken as given, in other
words, ∂πdi /∂I k = 0, i, k ∈ {y, o} when calculating the marginal value of an infected
individual.

Myopic:         The myopic market allocation is equivalent to the planner’s problem
                                                              i
described in Section E.1 with line (46) replaced by ξ T = 0, capturing that the myopic
household does not perceive any cost of new infections.


E.4      Solution algorithm
The decomposition of the planner’s problem into a dynamic epidemic problem and a
static economic problem suggests a solution algorithm as follows.
   Set a final time period T and either conjecture that the epidemic is over at this
point or assume that a cure instantaneously arrives a time T . Given an initial epidemic
state in time t = 0 for both young and old, (S0i , I0i , R0i )i∈{y,o} , do the following:
                                                               Ti
                                                               t , for t = 0, . . . , T .
  1. Guess on a path of Lagrange multipliers on transmissions ξc
  2. Roll forward the epidemic for t = 0, . . . , T , starting with t = 0:
        • In period t, given the epidemic state (Sti , Iti , Rti )i∈{y,o} and the guess of the
                                                          i
           Lagrange multiplier on transmissions ξtT , for t = 0, . . . , T , compute the
           optimal economic behavior (time allocations and consumption decisions) by
           solving the system of equations given by first-order conditions and constraints
           at time t.
        • Use the epidemic law of motion together with the economic behavior in time
           t to get the epidemic state at time t + 1.
        • Repeat until time t = T .
  3. Roll backward the marginal value functions:
        • At time t = T , the epidemic is by definition over. Given the time allocations
           and consumption choices for time T found in the previous forward rolling


                                               67
                  of the epidemic, calculate the marginal value of an extra individual, VS i =
                                                                                                    T
                  VI i = VRi .30 The per-period marginal value of an individual is not only
                    T        T
                  the individual’s utility (including the intrinsic value of life), but also the net
                  contribution of the individual (what it brings into the family in terms of
                  labor net of what it consumes). The total marginal value of an individual in
                  period T is then the discounted sum of the marginal per-period values, from
                  the final period of the epidemics, T , up until the death of the individual, T y
                  and T o for the young and the old respectively.
               • In period t < T , use the envelope theorem (equations (58) to (60)), given
                  VS i , VI i , and VRi       as well as the economic behavior in time t, to compute
                     t+1    t+1         t+1
                  VSti , VIti , and VRti . The marginal value of an extra individual now depends
                  on if the individual is susceptible, infected, or recovered.
               • Repeat until time t = 0.
                                                                 i
         4. Use VSti and VIti to calculate the resulting ξtT (for t = 0, . . . , T ) . Use this to
            update the guess for the path of Lagrange multipliers on transmission ξc     Ti.
                                                                                               t

         5. Go back to step (2) and repeat until convergence.
         6. Go back to step (1) and try various initial guesses to ensure that the correct
             equilibrium is found.31
          We use this algorithm to solve the planner’s problem, and an analogous version of
       the algorithm also solves the market solution.




  30
     In time T , the marginal values of an extra individual VSTi , VITi , and VRTi are equal since it does not
matter if an individual is susceptible, infected, or recovered if there is no epidemic. We here use the notation
∂V /∂S i = VS i to write it more compactly.
  31
     The SIR dynamics and the overloading of the hospital system make the planner’s problem non-convex
and the problem therefore does not necessarily have a unique equilibrium. Careful evaluation of various
qualitatively different initial guesses is necessary to ensure that the correct solution is found. In practice,
the non-convexity appears to be modest and has only been an issue in a region of the parameter space where
the optimal solution transitions from“full suppression” to “protecting the health-care system”.


                                                       68
F      Covid results with a high value of a statistical
life
Figure 23 shows the outcome for the three different scenarios, assuming the higher
value of life. As can be seen, the myopic scenario is (by definition) not affected by
changing this assumption. However, both the rational expectations scenario and the
social planner scenario display a lower death toll.
    In the rational expectation scenario, people are more afraid of getting infected, and
therefore they stay at home and avoid contagious activities to a higher extent than in
the scenario with a higher value of a statistical life. This slows down the spread of
the epidemic, and thus there is less “overshooting”. In the scenario with the higher
value of a statistical life, the total number of recovered is only approximately 57%
(compared to the scenario with the lower value of a statistical life assumption, when
it was approximately 63%). A lower number of people who have ever been infected
translates into a lower number of people who die from the disease.
    In the social planner scenario, the death toll is even lower. The social planner let the
number of infected slowly, slowly rise, the economy is actually not in an unconstrained
phase even after two years. The old are also staying at home to an even higher extent
in this scenario compared to the lower-value-of-life scenario, thus they are even more
shielded from the epidemic.




                                            69
                                       Cumulative deaths                                                                                         Output
           1.0       myopic                                                                                  0
                     full info
                     optimal
           0.8                                                                                                5

           0.6
                                                                                                             10
 Percent




                                                                                                   Percent
           0.4
                                                                                                             15
           0.2
                                                                                                                                                                          myopic
                                                                                                             20                                                           full info
           0.0                                                                                                                                                            optimal
                 0      100      200     300      400            500   600    700                                  0         100         200   300      400   500   600    700
                                               days                                                                                                  days

(a) Cumulative deaths under the three different (b) Output drop under the three different scenar-
scenarios.                                      ios.

                                                                                    Flow utility per capita
                                                           0.0
                                                           0.5
                                                           1.0
                                                           1.5
                                                 Percent




                                                           2.0
                                                           2.5
                                                           3.0
                                                                                                                               myopic
                                                           3.5                                                                 full info
                                                                                                                               optimal
                                                                   0    100    200      300      400         500       600         700
                                                                                              days

                                       (c) Drop in flow utility under the three different scenarios.

Figure 23: Comparing the three different scenarios, assuming the higher value of a statistical
life.




                                                                                              70
       G      Seasonal flu
       To simulate a “seasonal flu” we set the basic reproduction number, R0 , to 1.3, use
       a death rate of 0.00045, and a recovery rate of 1/10. This corresponds to a regular
       normal flu season, and not to a year with a particularly severe instance of the flu, or a
       year with a pandemic influenza (such as the H1N1/09 virus in 2009).
           A systematic review of several published estimates of the basic reproduction number
       for the seasonal influenza, conducted by Biggerstaff et al. (2014), found that the median
       estimate of R0 for the seasonal flu was 1.3, so we use this number directly.
           The infection fatality rate for a seasonal flu is more difficult to estimate, and it
       also varies substantially from year to year. A commonly cited case fatality rate for
       the seasonal flu is 0.1% (Faust and Del Rio, 2020). According to WHO, the infection
       fatality rate (i.e., the proportion of deaths among all infected individuals, including
       all asymptomatic and undiagnosed subjects) is usually well below 0.1%.32 In order
       to be conservative, we set the infection fatality rate to less than half of this: 0.045%.
       An important difference between a regular influenza and covid-19 is also how different
       groups in the population are affected. According to Petersen et al. (2020), 80% of the
       deaths from the pandemic influenza in 2009 were below the age of 65, but for a seasonal
       flu the deaths are more skewed towards the elderly, but not as much as for covid-19.
       We set an equal death rate for the young and for the old as defined in our model.
           According to Petersen et al. (2020), the proportion of infected individuals requiring
       intensive care is also substantially lower for a pandemic influenza than for covid-19 (less
       than a sixth). We do not observe any particular overcrowding problems in hospitals
       during a seasonal flu. To be conservative, we choose to remove the overburdening of
       the health care system effect, and have the same death rate regardless of the number
       of infected in the economy.
           Further, we assume that on average it takes less time to recover from a flu than
       from covid-19. For the flu, we use 10 days to recover on average.
           To ensure that our estimates of the reproduction number, the infection fatality rate,
       and estimated time for recovery are plausible, we simulate the myopic model and the
       rational expectation model to see what the model predicts in terms of deaths. The
       result is 1.9 (myopic) or 1.8 (rational expectations) deaths per 10,000 people, which
       rescaled to the full population is 1.5 (myopic) and 1.4 (rational expectations) deaths
       per 10,000 people.33
  32
     See           https://www.who.int/news-room/q-a-detail/coronavirus-disease-covid-19-similarities-and-
differences-with-influenza, downloaded 2020/10/27.
  33
     Our model does not include individuals below the age of 15, who constitute 21.4% of the population.


                                                   71
         Rolfes et al. (2018) estimate the burden of seasonal influenza in the US and find
      that the annual deaths due to the seasonal flu in the period between the 2010/2011
      season and the 2015/2016 season can have varied between 16,000 and 76,000. Using
      the average of this low and high number (and approximating the US population to 320
      million) gives us a death toll of 1.4 per 10,000 individuals. Another estimate is given
      by Dushoff et al. (2006), who find an annual average number of deaths in the US from
      influenza of 41,400 over the period 1979 to 2001. Approximating the US population to
      280 million (approximate average during this time period) gives 1.5 deaths per 10,000.
      A third set of estimates of the total number of deaths per year due to the seasonal flu
      is provided by CDC.34 The median of their estimated number of deaths for the period
      2010/2011 to 2018/2019 is 1.2 deaths per 10,000 people. Compared to these numbers,
      our simulated flu is slightly worse than the median flu, but not as severe as for instance
      the 2014/2015 flu (with 1.6 deaths per 10,000) or the 2017/2018 flu (with 1.9 deaths
      per 10,000). Hence, our implied estimate of 1.4 − 1.5 deaths per 10,000 people during
      a normal flu year seems to be well in line with what is observed .
         In sum, the flu we simulate corresponds to a reasonably normal seasonal flu, and
      not a year with a particularly severe flu. It is also far from a pandemic influenza such
      as the 2009 case. Note also that we do not take into account the burden of a seasonal
      flu in terms of people being sick and having to stay at home in bed for days.

      Results seasonal flu Figure 24 compare the number of deaths, the output loss and
      the flow utility loss for a seasonal flu in the myopic market allocation, the rational-
      expectations market allocation, and the social planner’s allocation, assuming the lower
      value of a statistical life. Figure 26 shows the evolution of infected individuals in the
      three scenarios, and as the figures show, the evolution is very similar across scenarios.
         A social planner would want to decrease output by 1.4 percent during the second
      quarter of the epidemic, as can be seen in Figure 24b, and the annual drop in output
      is 0.8 percent. However, this translates into a smaller fall in flow utility, as Figure 24c
      shows.
         Figure 25 shows the corresponding results assuming the higher estimate for the
      value of a statistical life. With the high value of a statistical life, the social planner
      would want to lower output by 4.6 percent during the second quarter, and the annual
      drop in output is 3.4 percent. This, as far as we can tell, is not how actual policy makers
      have reacted historically. Thus, although we cannot say whether a chosen value of a
We assume for simplicity that there are no deaths in this group.
 34
    See https://www.cdc.gov/flu/about/burden/index.html, downloaded 2020/10/21.



                                                  72
statistical life is the correct one, the results from the flu simulations indicate that a
value from the lower range is more in line with observed policy actions.




                                           73
                                         Cumulative deaths                                                                                               Output
          0.0200
                       myopic                                                                                       0.00
          0.0175       full info
                       optimal                                                                                      0.25
          0.0150
                                                                                                                    0.50
          0.0125
                                                                                                                    0.75
Percent




                                                                                                          Percent
          0.0100
          0.0075                                                                                                    1.00

          0.0050                                                                                                    1.25
          0.0025                                                                                                    1.50         myopic
                                                                                                                                 full info
          0.0000                                                                                                                 optimal
                                                                                                                    1.75
                   0       50      100     150      200            250   300         350                                    0         50         100   150      200   250   300   350
                                                 days                                                                                                        days

(a) Cumulative deaths under the three different (b) Output drop under the three different flu sce-
flu scenarios.                                  narios.

                                                                                           Flow utility per capita
                                                            0.00

                                                            0.01

                                                            0.02
                                                  Percent




                                                            0.03

                                                            0.04

                                                            0.05
                                                                         myopic
                                                            0.06         full info
                                                                         optimal
                                                                     0       50       100      150      200           250       300        350
                                                                                                     days

                                     (c) Drop in flow utility under the three different flu scenarios.

Figure 24: Comparing the three different flu scenarios with a low value of a statistical life
assumption.




                                                                                                     74
                                         Cumulative deaths                                                                                             Output
          0.0200
                       myopic                                                                                       0
          0.0175       full info
                       optimal
          0.0150                                                                                                    1

          0.0125
                                                                                                                    2
Percent




                                                                                                          Percent
          0.0100
          0.0075                                                                                                    3

          0.0050
                                                                                                                    4
          0.0025                                                                                                               myopic
                                                                                                                               full info
          0.0000                                                                                                    5          optimal
                   0       50      100     150      200            250   300         350                                  0         50         100   150      200   250   300   350
                                                 days                                                                                                      days

(a) Cumulative deaths under the three different (b) Output drop under the three different flu sce-
flu scenarios.                                  narios.

                                                                                           Flow utility per capita
                                                           0.000

                                                           0.025

                                                           0.050

                                                           0.075
                                                 Percent




                                                           0.100

                                                           0.125

                                                           0.150         myopic
                                                                         full info
                                                           0.175         optimal
                                                                     0       50       100      150      200         250       300        350
                                                                                                     days

                                     (c) Drop in flow utility under the three different flu scenarios.

Figure 25: Comparing the three different flu scenarios with a high value of a statistical life
assumption.




                                                                                                     75
                                                   Evolution of the epidemic: infections                                                                                                                                   Evolution of the epidemic: infections
                                   0.16                                                                                           young                                                             0.16                                                                    young
                                                                                                                                  old                                                                                                                                       old
                                   0.14                                                                                                                                                             0.14
 fraction of population infected




                                                                                                                                                                  fraction of population infected
                                   0.12                                                                                                                                                             0.12
                                   0.10                                                                                                                                                             0.10
                                   0.08                                                                                                                                                             0.08
                                   0.06                                                                                                                                                             0.06
                                   0.04                                                                                                                                                             0.04
                                   0.02                                                                                                                                                             0.02
                                   0.00                                                                                                                                                             0.00
                                          0   50       100     150      200                                     250   300          350                                                                      0         50         100         150        200   250   300     350
                                                                     days                                                   flu_base_vsl40_eps99_myopic_365
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     days                 flu_base_vsl40_eps99_ce_365


(a) The evolution of a seasonal flu under the my- (b) The evolution of a seasonal flu under the ra-
opic market allocation.                           tional expectations market allocation.

                                                                                                                              Evolution of the epidemic: infections
                                                                                                         0.16                                                                                                              young
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           old
                                                                                                         0.14
                                                                       fraction of population infected




                                                                                                         0.12
                                                                                                         0.10
                                                                                                         0.08
                                                                                                         0.06
                                                                                                         0.04
                                                                                                         0.02
                                                                                                         0.00
                                                                                                                  0     50            100          150           200                                  250       300        350
                                                                                                                                                              days                                                     flu_base_vsl40_eps99_sp_365


                                               (c) The evolution of a seasonal flu under the social planner’s allocation.

Figure 26: The evolution of a seasonal flu under the social planner’s allocation and the two
different market allocations for the low value of a statistical life assumption.




                                                                                                                                                         76
       H       SARS
       To test our model with an epidemic that is substantially worse than covid-19, we use
       the SARS virus of 2002/2003 (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus, SARS-
       CoV).
           For the transmissability of SARS we use estimates from Petersen et al. (2020) and
       set R0 to 2.4. An age-related increase in mortality was observed also for SARS-CoV
       (although with a far greater case fatality). In Hong Kong, the case fatality due to
       SARS-CoV was 0% for age group 0-24 years, 6% for those aged 25-44 years, 15% for
       those aged 45-64 years, and 52% for people who were 65 years and older (Petersen
       et al., 2020). We set the infection fatality rate to 8% for the group we define as young
       (15 to 60) and 45% for the group we define as old (above 60).35
           SARS also has a slightly faster incubation period, so for average number of days
       until recover we use 12 days. In terms of overcrowding of hospitals, we assume that
       there is no overcrowding effect in the hospitals that could elevate the IFR even further.

       Results SARS Figure 27 shows the evolution of the SARS epidemic in the myopic
       market allocation, the rational-expectation market allocation, and the social planner’s
       allocation under the assumption that a cure arrives after one year exactly.36 Again,
       the epidemic under the myopic market allocation is close to standard SIR dynamics.
       Many people rapidly get infected. In the case of rational expectation, the behavior is
       qualitatively different. SARS is dangerous enough to make people so scared of being
       infected that they stay away from infectious activities voluntarily to a high extent.
           A social planner would lower the amount of infectious activities even more. In the
       case of a social planner, the epidemic is not allowed to take off at all, as Figure 27c
       shows (we did not forget to plot the curve in this graph!).
           As Figure 28 shows, the results from the three scenarios are very different. The
       death toll is high in the myopic scenario, as expected. In the scenario with rational
       expectations, the number of deaths is reduced by more than 90%, and the social planner
       would reduce the number of deaths even more, as shown in Figure 28a.
           Figures 28b and 28c highlight the difference in strategy taken by a social planner
       compared to the rational-expectations equilibrium. A social planner would quickly
       lower the amount of infectious activities to get the epidemic under control, and would
  35
    In the case of SARS, the difference between the case fatality rate and the infection fatality rate is small.
  36
    We only show the results for a low value of a statistical life, results from assuming a high value of a
statistical life are very similar. Results from assuming that the cure arrives after two years are also very
similar, and can be found in the appendix.



                                                      77
thereafter not have to reduce the activities as much. In the rational-expectations
scenario people would carry on with their activities until the number of infected is too
high in the economy. Then people become afraid of becoming infected, and reduce
their activities. Hence, in this scenario, the effective reproduction number is around
1 all the time for the rational expectation equilibrium. The annual drop in output in
the rational-expectations scenario is 26.3 percent, which should be compared to the
social-planner scenario, in which it is 23.8 percent. Thus, the social planner achieves
not only less deaths, but also a smaller drop in output, by setting in “lock-down”
measures early, and by doing so getting the epidemic under control at an early stage.
   The same type of qualitative effect, that the effective reproduction number hovers
around 1 in a rational expectations scenario, is also reported by Farboodi et al. (2020)
and Bognanni et al. (2020). The intuition behind the result is as follows. On one hand,
the precautionary behavior is increasing in the infection risk, which is increasing in the
number of infected. On the other hand, the number of infected is decreasing in the
strength of the precautionary response. The infection rate therefore stabilizes around
a level which is consistent with the precautionary behavior.
   In our calibration of the covid-19 epidemic, we do not find that the effective re-
production number stabilizes around 1 in the rational-expectations scenario. Including
age heterogeneity in the model is important for our result. For the young, the risk
of a covid infection does not provide a sufficiently strong motive for a precautionary
response to stabilize the infection rate.




                                            78
                                                   Evolution of the epidemic: infections                                                                                                                                Evolution of the epidemic: infections
                                   0.16                                                                                         young                                                            0.16                                                                     young
                                                                                                                                old                                                                                                                                       old
                                   0.14                                                                                                                                                          0.14
 fraction of population infected




                                                                                                                                                               fraction of population infected
                                   0.12                                                                                                                                                          0.12
                                   0.10                                                                                                                                                          0.10
                                   0.08                                                                                                                                                          0.08
                                   0.06                                                                                                                                                          0.06
                                   0.04                                                                                                                                                          0.04
                                   0.02                                                                                                                                                          0.02
                                   0.00                                                                                                                                                          0.00
                                          0   50       100     150      200                                     250   300       350                                                                      0         50         100         150        200   250   300       350
                                                                     days                                               sars_base_vsl40_eps99_myopic_365
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  days                 sars_base_vsl40_eps99_ce_365


(a) The evolution of a SARS epidemic under the (b) The evolution of a SARS epidemic under the
myopic market allocation.                      rational expectations market allocation.

                                                                                                                             Evolution of the epidemic: infections
                                                                                                         0.16                                                                                                           young
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        old
                                                                                                         0.14
                                                                       fraction of population infected




                                                                                                         0.12
                                                                                                         0.10
                                                                                                         0.08
                                                                                                         0.06
                                                                                                         0.04
                                                                                                         0.02
                                                                                                         0.00
                                                                                                                  0     50         100          150           200                                  250       300        350
                                                                                                                                                           days                                                    sars_base_vsl40_eps99_sp_365


                                              (c) The evolution of a SARS epidemic under the social planner’s allocation.

Figure 27: The evolution of a SARS epidemic under the social planner’s allocation and the
two different market allocations.




                                                                                                                                                      79
                                       Cumulative deaths                                                                                        Output
                     myopic                                                                                  0
                     full info
            10       optimal
                                                                                                             10
             8

                                                                                                             20
  Percent




                                                                                                   Percent
             6

             4
                                                                                                             30
             2
                                                                                                                                                                         myopic
                                                                                                             40                                                          full info
             0                                                                                                                                                           optimal
                 0       50      100     150      200            250   300    350                                  0         50         100   150      200   250   300     350
                                               days                                                                                                 days

(a) Cumulative deaths under the three different (b) Output drop under the three different SARS
SARS scenarios.                                 scenarios.

                                                                                    Flow utility per capita
                                                           0.0
                                                           2.5
                                                           5.0
                                                           7.5
                                                Percent




                                                          10.0
                                                          12.5
                                                          15.0                                                                myopic
                                                                                                                              full info
                                                          17.5                                                                optimal
                                                                   0     50    100      150      200         250       300        350
                                                                                              days

                                 (c) Drop in flow utility under the three different SARS scenarios.

                                   Figure 28: Comparing the three different SARS scenarios.




                                                                                              80
