                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          MACROECONOMIC EXPECTATIONS AND CREDIT CARD SPENDING

                                         Misha Galashin
                                          Martin Kanz
                                      Ricardo Perez-Truglia

                                       Working Paper 28281
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28281


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




We are grateful for comments from numerous colleagues and seminar discussants. Javier
Feinmann, Luisa Cefala and Santiago De Martini provided superb research assistance. Perez-
Truglia was employed at University of California, Los Angeles while the research was being
conducted. This project was reviewed in advance and approved by the Institutional Review Board
at University of California Los Angeles (IRB #18-000683). We gratefully acknowledge financial
support from the UCLA Fink Center and the World Bank Research Support Budget. The
experiment was registered with the American Economic Association registry for randomized
control trials (AEA-RCTR #0003717). The opinions expressed in this paper do not necessarily
represent the views of the World Bank, its executive directors, the countries they represent, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Misha Galashin, Martin Kanz, and Ricardo Perez-Truglia. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Macroeconomic Expectations and Credit Card Spending
Misha Galashin, Martin Kanz, and Ricardo Perez-Truglia
NBER Working Paper No. 28281
December 2020
JEL No. C81,C93,D83,D84,E03,E31

                                          ABSTRACT

How do macroeconomic expectations affect consumer decisions? We examine this question using
a natural field experiment with 2,872 credit card customers from a large commercial bank. We
conduct a survey to measure consumer expectations about future inflation and the nominal
exchange rate and combine this with an information-provision experiment that generates
exogenous variation in these expectations. We merge the survey and experimental data with
detailed administrative data on the subjects' credit card transactions and balances. The experiment
is designed to test three standard predictions from models of intertemporal consumption choice:
inflation expectations should affect spending on durables; exchange rate expectations should
affect spending on tradables; and, holding constant the nominal interest rate, inflation
expectations should affect borrowing. We find that the information provided to participants
strongly affects subjective expectations. However, we do not find any significant effects on actual
consumer behavior (as measured in administrative data) or self-reported consumption plans (as
measured in survey data). Our preferred interpretation is that consumers are not sophisticated
enough to factor inflation and exchange rate expectations into their consumption decisions. The
absence of a link between consumer expectations and behavior has potentially important
implications for macroeconomic policies such as forward guidance.

Misha Galashin                                   Ricardo Perez-Truglia
Anderson School of Management                    Haas School of Business
University of California, Los Angeles            University of California, Berkeley
110 Westwood Plaza                               545 Student Services Building #1900
Los Angeles, CA 90095                            Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
mgalashin@gmail.com                              and NBER
                                                 ricardotruglia@berkeley.edu
Martin Kanz
The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington, DC 20433
mkanz@worldbank.org
1      Introduction
Macroeconomic models typically assume that the consumption choices of households respond
to changes in their macroeconomic expectations. This notion is so deeply ingrained in economic
thought that it is often taken for granted. However, surprisingly little causal evidence exists on
the effect of macroeconomic expectations on consumer behavior.
    Recent insights from behavioral economics provide several reasons why the link between
macroeconomic expectations and household consumption might be more tenuous than is gener-
ally assumed. The typical household may, for example, not be sophisticated enough to under-
stand how to optimally revise consumption choices in response to a change in macroeconomic
expectations. Macroeconomic indicators might also not be sufficiently salient for consumers, for
instance, because they face more pressing concerns when they make spending decisions. The
resulting failure of consumers to factor macroeconomic expectations into their consumption
behavior could have far-reaching consequences for macroeconomic policies, given that many of
these policies are explicitly based on the premise that changes in expectations will affect real
economic activity (Bernanke, 2007). The Federal Reserve, for example, explains on its website
that "when central banks provide forward guidance, individuals and businesses will use this in-
formation in making decisions about spending and investments. Thus, forward guidance about
future policy can influence financial and economic conditions today."1
    In this paper, we provide novel evidence on the causal effect of macroeconomic expectations
on consumption decisions. We focus on two macroeconomic factors that receive arguably the
most attention in macroeconomic models: the inflation rate and the foreign exchange rate. We
use an information-provision experiment with credit card customers to examine how shocks to
inflation and exchange rate expectations affect households' consumption decisions.
    We collaborated with the consumer finance division of a large Malaysian bank and inte-
grated a randomized experiment into the bank's customer communications. The experiment
was administered as part of a phone survey with the partner bank's credit card customers and
proceeded in the following steps. First, we elicited the respondents' exchange rate and inflation
expectations. Second, we provided randomly chosen subsets of the sample population with ex-
pert forecasts of inflation, the exchange rate, or both. Third, we elicited participants' posterior
beliefs and self-reported spending plans. Finally, we merged survey responses with data on
credit card spending provided by the partner bank. This approach allows us to examine the
impact of macroeconomic expectations on actual consumption behavior.
    The setting and customer population we use in our experiment are well-suited to study the
link between macroeconomic expectations and economic decisions for several reasons. Macroe-
conomic trends in Malaysia are arguably representative of many small, open economies and,

    1. See www.federalreserve.gov/faqs.

                                                2
as such, provide an interesting contrast between the evolution of inflation and exchange rates.
On the one hand, the inflation rate has been stable at low levels over the past decades: since
2005, the inflation rate has hovered between 1% and 3% per year. The nominal exchange rate,
on the other hand, has been highly volatile, with two-digit depreciation swings over the same
period: since 2005, the exchange rate has fluctuated between 3.08 and 4.45 MYR per USD. This
volatility means that, at least according to models of inattention, it may be more important for
consumers to keep up to date with their exchange rate expectations and factor them into their
spending decisions. Another advantage of our setting lies in the characteristics of the sample
population. Individuals in our sample are among the most educated and financially experienced
and thus should be the most likely group to respond to macroeconomic expectations. As they
are relatively affluent, their consumption bundle contains significant shares of durable goods and
tradable goods corresponding to the consumption categories expected to change in response to
exchange rate and inflation expectations.
    We present two main results. The first result is that the information provided in the ex-
periment has a significant effect on the formation of expectations. Some individuals whose
inflation and exchange rate expectations disagree with the expert forecasts update their ex-
pectations in response to our information treatments. Specifically, a 1 percentage point (pp)
increase in the information shock about future inflation increases inflation expectations by 0.237
pp (p-value<0.001). In turn, a 1 pp increase in the information shock about the future nominal
exchange rate increases exchange rate expectations by 0.065 pp (p-value=0.036). Indeed, the
finding that individuals are less prone to incorporate information about the exchange rate than
about inflation is consistent with the view that they have greater incentives to be informed
about the exchange rate and thus have stronger prior beliefs.
    The second result is that changes in macroeconomic expectations induced by our experiment
do not translate into changes in actual consumption behavior. Specifically, we test three basic
predictions from a simple model of optimal inter-temporal consumption: (i) higher inflation
expectations should increase durable spending; (ii) higher expected exchange rate depreciation
should increase spending on tradable durable goods; and (iii) conditional on the nominal in-
terest rate, higher inflation expectations should increase credit card borrowing. We do not
find empirical support for any of these predictions. Instead, the effects of information shocks
induced by the experiment on spending are close to zero and statistically insignificant. While
we cannot rule out small effects on any specific outcome, we have sufficient statistical power to
rule out moderate or large effects. Moreover, shocks to expectations do not affect self-reported
spending plans, which we elicit immediately after the information-provision part of the survey
experiment.
    Our preferred interpretation of these results is that consumers are not sophisticated enough
to re-optimize their spending plans based on revised macroeconomic expectations. Indeed,


                                                3
substantial evidence suggests that consumers fail to optimize in even simpler economic decisions,
either due to behavioral biases or lack of knowledge (see Campbell et al., 2011; Beshears et
al., 2018). In the context of credit card spending, Ponce, Seira, and Zamarripa (2017) and
Gathergood et al. (2019) show that consumers do not borrow using the lowest interest rate
card and do not prioritize repayment of the card with the highest interest rate, and Chetty
et al. (2020) show that credit card spending fails to react to anticipated income shocks. To the
extent that shielding against inflation and exchange rate risks entails complex decision-making,
it is perhaps not surprising that individuals fail to factor their macroeconomic expectations in
their spending decisions.
     We discuss, and provide evidence against, some alternative interpretations. One such inter-
pretation is that individuals update their spending plans but cannot follow through on those
plans due to self-control problems. We provide a direct test of this hypothesis. If self-control
were responsible, we would expect the information treatments to still affect spending plans.
Instead, we show that providing information has no impact on self-reported spending plans,
which are elicited immediately after the information-provision part of the survey experiment.
     Another possibility is that the effects of the information shocks on expectations do not last
long enough to affect decision making. We provide some evidence against this interpretation.
First, we find that our results are robust if, instead of looking at spending behavior in the
subsequent three months, we look at shorter time horizons.2 Second, we show that information
shocks do not affect spending plans, which are self-reported immediately after the information-
provision experiment when one would expect the information to still be fresh and salient. Third,
evidence from several other studies suggests that providing information through an experiment
tends to have long-lasting effects on expectations. For instance, the effects of information shocks
on inflation expectations last for at least a few months (Cavallo, Cruces, and Perez-Truglia,
2017).3 Fourth, information experiments similar to the one in this study have been shown to
affect high-stakes decisions measured in administrative data: e.g., employees work harder after
increasing their expectations of future salary increases (Cullen and Perez-Truglia, 2018), home
sellers are less likely to sell their homes when their home price expectations increase (Bottan
and Perez-Truglia, 2020b), and employees revise savings decisions in response to feedback about
the choices of their peers (Beshears et al., 2015).
     Our study of macroeconomic expectations and consumer behavior relates to several strands
of literature. First and most directly, our paper relates to the literature on subjective ex-
pectations in macroeconomics and finance. While traditional economic theory assumes that
individuals form statistically optimal expectations based on all available information, survey


  2. These results are available upon request.
  3. Additionally, shocks to other types of economic beliefs have been found to last from months (Bottan and
Perez-Truglia, 2020a) to even a year (Fehr, Mollerstrom, and Perez-Truglia, 2019).

                                                     4
data indicate large information frictions in the acquisition and processing of information about
macroeconomic factors, such as inflation (Armantier et al., 2016; Malmendier and Nagel, 2016;
Cavallo, Cruces, and Perez-Truglia, 2016, 2017), home prices (Armona, Fuster, and Zafar, 2019;
Fuster et al., 2020; Bottan and Perez-Truglia, 2020b), and GDP growth (Roth and Wohlfart,
2020). Growing evidence shows how these expectations are formed. Less is known, however,
about whether individuals actually factor macroeconomic expectations into their consumption
decisions (Bachmann, Berg, and Sims, 2015; Armantier et al., 2015; Coibion et al., 2019;
D'Acunto et al., 2019; Bottan and Perez-Truglia, 2020b). For example, Bachmann, Berg, and
Sims (2015) shows that inflation expectations and survey measures of readiness to spend are
not positively correlated. And Coibion et al. (2019) present evidence from a survey experiments
that, if anything, inflation expectations have a negative impact on durable spending.
    We contribute to this literature in two ways. We are the first to measure the impact of ex-
pectations on actual, rather than self-reported, consumer behavior using detailed administrative
data on credit card spending. This exercise overcomes several limitations specific to survey data,
such as measurement error or experimenter demand effects. Indeed, we provide direct evidence
that the concerns about survey data should be taken seriously, as we document a weak corre-
lation between self-reported spending plans and the corresponding actual spending decisions.
Second, we add to this line of research by studying exchange rate expectations. In recent years,
inflation rates have been low and stable in most of the world and are thus arguably of little im-
portance for most households. In contrast, large fluctuations in the nominal exchange continue
to be commonplace around the world and have meaningful economic consequences for many
households (Gouvea, 2020; Cravino and Levchenko, 2017). Despite the economic importance of
exchange rates, there is little evidence on how households form exchange rate expectations and
how such expectations may affect consumption decisions.
    This study also relates to a literature on household finance and the impacts of consumer
expectations on personal financial decisions. Giglio et al. (2020a) and Giglio et al. (2020b) use
survey data to test how macroeconomic beliefs affect the decisions of retail investors. They
show that beliefs are reflected in asset allocations and change in response to discrete macroeco-
nomic events, such as a stock market crash. Aaronson, Agarwal, and French (2012), Agarwal,
Liu, and Souleles (2007), and Agarwal and Qian (2014) use credit card data to test consumer
responses to minimum wage increases, tax changes, and unanticipated income shocks and find
effects inconsistent with models of fully rational expectations.4 We make both an empirical and
methodological contribution to this literature. On the empirical side, we merge information on
consumer beliefs, as elicited via survey, with rich administrative data that covers the universe of
credit card transactions. On the methodological side, we generate exogenous variation in beliefs

  4. Related evidence shows that behavioral factors, such as social norms and conspicuous consumption, affect
spending and debt repayment decisions (e.g. Bursztyn et al., 2018; Bursztyn et al., 2019)

                                                     5
through an experiment and measure the effects on spending using the administrative data.
   The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides a theoretical frame-
work to motivate our experimental design and develop our hypotheses. In Section 3, we sum-
marize the setting, research design, and implementation of the experiment. In Section 5, we
describe additional data sources and provide descriptive statistics. Section 6 reports the results,
and Section 7 concludes.


2    Theoretical Framework and Hypotheses
We use a standard model of intertemporal consumer choice to motivate our experimental design.
Letting subscript t denote the time period, we assume that the consumer faces an exogenous
stream of nominal income Yt and can have positive or negative holdings of an asset At that pays
an exogenous nominal interest rate Rt . There are four types of consumption goods, which we can
classify according to their durability and tradability: durable tradables (denoted XtT ), durable
nontradables (XtN ), nondurable tradables (CtT ), and nondurable nontradables (CtN ). We assume
that durable goods depreciate at a rate of  , tradable goods (both durable and nondurable) have
an exogenous price PtT , and nontradable goods (both durable and nondurable) have price PtN .
The consumer gets utility U (CtN , XtN , CtT , XtT ) from a given combination of goods, which is
concave in each of its arguments and has a discount factor  .
    The consumer's optimization problem can thus be summarized as follows:

                                                 T
                                 max
                            N ,X ,C ,X T ,A }
                                N T
                                                        t U (CtN , XtN , CtT , XtT )           (1)
                          {Ct   t  t  t    t t   t=1


    subject to

            PtN (CtN + XtN - XtN     N         T  T    T    T      T
                               -1 + Xt-1 ) + Pt (Ct + Xt - Xt-1 + Xt-1 ) + At+1

                                     Pt Yt + Rt At

    We denote the exogenously given rate of inflation from period t to t + 1 as t+1 , which is
defined as follows:

                    PtN   ¯N   ¯N       T   ¯T    ¯T
                      +1 (Ct + Xt ) + Pt+1 (Ct + Xt )      N               T
            t+1   =    N ¯N    ¯ N      T ¯T     ¯ T
                                                      = wt t +1 + (1 - wt )t+1
                     Pt (Ct + Xt ) + Pt (Ct + Xt )
                                       (C¯ N + X ¯N)
                                          t       t
                      where wt  ¯ N  ¯ N      T   N ¯T   ¯ tT )
                               (Ct + Xt ) + Pt /Pt (Ct + X
¯ is the average value of variable Z in the economy.
Z
   We make the following simplifying assumptions. First, an increase in inflation cannot be

                                                       6
accompanied by a decrease in inflation in any specific category of goods:
                   N
                  dt              T
                                 dt
Assumption 1         +1
                  dt+1
                           0,       +1
                                 dt+1
                                           0
                                -Et
   Second, defining dt+1 = Et+1
                              Et
                                    as the exchange rate depreciation between period t and t+1
(Et denotes the spot exchange rate of the Malaysian Ringgit to the US Dollar at time t), we
assume non-zero pass-through of exchange rate depreciation to tradables:
                  dtT
Assumption 2         +1
                  ddt+1
                          0

   Third, we assume Cobb-Douglas instantaneous utility:

Assumption 3 Let consumption utility be Cobb-Douglas with parameters  and  correspond-
ing to the weights of non-durables and non-tradables, respectively:
            U (CtN , XtN , CtT , XtT ) =
             log CtN + (1 - ) log CtT + (1 - ) log XtN + (1 - )(1 - ) log XtT

   This model yields the following three predictions (for proofs of each proposition, see Ap-
pendix A), which motivate the design of our field experiment:

Proposition 1 Spending on durables (tradable and non-tradable) PtN XtN + PtT XtT increases
with expected inflation t+1 .

    The intuition for this standard result (see, for example, Bachmann, Berg, and Sims, 2015)
is that one can buy durables to shield against the inflation tax.
    The second proposition describes the effect of nominal exchange rate depreciation:

Proposition 2 Spending on tradable durables PtT XtT increases with future exchange rate de-
preciation Et+1 .

    The intuition is equivalent to that of the previous proposition: consumers want to consumer
durable tradables to shield against the depreciation tax. If consumers expect the exchange rate
to depreciate, they might be more likely to buy durable tradables such as electronics (as in one
of our survey questions) now, because doing so in the future will be more expensive.
    The last result describes the relationship between inflation expectations and debt:

Proposition 3 Net borrowing At - At+1 increases with inflation t+1 .

    This proposition states that when deciding how much debt or savings to accumulate, indi-
viduals care about the real interest rate. Holding constant the nominal interest rate, an increase
in inflation will reduce the real interest rate. As a result, an increase in the expected rate of
inflation will make it attractive for consumers to borrow more (or save less).

                                                7
3     Background and Setting
3.1    Macroeconomic Context
We conduct a natural field experiment with credit card customers from a large commercial
bank in Malaysia. Malaysia is representative of many small, open economies in that inflation
has been stable and low in recent decades, whereas the exchange rate has been volatile at times.
Figure 2 presents historical data to illustrate these points. The figure first shows the evolution
of the consumer price index over the last four decades. The country experienced a short period
of high inflation in the early 1980s. However, since then, inflation has been generally moderate
and stable at around 2% to 5% annually. Figure 2 also shows the evolution of the nominal
exchange rate with respect to the U.S. Dollar. The exchange rate has been markedly more
volatile than the rate of inflation. Indeed, the difference in volatility would be even more
pronounced if we looked at weekly rather than yearly data, as inflation is stable over the year,
while the exchange rate is characterized by sharp changes at shorter time intervals. Exchange
rate volatility was most pronounced during the Asian financial crisis that began in 1997, and
during which the Malaysian Ringgit depreciated by more than 50% against the U.S. Dollar.
Following this experience, the Malaysian Ringgit was pegged to the U.S. Dollar at a rate of
3.20 MYR/USD between 1998 and 2005. Since the end of the currency peg, the exchange rate
has fluctuated between 3.08 and 4.45 MYR/USD. Several large exchange rate fluctuations have
occurred in recent years, triggered by external and domestic events, such as oil price shocks and
political instability surrounding national elections.
    Because of its greater volatility and the relatively high share of imported goods in total
consumption, it seems plausible that in our setting, the foreign exchange rate plays a more
important role in consumer decisions than the rate of inflation. As our theoretical framework
in Section 2 highlights, consumers can partially offset the effect of higher inflation by shifting
their consumption towards durable goods. We therefore predict that a consumer who expects
higher inflation will increase the relative share of durable goods in credit card spending to insure
against inflation risk. However, given that inflation in our setting is typically between 2 and 5
percent, this is unlikely to be very meaningful for the consumer's overall finances. In contrast,
when considering the purchase of tradable goods, such as consumer electronics or a car, the same
consumer might be substantially affected by exchange rate fluctuations due to the magnitude
in our setting. If the consumer, for example, expects a 20­25% exchange rate depreciation, the
timing of such a purchase could amount to substantial savings.
    To examine whether, in our context, changes in the exchange rate are in fact more salient to
households than changes in the inflation rate, we exploit data on online searches and newspaper
articles. Figure 3 plots data from Google Trends that tracks the frequency of online searches.
These data have been used in several previous studies to measure public interest in specific

                                                 8
topics (see, for example, Perez-Truglia, 2020). Figure 3.a plots the frequency of online searches
related to the terms "inflation" and "exchange rate", where dark bars correspond to keywords
related to inflation and lighter-colored bars correspond to keywords related to the exchange
rate. Google reports online searches only in relative terms. We therefore normalize the series,
with the nominal exchange rate taking the value 100 in the first period. The figure shows that
consumers seek information about the exchange rate more frequently than information about
the inflation rate: in an average week of 2019, there were approximately 18 times more searches
about the exchange rate than searches related to inflation.5
    This result is supported by a comparison of newspaper articles mentioning either inflation
or the exchange rate. Figure 3.b plots the frequency of articles in Malaysia's most widely read
English language newspaper in which either term is mentioned.6 As in Figure 3.a, both series
are normalized so that the nominal exchange rate takes the value 100 in the first period. In an
average week of 2019, there were approximately twice as many newspaper articles that referred
to the exchange rate than newspaper articles mentioning the inflation rate. The two different
data sources indicate both higher demand and higher supply for news about the exchange rate,
rather than news about the inflation rate, in our setting.


3.2     Partner Institution
Our partner institution is one of the largest commercial banks in Asia and has more than a mil-
lion customers in Malaysia. Nearly all of our partner bank's retail banking customers have debit
cards, and a significant share additionally have credit cards linked to their account. Although
our partner bank covers a broad, socially and geographically diverse customer base, its clients
are naturally not a fully representative sample of the population. They are on average younger,
more educated, more likely to reside in urban areas, and wealthier (for more details, see Section
5). Credit card usage in this setting is high and in fact comparable to high-income economies.
Using the bank's administrative data, we estimate that monthly credit card spending in our
data accounts, on average, for 32% of consumers' estimated monthly income. In comparison,
Ganong and Noel (2019) use data from the JP Morgan Chase Institute and find that average
credit and debit card spending accounted for 51% of monthly income in the United States.7




   5. The 2019 data cover the period when our experiment was conducted and are similar to other years.
   6. The Star, whose archive is available at www.thestar.com.my.
   7. This share was calculated based on results from Table 1 of Ganong and Noel (2019), which uses a sample
of credit and debit card customers in the 3 months prior to becoming unemployed.

                                                     9
4     Research Design
4.1    Overview
Figure 1 provides a graphical summary of the research design. Our intervention is designed
as an information provision experiment and administered through a phone survey with our
partner bank's credit card customers. In addition to survey data, we observe pre-treatment
and post-treatment administrative data covering the universe of credit card transactions for all
participants of our study.
    The intervention proceeds in the following four steps. First, all respondents are asked a
set of standard questions on demographics and their general economic situation. Second, a
survey module elicits macroeconomic expectations and provides randomly selected subsets of
respondents with information about inflation, the exchange rate, or both. Third, we measure
posterior beliefs to assess whether our information treatments affect respondents' expectations.
Finally, we combine survey responses with administrative data on credit card spending to test
whether the information provided affects subsequent consumption in the manner predicted by
economic theory. We provide additional details on each of these steps in the following sections.


4.2    Sample Population
To construct the sample frame for our experiment, we first requested a list of credit card
customers from our partner bank. We specified that this list should be restricted to customers
who opened their accounts within the previous three years. We received a random sample of
33,000 credit card customers and invited these customers to participate in a phone survey, which
included our information experiment.
    The survey was conducted by a team of 11 call center operators who were trained to admin-
ister a short phone survey and supervised in person by a member of the research team. At the
beginning of each workday, the operators were provided with a randomly selected list of credit
card customers to call. The operators introduced themselves as surveyors working on behalf
of researchers from UCLA and asked participants if they were willing to participate in a short
survey about their economic expectations. If operators were unable to reach a respondent on
the first attempt, they were instructed to make at least one further attempt at a later time.


4.3    Information Experiment
We integrated our experiment into this credit card customer survey administered by our partner
bank. The survey instrument, which is available in C, can be divided into five parts: (i) collecting
baseline information, (ii) eliciting prior beliefs, (iii) providing information to a random subset


                                                10
of respondents, (iv) eliciting posterior beliefs, and (v) self-reporting of consumption plans for
all respondents. In this section, we describe each component of the intervention in turn.

4.3.1    Baseline Information

We begin with a set of standard questions on the respondent's socio-economic background, in-
cluding employment status, highest level of education attained, marital status, and dependents.
We do not ask about gender, age, or income as this information is available in the administra-
tive records obtained from the partner bank. We also include one question about the expected
economic conditions in the country over the next 12 months, for which the possible responses
are "better off," "about the same," and "worse off." The language in this question, and all
other questions about expectations, closely follows the wording used in the most widely used
surveys of consumer expectations, such as the University of Michigan's Survey of Consumers
and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York Survey of Consumer Expectations (see, for example,
Bachmann, Berg, and Sims, 2015; Fuster et al., 2020).

4.3.2    Elicitation of Prior Beliefs

Next, we elicit participants' inflation and exchange rate expectations at two points in time:
immediately before the treated individuals receives information from the experimenter (prior
beliefs ) and after a randomly chosen subset of respondents is provided with an inflation or
exchange rate forecast (posterior beliefs ). The wording in both rounds is closely modeled on
that used in standard surveys of consumer expectations, and was adjusted to the context of our
study through qualitative interviews and an online pilot.
    We elicit beliefs about the future inflation rate and exchange rate. To avoid artificially
making one belief more salient than the other, we randomized the order of these two questions.
To elicit inflation expectations, the surveyors first provide a definition of inflation by explaining
that "[...] inflation is the measure of how prices in Malaysia change in general" and then elicit the
respondent's expected inflation rate over the following 12 months. Our wording is similar to that
used in one of the most widely used surveys of inflation expectations, the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York Survey of Consumer Expectations, which asks about the inflation rate directly.8
Participants are asked to give their response in percentage points.
    As documented in Section 3.1, the nominal exchange rate is already salient in news media and
online searches in the country of study. This makes it more straightforward to elicit exchange

   8. Another widely used source of data is the Michigan Survey of Consumers, conducted by the Survey Research
Center at the University of Michigan, which asks about prices in general instead of asking about inflation directly.
See Armantier et al. (2016) for a discussion on how these differences in wording might affect responses. Given the
similarity of the questions used to elicit expectations, we can benchmark our results to those of related studies
that have used the Survey of Consumer Expectations data and, with some caveats that have been highlighted
by Armantier et al. (2016) among others, to studies that used the Michigan Consumer Survey data.

                                                        11
rate expectations. To elicit respondents' nominal exchange rate expectations, the surveyor
informs the respondent of the current nominal exchange rate ("as of April 2019, 1 U.S. Dollar is
worth around 4.05 Malaysian Ringgit") and then asks what, in their opinion, "[...] the exchange
rate will be 12 months from now, in April 2020". This way of eliciting beliefs is consistent with
previous work by Cavallo, Cruces, and Perez-Truglia (2017) and was adapted to our research
setting through a series of pilot tests and consumer interviews.

4.3.3   Information Provision

In the information provision stage of the experiment, all respondents are first read the following
message: "In this stage, we randomly select respondents to receive some feedback about the
previous questions." Each respondent is then randomly assigned to one of the following three
treatment groups with equal probability:

 (a) Treatment Inflation : In the first treatment condition, respondents receive a signal
     about the future inflation rate: "The consensus among experts from the government and
     private sector is that inflation in Malaysia will be 2.3% over the next 12 months."

 (b) Treatment Exchange Rate : In our second treatment condition, respondents receive
     a signal about the future nominal exchange rate: "The consensus among experts from
     the government and private sector is that 1 U.S. Dollar in Malaysia will be worth 4.10
     Malaysian Ringgit 12 months from now."

 (c) Treatment Exchange Rate and Inflation : In our final treatment condition, respon-
     dents receive two signals. The first one relates to the inflation rate: "The consensus among
     experts from the government and private sector is that inflation in Malaysia will be 2.3%
     over the next 12 months". The second one relates to the exchange rate: "The consensus
     among experts from the government and private sector is that 1 U.S. Dollar will be worth
     4.10 Malaysian Ringgit 12 months from now".The order of these two pieces of information
     was consistent with the (randomized) order of the questions on prior beliefs: i.e., if the
     prior inflation expectations was elicited before the prior exchange rate expectations, then
     feedback about inflation would come before the feedback about the exchange rate.

The inflation and exchange rate information we provide is based on forecasts published on popu-
lar forecasting websites, including Statista.com, TradingEconomics.com, and WalletInvestor.com.
These sources are widely known and respected in our setting and comparable to professional
forecasting sources that have been used in similar information-provision experiments (see, for
example, Cavallo, Cruces, and Perez-Truglia, 2017; Fuster et al., 2020; Roth and Wohlfart,
2020). It is worth noting that our research design does not include an information treatment


                                               12
where no respondent receives information. The decision to omit the no information condition
from our research design was based on results from a pilot, in which surveyors found it difficult
to re-elicit beliefs when no new information had been provided to the respondent. Since this
treatment condition is not necessary to estimate the effects of information, we chose to exclude
it from our experimental design altogether.

4.3.4   Elicitation of Posterior Beliefs

The second round of belief elicitation takes place immediately after respondents are provided
with information about inflation, the exchange rate, or both. To ensure that the responses are
comparable to the elicitation of prior beliefs, the second round of belief elicitation uses the exact
same wording as the first. The goal of this second round of belief elicitation is to understand
whether individuals incorporate the information provided to them through the information
treatments into their expectations.

4.3.5   Elicitation of Consumption Plans

While the main goal of our experiment is to estimate the effect of information on actual con-
sumption, as measured objectively in administrative data, we also asked a series of questions on
respondents' consumption plans. These responses were collected after the elicitation of posterior
beliefs and serve two purposes. First, they allow us to test whether our information treatments
affect intended behavior. With that goal in mind, we measure expected future spending in the
main consumption categories highlighted by the theoretical framework (durable goods, tradable
goods, and credit card debt), as well as other categories that act as useful proxies or benchmarks.
Second, these questions allow us to confirm that survey responses have predictive content by
testing whether predicted consumption correlates with actual future consumption.
    The first of these questions elicit respondents' expected change in total credit card ex-
penditures (which corresponds to the total expenditures we observe in administrative data).
Specifically, respondents were asked: "Do you expect your credit card spending to go up, stay
the same, or go down during the next 3 months?" We code this and other similar questions on
a simple three-step scale. the variable takes the value -1 if the individual responded "go down,"
0 if the individual responded "stay the same," and +1 if the individual responded "go up."
Another pair of questions uses similar language to elicit total spending, not limited to spending
on credit cards, and spending on groceries for comparison.
    The next set of questions on expected spending asks about spending on durable goods and
uses wording that closely follows the Michigan Survey of Consumers. We first ask respondents:
"Do you think now is a good time, a bad time, or neither a good nor a bad time to buy household
items, such as furniture or a refrigerator?" We code responses using the same {-1, 0, +1} scale


                                                 13
as before. The variable takes the value -1 if the individual responded "No, it's a bad time," 0 if
the individual responded "It's neither a good nor a bad time," and +1 if the individual responded
"Yes, it's a good time." We include three additional questions using this same language, but
instead of asking about durable expenditures, we ask about electronics, vehicles, and credit card
borrowing, respectively.
    One potential concern with our design is that the information treatments could affect be-
havior through a mechanism other than intertemporal optimization of consumption. Intuitively,
information about inflation and the exchange rate could affect spending by changing respon-
dents' general optimism or pessimism about the economy. For example, individuals who learn
that there will be inflation or depreciation in the future may infer that these are symptoms of
an economic downturn and interpret this as bad news for their personal economic situation. We
include two questions to shed light on this potential mechanism in the questionnaire. The first
asks respondents about their expectations for the economy overall, the second asks about the
individual's own financial outlook: "Looking forward, would you say that you and your family
living with you will be better off or worse off financially than you are now?" We code both
outcomes using the same {-1, 0, +1} scale: -1 if the individual responds "Worse off," 0 if the
individual responds "About the same," and +1 if the individual responds "Better off."


5     Data and Descriptive Statistics
5.1     Sample and Survey Implementation
We implemented the experiment over a 4-month period between April and July 2019. During
this time, the survey team attempted to reach 28,958 credit card clients and completed 2,872
surveys, implying a 10% response rate.9 The median respondent took 7 minutes to complete
the interview. Surveys were offered in English and Malay, and 47% of respondents chose to
complete the survey in English, while the remaining 53% responded in Malay. The partner
bank shared detailed administrative records for all participants who responded to the survey, as
well as a representative sample of clients who were invited to the survey but did not respond.
    Table 2 provides descriptive statistics for our sample based on administrative data. Column
(1) reports data for a random sample from the universe of the bank's credit card clients, which
includes both survey respondents and non-respondents. In this sample, 62% of clients are male,

   9. This final sample excludes individuals who started the survey but did not make it to the end. There
are only 174 partially complete surveys and we cannot reject the hypothesis that the respondents are missing
at random after the information-provision stage of the survey. Our final sample excludes 274 individuals who
reported extreme prior beliefs about the nominal exchange rate (above 4.65 or below 3.7 Ringgit per U.S. dollar)
because the system used by the surveyors prevents us from knowing the exact expectations of those respondents.
We would have excluded those extreme prior beliefs anyway to avoid sensitivity to outliers, as is standard in
studies based on expectations data (Fuster et al., 2020).

                                                      14
they are on average 33.6 years old, have an average monthly income of $3,087 and monthly
credit card expenditures of $1,106.
    As one might expect, the summary statistics shown in column (1) of Table 2 indicate that
clients of the partner bank are not representative of the entire Malaysian population. On the
one hand, the age and gender composition of our sample is not substantially different from the
country average: data from the Malaysian Department of Statistics for 2020 indicate that 51.4%
of the Malaysian population is male (compared to 62% in our sample of bank customers) with
a mean age of 31.4 years (compared to 33.6 years in our sample). On the other hand, we find
substantial income differences. According to data from the Salaries and Wages Survey Report,10
the average Malaysian household earned $1,767 (compared to $3,087 in our sample).
    However, Table 2 also shows that there is no indication of selection into treatment. Cus-
tomers who participated in our experiment are similar to non-respondents. Columns (2) and (3)
compare the characteristics of the 2,872 clients who answered our survey (reported in column
(2)) to the sample of 3,126 clients who were invited to the survey but did not respond (column
(3)). Comparing columns (2) to (3) indicates that although there are some statistically signifi-
cant differences in average characteristics, none of these differences are meaningful in magnitude.
For example, the average age is 33.28 years among survey respondents as compared to 33.88
among non-respondents. The average monthly income is $3,129 among survey respondents as
compared to $3,050 among non-respondents. The average credit card expenditures are $1,135
among survey respondents and $1,080 among non-respondents. The one possible exception is
gender, where we find that men are more represented among survey respondents (67%) than
among non-respondents (57%).
    Table 3 provides additional descriptive statistics, based on survey and administrative data,
and presents a test of randomization balance. Column (1) is based on the sample of all 2,872
survey respondents. The summary statistics show that the respondents in this sample are highly
educated (87% have a college degree), around half (54%) are married, and around 10% are self-
employed. In columns (2) through (4) of Table 3, we compare the baseline characteristics and
expenditures of the three treatment groups. Column (5) reports p-values for the null hypothesis
that these characteristics are equal across all three treatment groups. The results indicate that,
consistent with successful random assignment, pre-treatment observables are balanced across
treatment groups. As expected, all differences across treatment groups are economically small.
The difference is statistically significant (p-value=0.09) for only one of the 11 characteristics
reported in the table: the number of dependents. This result is within expectations, given that
1 out of every 10 differences are expected to be statistically significant at the 10% level simply
by chance. We nonetheless follow standard practice and include the number of dependents as a
control variable in all regressions.

 10. Source: Malaysian Department of Statistics, 2017.

                                                    15
5.2     Credit Card Data
Our partner bank shared administrative data on credit card transactions for all customers in the
sample. These data allow us to measure spending and borrowing behavior of all customers in our
sample for 12 months prior to the intervention and 3 months after the intervention. The dataset
contains detailed records of all credit card transactions that occurred during this time period,
which include the transaction amount, description, vendor name, and spending category code.11
The credit card data also include information about outstanding balances and repayment, which
we use to measure consumers' willingness to take on debt. Importantly for our purposes, each
transaction in the data contains the standardized Merchant Category Code (MCC), a 4-digit
identifier that classifies a business by the types of goods or services it sells. The MCC makes
it possible to assign each transaction to a specific spending category. Importantly, for the goal
of our analysis, the MCC allows us to distinguish between spending on durable, nondurable,
tradable, and nontradable goods. To classify spending into durable versus nondurable goods, we
follow the standard categorization used in the literature (see Aaronson, Agarwal, and French,
2012; Agarwal and Qian, 2014; Ganong and Noel, 2019; Chetty et al., 2020). For example, some
durable spending items include apparel, consumer electronics, and furniture. To the best of our
knowledge, no other paper has used MCCs to classify credit card spending into tradable and
non-tradable expenditures. We therefore created our own categorization by manually inspecting
each individual MCC and classifying it as tradable or nontradable. In our classification, all codes
for services are assigned to the nontradable category, whereas codes for goods are assigned to
the tradable category if those goods are typically imported or exported. For example, some
tradable spending items include apparel and consumer electronics.
    We summarize both MCC categorizations in Table 1. As there are thousands of individual
MCCs, we report summary statistics using standard groupings of MCCs that are commonly
used by financial institutions and in the academic literature. Column (1) reports the average
spending for each MCC group in our sample. Column (2) indicates the fraction of spending
within that MCC group that is classified as durable (the remainder is classified as nondurable
by construction). Column (3) indicates the fraction of spending within the MCC group that is
classified as tradable (with the remainder classified as nontradable). For example, the third row
corresponds to the MCC group "automotive expenditures", in which 100% of codes are classified
as durables and 0% as non-durables, and 64% of the spending in this MCC group is classified as
tradable versus 36% as nontradable (primarily codes corresponding to services). The last row
of the table summarizes codes that we group as "uncategorized." These miscellaneous MCCs
do not contain enough information to categorize them as durable, as opposed to nondurable, or
tradable, as opposed to nontradable, expenditures.
  11. We do not obtain data on debit card transactions because that they account for a negligible fraction of
spending according to pre-intervention summary data (debit cards are used primarily for cash withdrawals).

                                                     16
    Figure 4 summarizes the breakdown of spending between durable and tradable categories.
Each rectangle corresponds to one unit of spending. The blue rectangles towards the right,
denoted as uncategorized, correspond to the 10% of spending that cannot be categorized. Among
the transactions that can be categorized (90% of all spending), 31% are categorized as tradable
and the remaining 69% as nontradable. Among the transactions that can be categorized, 32%
are durable and 68% nondurable. Figure 4 also shows substantial orthogonal variation between
the two categorizations. That is, not all tradables are durables and vice-versa.
    Table 2 also shows average spending statistics for each key spending category used in our
analysis. Specifically, column (2) shows that customers who participated in the experiment used
their credit cards to spend average monthly amounts of $371 (33% of the $1,135 total credit
card spending) on durables and $275 (24% of total spending) on tradable durables. On average,
subjects had $1,805 in outstanding credit card debt, equivalent to 1.5 months of spending.


6     Results
6.1    Spending: Survey versus Administrative Data
Existing research has generally studied the impact of economic expectations on consumption
using survey data, which may suffer from a number of well-known limitations, such as measure-
ment error, selection problems, and surveyor demand effects. To assess whether this is a source
of concern in our study, we explicitly test the relationship between self-reported consumption
plans and actual future consumption in our data. If survey measures of consumption track
actual consumption closely, measuring consumption in administrative data has few benefits. If,
however, there is a disconnect between survey responses and actual spending, this would suggest
that using administrative data could be crucially important to avoid spurious results.
    Our survey elicited expectations about future credit card spending by asking respondents
whether they expect their credit card spending to increase, decrease, or remain the same.
Comparing these self-reported consumption plans to actual spending can reveal the extent to
which survey measures predict actual consumption. Figure 5 presents the results. The x-axis
corresponds to the actual change in monthly credit card spending in the 3 months after the
survey completion. The y-axis corresponds to self-reported consumption plans on a 3-point
scale from -1 ("go down") to +1 ("go up").
    We find a statistically significant (p-value=0.020) relationship between the expected change
in credit card expenditures and the actual change in spending, indicating that self-reported
consumption plans do have some information content. This relationship is, however, weak.
The estimated slope (0.034) implies that a one-standard-deviation increase in actual future
expenditures is associated with an increase in expected future expenditures of only 0.03 standard


                                               17
deviations.12 This is also highlighted by a low R2 of 0.021. These results indicate that survey
predictions are a useful but very weak indicator of actual future spending.
    There are several possible explanations for this finding. One possibility is that individuals
may make consumption decisions spontaneously and are therefore not very good at predicting
their spending over longer time horizons. Alternatively, individuals may have a clear idea of
their future spending but may fail to follow through on their plans, for example due to a lack of
self-control or financial constraints (although the latter is unlikely given that all participants of
our experiment have access to credit card borrowing by definition). Another explanation could
be measurement error and different types of response bias. Consumers may have a clear idea
of their future spending but fail to communicate this accurately in their survey responses. This
interpretation is somewhat unlikely to apply in our population, given that the participants of our
experiment are highly educated, and financially experienced (87% of respondents in our sample
have a college degree) and that we elicited survey expectations following standard questionnaires
that were adapted and tested for this specific population.
    Taken together, the evidence suggests that using survey data to measure treatment effects
may be misleading, and provides a strong rationale for using administrative data to measure
actual rather than planned consumption.


6.2     Prior Beliefs
Figure 6 shows the distribution of inflation and exchange rate expectations at baseline. In Figure
6.a, we plot the distribution of prior beliefs about the future inflation rate. On average, prior
expectations about inflation (3.39 pp) are close to the expert forecast (2.3 pp) and close to a
recent rate (1.4 pp).13 There is, however, significant dispersion in predictions across individuals,
with individuals in the bottom decile of the distribution predicting an inflation rate of 0 pp and
individuals in the top decile of the distribution predicting an inflation rate of 10 pp. In Figure
6.b, we plot the distribution of exchange rate expectations. The figure shows that beliefs about
the future exchange rate follow a similar pattern as those for the future rate of inflation: prior
expectations about the nominal exchange rate (4.13 MYR per USD) are centered close to the
expert forecast (4.10 MYR per USD), but there is significant dispersion in individual predictions,
with some individuals (bottom 10%) expecting the exchange rate to rise to 3.90 Ringgit per US
Dollar and others (top 10%) expecting it to decline to 4.40 Ringgit per U.S. Dollar.
    The finding that expectations are centered around the professional forecast but dispersed has
been documented widely in the literature on inflation and exchange rate expectations (Armantier

 12. The standard deviation of the variable shown in the x-axis is $602, and the standard deviation of the
variable shown in the y-axis is 0.665.
 13. The 1.4 pp annual rate of inflation corresponds to the estimate for July 2019, according to the Malaysian
Department of Statistics.

                                                     18
et al., 2016; Cavallo, Cruces, and Perez-Truglia, 2017), as well as in other contexts (see, for
example, Fuster et al., 2020). Our information-provision experiment leverages this dispersion
in prior beliefs.


6.3    Effect of Information on Posterior Beliefs
We next examine how the information feedback provided through our treatment conditions
affects macroeconomic expectations. To do so, we use the standard econometric approach that
has been used in information-provision experiments on a wide range of topics, such as inflation
(Armantier et al., 2016; Cavallo, Cruces, and Perez-Truglia, 2017), cost of living (Bottan and
Perez-Truglia, 2020a), and housing prices (Fuster et al., 2020).
                                                                                    prior
    Let subscript i index the participants of our experiment and denote i,t               as individual
i's prior belief about the inflation rate, where t denotes the point in time when the belief is
elicited and  the expected inflation between time t and t + 12 months. This is the belief
about the inflation rate right before the individual reaches the information-provision stage of
                         signal
the experiment. Let i,t         be the value of the signal that we may or may not show to the
                                                                                          
individual (the expert forecast at time t of the inflation rate in 12 months). Let Ti,t     be a binary
variable that takes the value 1 if individual i is shown the signal and 0 otherwise. We denote the
                                     post
corresponding posterior belief as i,t     . That is, the expected inflation rate after the individual
sees, or does not see, the signal.
    When priors and signals are distributed normally, Bayesian learning implies that after the
individual sees the signal, the mean of the posterior belief should be a weighted average between
                                               post       signal           prior
the signal and the mean of the prior belief, i,t    =  · i,t     +(1 - ) · i,t   , where the parameter
 depends on the relative precision of the prior belief and the signal (Hoff, 2009). The parameter
, the learning rate, ranges from 0 (individuals ignore the signal) to 1 (individuals fully adjust
to the signal). We can rearrange this identity as follows:

                                post   prior      signal   prior
                                i,t  - i,t   =  · i,t    - i,t                                     (2)
                                                                               post     prior
    In other words, the Bayesian model predicts that the belief updates (i,t        - i,t     ) should
                                                                           signal    prior
be a linear function of the gap between the signal and the prior belief (i,t - i,t ). That is,
respondents who overestimate the inflation rate will revise their expectations downward when
shown the signal, and those who underestimate the inflation rate will revise their beliefs upward
when shown the signal. The model also predicts that the slope of that relationship should be
equal to the learning rate, .
    In practice, several "spurious" reasons may explain why individuals revise their beliefs in the
direction of the feedback, even if they received no signal. For example, some may take additional
time to think when asked a question a second time and may get closer to the truth as a result.


                                                  19
This may be particularly true in phone surveys where participants interact with a caller and
may feel social pressure to report different beliefs when asked about their expectations again,
even if they were not given new information. To allay concerns of such potentially spurious
updating, we exploit the randomized assignment from the information provision experiment,
following standard specifications in the literature (see Armantier et al., 2016; Cavallo, Cruces,
and Perez-Truglia, 2016):

              post   prior      signal   prior             signal   prior
              i,t  - i,t   =  · i,t    - i,t   · Ti,t +  · i,t    - i,t   +       i            (3)

    In this specification, the parameter  picks up spurious reversion towards the signal and 
picks up true learning (i.e., changes in beliefs caused by the information provision) above any
spurious revisions. Note that we do not expect subjects to fully update to the signal we provided
( = 1) because the signal is an expert forecast that most respondents will correctly interpret
as uncertain. Moreover, some individuals may not fully trust the source of the forecast and
therefore place lower weight on the forecast. Nevertheless, we should expect  to be significantly
greater than zero.
    The same logic applies to expectations about the nominal exchange rate. Let dpriori,t  denote
participant i's prior belief about the depreciation rate (i.e., the growth rate of the nominal
exchange rate) before the individual reaches the information-provision experiment. Let dsignal
                                                                                             i,t
be the value of the signal that we may or may not show to the individual (i.e., the forecast).
      d
Let Ti,t be a binary variable that takes the value 1 if we showed that signal to individual i and
0 if not. Denote dpost
                    i,t as the corresponding posterior belief, that is, the expected depreciation
rate after the individual sees, or does not see, the signal.
    Our experiment provides respondents with information about inflation and the nominal
exchange rate. Thus, it is possible that individuals use feedback about the inflation rate to
update beliefs about the exchange rate and vice versa. Indeed, we might expect this type of
cross-learning based on macroeconomic evidence. For example, after a devaluation of the local
currency, there is partial pass-through to inflation (Dornbusch, 1987). We therefore expand the
learning model to accommodate the possibility of cross-learning and estimate the following set
of equations:


           post   prior       signal   prior
           i,t  - i,t   = 1 · i,t    - i,t       
                                             · Ti,t + 2 · dsignal
                                                           i,t    - dprior
                                                                     i,t
                                                                               d
                                                                           · Ti,t +
                                                                                               (4)
                            1 · dsignal
                                 i,t    - dprior
                                           i,t
                                                       signal
                                                 + 2 · i,t      prior
                                                              - i,t   + Xi,t 1 +           i



            dpost   prior
             i,t - di,t
                               signal
                          =3 · i,t      prior
                                      - i,t       
                                              · Ti,t + 4 · dsignal
                                                            i,t    - dprior
                                                                      i,t
                                                                                d
                                                                            · Ti,t +
                                                                                               (5)
                           1 · dsignal
                                i,t    - dprior
                                          i,t
                                                      signal
                                                + 2 · i,t      prior
                                                             - i,t   + Xi,t 2 +        i




                                               20
    Note that this equation also includes a vector of control variables denoted Xi,t . Given
random assignment, this vector of control variables should not change the point estimates but
help absorb the variance of the error term and improve statistical power. We use the exact same
set of control variables in all regressions presented in this paper: a set of 10 surveyor dummies,
four dummies for the week of the year when the respondent completed the survey, the number
of dependents, and 20 variables to control flexibly for the pre-treatment spending patterns.14
    The main parameters of interest are 1 , measuring how individuals incorporate feedback
about inflation into their inflation expectations, and 4 , measuring how individuals incorporate
feedback about the exchange rate into their exchange rate expectations. The parameters 2
and 3 measure cross-learning by capturing how individuals incorporate exchange rate feedback
into their inflation expectations and inflation feedback into their exchange rate expectations.
    Before presenting the regression results, Figure 7 provides a graphical summary of the im-
pact of our information treatments on macroeconomic expectations. Figure 7.a shows a binned
scatterplot corresponding to the effects of the inflation feedback. The x-axis corresponds to the
potential update in response to the provision of feedback (i.e., the difference between the feed-
back on inflation expectations and the corresponding prior belief). The y-axis shows the actual
belief update (i.e., the difference between the posterior belief and the prior belief). The gray
circles correspond to the control group (i.e., individuals who do not receive inflation feedback).
The slope of this linear relationship (the gray line) corresponds to the coefficient  in the learning
equation (3), which measures "spurious" learning. We find significant spurious learning, which
is consistent with findings from related studies (see, for example, Fuster et al., 2020; Cullen
and Perez-Truglia, 2018).15 In turn, the red squares correspond to the treatment group (i.e.,
individuals who receive the inflation feedback). Most importantly, the slope of the relationship
is significantly larger (p-value=0.000) in the treatment group (0.472) than in the control group
(0.247). This difference in slopes corresponds to the coefficient  from the learning equation (3)
(i.e., the true rate of learning that can be attributed to the information provision). Figure 7.b
is similar to Figure 7.a, but reports updating on exchange rate expectations instead of inflation
expectations. Again, consistent with genuine learning from the feedback, we find that the slope
is stronger in the treatment group than in the control group, although the difference is smaller
in magnitude (0.317 vs 0.255) and statistical significance (p-value=0.046).
    We next turn to the regression results, presented in Table 4. The first two columns of this
table correspond to the regression specifications given by equations (4) and (5), respectively.

  14. More specifically, we include a set of four variables with the average monthly spending over each of the
last four quarters before the survey date, as well as the corresponding set of variables for each of the following
spending categories: durable, tradable durable, and nondurable.
  15. In terms of magnitude, however, the degree of spurious learning seems larger in our data. Our preferred
interpretation for this difference is that, unlike other surveys experiments that are conducted online, our survey
was conducted via phone. As a result, some individuals may have felt pressured to revise their posterior beliefs
even if they did not receive any feedback.

                                                       21
In column (1), the dependent variable is the updating on inflation expectations. In column
(2), the dependent variable is the updating on the expected exchange rate depreciation. These
results differ from the simpler binned scatterplots in Figure 7 in that they include additional
control variables and allow for cross-learning. Table 4 reports the coefficients of the two key
independent variables, corresponding to the interactions between the treatment assignments
and the size of the information shock. For simplicity, we refer to these variables as information
shocks.
    The first coefficient from column (1) of Table 4 indicates that information about inflation
has a significant effect on inflation expectations: a 1 pp increase in inflation shock increases
inflation expectations by 0.237 pp (p-value<0.001). The second coefficient from column (1) of
Table 4 is close to zero (-0.031) and statistically insignificant (p-value=0.189), indicating that
the information shock about the exchange rate does not have a significant effect on inflation
expectations. In other words, individuals use the feedback in a compartmentalized manner.
    The magnitude of the pass-through from the inflation feedback to the inflation expectations
is in the same order of magnitude as the pass-through estimated in other information experi-
ments. For example, Bottan and Perez-Truglia (2020b) shows that a 1 pp increase in feedback
about future home prices increases the home price expectations by 0.205 pp. However, the de-
gree to which subjects incorporate the information is lower than that reported in other studies.
For example, Cavallo, Cruces, and Perez-Truglia (2017) find that, when forming inflation ex-
pectations, the average Argentine respondent assigns a weight of 0.432 to the feedback and the
remaining 0.568 to their prior beliefs (coefficient -statistics reported in Panel B, column (1) of
Table 1). The fact that individuals are less prone to incorporating information in our context
may reflect a more educated and financially savvy population that has more confidence in their
prior beliefs. However, this difference in rates of learning could be attributed to differences in
the survey methods. For example, other studies provide information and elicit beliefs on a com-
puter screen, whereas our study uses phone surveys, which could arguably make the information
less salient. Also, other studies where subjects are paid to fill out the survey could generate
experimenter demand effects. Subjects in our survey were not paid for their participation.
    The second coefficient in Table 4, column (2), indicates that information about the exchange
rate has a significant effect on exchange rate expectations: a 1 pp information shock increases ex-
pectations of a nominal exchange rate depreciation by about 0.065 pp (p-value=0.036). Again,
we find compartmentalized learning about the exchange rate: the first coefficient in column
(1) is close to zero (0.033) and statistically insignificant (p-value=0.206), indicating that in-
formation about the inflation rate does not have a significant effect on participants' exchange
rate expectations. We find that the magnitude of the learning effects for the exchange rate
(coefficient of 0.065) is lower than the magnitude of learning effects for inflation (0.237), and
the difference between the two is statistically significant (p-value<0.001). Following a Bayesian


                                                22
learning approach, we offer two potential interpretations for this difference. First, individuals
may have stronger prior beliefs about the exchange rate than about the inflation rate. This
interpretation is consistent with the evidence documented in Section 3.1 showing substantially
more interest in learning about the exchange rate than the rate of inflation, presumably because
it is more consequential for everyday economic decisions. An alternative interpretation is that
individuals do not trust the precision of the signal. That is, they are less likely to trust expert
forecasts about inflation than about the exchange rate. However, as we do not provide specific
information about the sources of inflation and exchange rate forecasts used in our experiment,
this interpretation seems less likely.


6.4    Effect of Information on Spending
Having shown that our information treatments are effective at shifting beliefs, we turn to their
impacts on consumption. The main goal of our experiment is to test whether changes in
macroeconomic expectations affect actual spending, as measured in administrative data covering
the universe of credit card transactions for bank customers in our sample. To examine this
question, we estimate the following regression equation:


                           signal   prior
                       
              Yi,t+1 = Y · i,t    - i,t       
                                          · Ti,t   d
                                                 + Y · dsignal
                                                        i,t    - dprior
                                                                  i,t
                                                                            d
                                                                        · Ti,t +
                                                                                               (6)
                        Y
                        
                          · dsignal
                             i,t    - dprior
                                       i,t
                                               d
                                             + Y   signal
                                                 · i,t      prior
                                                          - i,t   + Xi,t Y +       i


    Note that the right-hand-side of equation (6) is identical to the learning equations in (4)
and (5). The only difference is that the dependent variable is now a generic outcome Yi,t+1 .
For example, this dependent variable may be the average monthly spending in the 3 months
post-treatment. Recall that in the set of control variables (Xi,t ), we include the pre-treatment
spending, which exploits the persistence in spending patterns to help reduce the variance of the
error term and improve statistical power (see McKenzie, 2012).
    Table 4 reports the results. In columns (1) and (2), we estimate the relationship between the
information shock and the resulting change in self-reported macroeconomic expectations. The
results confirm that participants update their macroeconomic expectations in response to the
information provided to them through our experiment. In Table 4, columns (3) through (6), we
use the same empirical specification to examine whether the changes in macroeconomic expec-
tations documented in columns (1) and (2) translate into changes in consumption behavior. To
do so, we estimate equation (6), with spending on durables, tradable durables, credit card debt,
and total spending as the respective outcomes. Each outcome is measured in the administra-
tive data obtained from our partner bank. We observe credit card spending for 3 months after
the intervention and average the monthly spending over the entire period to mitigate concerns

                                                23
about outliers or seasonality of expenditures. Total credit card debt is measured as the amount
of outstanding credit card debt after the monthly repayment due date.
    The results in columns (3) through (5) of Table 4 test the key predictions of the theoretical
framework presented in Section 2. The first coefficient in column (3) measures the effect of the
inflation shock on durables consumption. This is a direct test of Proposition 1, which states
that spending on durables should increase with expected inflation. We do not find support for
this prediction in the data. While the point estimate has the correct sign, the coefficient is small
in magnitude (1.960) and not statistically different from 0 (p-value=0.483). The information
shock delivered by our experiment moves inflation expectations by an average of 0.088 standard
deviations, but our estimate implies that it increases average monthly spending on durables by
only 0.006 standard deviations (or less than $2).
    Similarly, the second coefficient estimate in column (4) of Table 4 provides a test of Proposi-
tion 2, which states that a decrease in the expected exchange rate (an increase in the expected
rate of depreciation) should increase spending on tradable durables. We also do not find evidence
consistent with this prediction. The point estimate is negative, small in magnitude (-2.514),
and not statistically significant (p-value= 0.196). While our intervention moves exchange rate
expectations by an average of 0.023 standard deviations, this coefficient estimate implies a neg-
ligible impact on spending on tradable durables, shifting expenditures in this category by only
0.007 standard deviations.
    Finally, column (5) of Table 4 shows that, consistent with Proposition 3, an increase in
the expected inflation rate leads to a slight increase in total credit card debt. However, this
coefficient is statistically insignificant and small in magnitude: it implies that for each 1 pp
increase in the inflation shock, individual credit card debt increases by just 0.014 standard
deviations.
    In column (6), we consider an additional hypothesis that is not motivated by the intertem-
poral consumption models. As argued by Coibion et al. (2019), individuals may see future
inflation and exchange rate depreciation as signs of a weak economy. According to that view,
an increase in expected inflation and depreciation may discourage the individual from spending
in general, for precautionary reasons. To explore this additional hypothesis, column (6) of Table
4 uses total spending as the dependent variable. We do not find any evidence that inflation
and exchange expectation shocks have significant effects on total spending. The coefficients are
negative but economically small and statistically insignificant. For example, a 1 pp inflation
shock reduces total spending by just 0.002 standard deviations (p-value=0.739), while a 1 pp
depreciation shock reduces total spending by just 0.005 standard deviations (p-value=0.429).
    As an additional robustness test to check the regression specification, we leverage data on
pre-treatment spending, which allows us to conduct a falsification test in the spirit of an event-
study analysis. We estimate the same regression but use pre-treatment instead of post-treatment


                                                24
spending as the dependent variables. The outcomes are measured before participants receive
information and thus should not show effects of the information on pre-treatment spending.
Appendix B.1 presents the results. As expected, we find no effects of the information shocks on
pre-treatment spending outcomes.


6.5    Magnitude of Coefficients
In the previous section, we show that our information treatments shift expectations but do
not have a statistically significant effect on consumption. However, this does not necessarily
mean that the effects are precisely zero. To get a better quantitative sense of the effect sizes,
we take a hypothetical information shock of 1 pp and estimate its impact on the outcomes of
interest in terms of dollars and standard deviations. We first consider the effect of an inflation
shock on durable consumption and find that a 1 pp information shock is predicted to increase
durable spending by a statistically insignificant $1.960, equivalent to less than 0.010 standard
deviations of the corresponding outcome. To examine the possibility of an undetected increase
in durable spending, we inspect the confidence interval of our estimate. The upper bound of
the 95% confidence interval is approximately 7.45, which rules out positive effects larger than
$7.44. Relative to the standard deviation of the outcome variable, we can rule out effects above
0.022 standard deviations, which is very close to zero.
    Note that our estimates are intention-to-treat (ITT) effects, because the information shock
given to the subjects only partially translates into changes in their posterior beliefs. For this
reason, we refer to equation (6) as the reduced-form effects of the information experiment. For
a more direct measure of the effect of expectations on behavior, we can use an instrumental
variables version of the reduced-form equation but with two endogenous variables corresponding
to the belief updates for inflation and exchange rate expectations.
    We report the results from the instrumental variables regressions in Table 5. The first predic-
tion of interest is that an increase in inflation expectations should increase durable expending.
The coefficient on inflation expectations in Table 5, column (1), indicates that a 1 pp increase
in inflation expectations causes an increase in durable spending of $14.3, or only 0.042 standard
deviations for this outcome. Looking at the upper bound of the 95% confidence interval, we rule
out an increase in this outcome above $39.1, or 0.114 standard deviations. This suggests that,
while we cannot rule out that inflation expectations have small effects on spending behavior,
we can rule out moderate to large effects.
    The results are similar for other hypotheses that we tested. The second prediction of our
theoretical framework is that an increase in expected depreciation should increase spending
on tradable durables. Contrary to this prediction, the coefficient from column (2) indicates
that a 1 pp increase in the expected devaluation reduces rather than increases spending on


                                                25
tradable durables by $33.1, which is equivalent to a reduction of 0.130 standard deviations.
Inspecting the bounds of the 95% confidence interval, we rule out an increase of more than
0.117 standard deviations for this outcome. The third prediction of the theoretical framework is
that an increase in inflation expectations should increase credit card borrowing. The coefficient
from column (3) indicates that a 1 pp increase in expected inflation increases credit card debt
by only $31.8, which is equivalent to 0.042 standard deviations. Moreover, the 95% confidence
interval rules out positive effects of more than 0.123 standard deviations. Last, column (4)
shows the effects of expectations on total spending. The results indicate that a 1 pp increase
in inflation expectations increases total spending by $1.47, or 0.002 standard deviations. In
turn, a 1 pp increase in depreciation expectations decreases total spending by $73.8, or 0.080
standard deviations.
    These results involve tests of multiple related predictions, involving multiple combinations of
expectations and spending margins. The small and statistically insignificant coefficients across
the board suggest that while expectations may have some effect on spending behavior, those
effects appear to be very small and therefore difficult to detect.
    As an additional test to rule out the presence of economically meaningful effects, we esti-
mate the relationship between expectations and credit card spending using the full variation in
expectations, rather than restricting our attention to the exogenous variation generated by our
experiment. Table 6 presents the results. The results reported in the table correspond to the
ordinary least squares equivalent of the instrumental variable regressions reported in Table 5.
There is a simple trade-off between these two approaches. On the one hand, the experimental
estimates provide better identification of the causal relationship between expectations and con-
sumption. On the other hand, the OLS estimates exploit all available variation in expectations
and thus lead to substantially more precisely estimated coefficients.
    The results from the two approaches are qualitatively consistent: the estimated effects of
expectations on behavior are close to zero and statistically insignificant. However, the OLS
estimates from Table 6 are substantially more precisely estimated than the corresponding IV
estimates from Table 5. As a result, the non-experimental estimates can rule out even smaller
effects. Take for example the effect of inflation expectations on durable consumption. Accord-
ing to the coefficient from column (1) of Table 6, a 1 pp increase in inflation expectations is
associated with a reduction in durable expenditures of less than $2. If we take the upper bound
of the 95% confidence interval, we can rule out increases in durable expenditures above $2.18,
which is equivalent to 0.006 standard deviations of that outcome and thus an arguably negligi-
ble effect. In summary, both experimental and non-experimental data support the conclusion
that our estimates provide evidence of null or small effects of macroeconomic expectations on
spending behavior.



                                                26
6.6    Effect of Information on Self-Reported Spending Plans
There are several possible interpretations of this result. One possibility is that individuals
update their intended behavior but cannot follow through on their consumption plans, for
example due to self-control problems or liquidity constraints. Since our survey collected data
on spending plans, we can test this hypothesis directly. We estimate equation (6) using self-
reported spending plans measured post-treatment as the dependent variable, rather than actual
spending observed in the credit card data. The results show that individuals do not change their
stated spending plans in response to information about inflation or the exchange rate, as shown
in Table 7. For reference, columns (1) and (2) reproduce the treatment effects of information
shocks on the inflation and exchange rate expectations. In columns (3) through (6), we report
the results of estimating equation (6) using self-reported spending plans for the four specific
sub-categories of spending. Each of these outcomes is measured on a subjective 3-point scale
that takes the values -1 (if the respondent anticipates spending less in the future), 0 (if they
anticipate spending about the same), or +1 (if they anticipate spending more). Each outcome
in columns (3) to (6) of Table 7 corresponds to the survey equivalents of the consumption
behavior measured with administrative data in columns (3) to (6) of Table 4. In column (3), the
dependent variable is the stated intention to increase or decrease spending on durable goods.
The prediction from the macroeconomic model is that higher inflation expectations should
increase intended spending on durables. We find no evidence of such an effect. The impact
of increased inflation expectations on total consumption is close to zero (-0.006), statistically
insignificant and small in magnitude: a 1 pp inflation shock is associated with a reduction in
expected durable spending of only 0.001 standard deviations. In column (4), the dependent
variable is intended future spending on electronic goods, which is our survey proxy for durable
tradables. These estimate test the prediction that expected depreciation should result in an
increase in planned spending on durable tradables. Contrary to this prediction, the coefficient
on the exchange rate shock is close to zero (0.008) and statistically insignificant. In column
(5), the dependent variable is the expected change in borrowing. The theoretical prediction is
that an increase in inflation expectations will lead to higher expected borrowing. We do not
find support for this hypothesis. The coefficient on inflation shock is close to zero (-0.003) and
statistically insignificant. In column (6), the dependent variable is the intention to increase total
spending. This regression tests the hypothesis that expectations of inflation or exchange rate
depreciation may be interpreted as a sign of an overall economic slowdown and should therefore
lead to a decline in spending. Instead, we find that the coefficients on the inflation shock and
the exchange rate shock are both close to zero (-0.006 and 0.003) and statistically insignificant.
    Taken together, these results suggest that shocks to macroeconomic expectations do not
affect consumption plans even when elicited immediately after information provision. This


                                                 27
effectively rules out the possibility that changes in macroeconomic expectations do not affect
consumption because individuals are unable to follow through on their consumption plans.


7    Conclusion
How do macroeconomic expectations affect individual consumption decisions? To explore this
question, we conducted a field experiment with 2,872 credit card customers of a large com-
mercial bank. We then created exogenous variation in macroeconomic expectations through
an information-provision experiment in which participants were provided with expert forecasts
of inflation and the exchange rate. We measure the effects of these information shocks on
consumers' subsequent macroeconomic expectations (based on survey data), their self-reported
consumption plans (measured in survey data), and their actual spending (measured in adminis-
trative data). We test several predictions from standard macroeconomic models, such as whether
an increase in inflation expectations increases spending on durables. We find that information
provision shifts beliefs but does not change consumers' actual spending behavior.
    Our preferred interpretation of the findings is that consumers fail to incorporate revised
macroeconomic expectations into their decision-making process, thus not re-optimizing their
consumption plans when new information becomes available. Several recent findings support
this interpretation. First, related work has found that agents fail to optimize in much simpler
economic environments (see Campbell et al., 2011; Beshears et al., 2018). Specific to the context
of credit card spending, Ponce, Seira, and Zamarripa (2017) and Gathergood et al. (2019) find
that consumers do not borrow using the lowest interest rate card nor prioritize payment of the
card with the highest interest rate. Chetty et al. (2020) shows that credit card spending does not
react to anticipated income shocks. Second, and in contrast with the competing hypothesis that
information provision is not meaningful (for example, because individuals mistrust the source or
because it is not salient), growing evidence in similar settings indicates that participants retain
information provided in the context of an information treatment for months after the experiment
(see Cavallo, Cruces, and Perez-Truglia, 2017; Bottan and Perez-Truglia, 2020a) or even a year
later. This suggests that it is unlikely that participants in our experiment simply discard the
acquired information when making consumption decisions. Lastly, providing information with
similar methods has been shown to affect behavior significantly in other contexts. For instance,
individuals change their effort after updating beliefs about their future earnings potential (Cullen
and Perez-Truglia, 2018) and delay home sales when updating beliefs about future home prices
in the area (Bottan and Perez-Truglia, 2020b).
    Our results have direct implications for the transmission of macroeconomic policy. Many
macroeconomic policies are explicitly based on the premise that changes in economic expecta-
tions will affect households' consumption choices. For example, central banks may try to en-

                                                28
gineer higher inflation expectations to stimulate spending (Bachmann, Berg, and Sims, 2015),
or they may try to manipulate expectations about the exchange rate to affect the consumption
of foreign goods. Our results suggest that such policies might be ineffective, or at least less ef-
fective than previously believed, because consumers do not factor macroeconomic expectations
into their consumption decisions.




                                                29
References
Aaronson, Daniel, Sumit Agarwal, and Eric French. 2012. "The spending and debt response to
    minimum wage hikes." American Economic Review 102 (7): 3111­3139.

Agarwal, Sumit, Chunlin Liu, and Nicholas S. Souleles. 2007. "The reaction of consumer spend-
    ing and debt to tax rebates - evidence from consumer credit data." Journal of Political
    Economy 115 (6): 986­1019.

Agarwal, Sumit, and Wenlan Qian. 2014. "Consumption and debt response to unanticipated
    income shocks: Evidence from a natural experiment in Singapore." American Economic
    Review 104 (12): 4205­30.

Armantier, Olivier, Wandi Bruine de Bruin, Giorgio Topa, Wilber van der Klaauw, and Basit
   Zafar. 2015. "Inflation Expectations and Behavior: Do Survey Respondents Act on their
   Beliefs?'" International Economic Review 56 (2): 505­536.

Armantier, Olivier, Scott Nelson, Giorgio Topa, Wilbert van der Klaauw, and Basit Zafar. 2016.
   "The Price Is Right: Updating Inflation Expectations in a Randomized Price Information
   Experiment." Review of Economics and Statistics 98 (3): 503­523.

Armona, Luis, Andreas Fuster, and Basit Zafar. 2019. "Home Price Expectations and Behaviour:
   Evidence from a Randomized Information Experiment." Review of Economic Studies 86 (4):
   1371­1410.

Bachmann, Rüdiger, Tim O Berg, and Eric R Sims. 2015. "Inflation Expectations and Readiness
    to Spend: Cross-Sectional Evidence." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7 (1):
    1­35.

Bernanke, Ben S. 2007. "Inflation Expectations and Inflation Forecasting." Speech at the Mon-
    etary Economics Workshop of the NBER Summer Institute (Cambridge, MA).

Beshears, John, James J. Choi Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. 2018. "Behavioral
    Household Finance." In Handbook of Behavioral Economics, edited by Douglas Bernheim,
    Stefano DellaVigna, and David Laibson, 177­276. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Katherine L. Milkman.
    2015. "The Effect of Providing Peer Information on Retirement Savings Decisions." Journal
    of Finance 70 (3): 1161­1201.

Bottan, Nicolas L., and Ricardo Perez-Truglia. 2020a. "Choosing Your Pond: Location Choices
    and Relative Income." The Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.


                                             30
Bottan, Nicolas, and Ricardo Perez-Truglia. 2020b. "Betting on the House: Subjective Expec-
    tations and Market Choices." NBER Working Paper No. 27412.

Bursztyn, Leonardo, Bruno Ferman, Stefano Fiorin, Martin Kanz, and Gautam Rao. 2018.
    "Status Goods: Experimental Evidence from Platinum Credit Cards." Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 133 (3): 1561­1595.

Bursztyn, Leonardo, Stefano Fiorin, Daniel Gottlieb, and Martin Kanz. 2019. "Moral Incentives
    in Credit Card Debt Repayment: Evidence from a Field Experiment." Journal of Political
    Economy 127 (4): 1641­1683.

Campbell, John Y., Howell E. Jackson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Peter Tufano. 2011. "Consumer
   financial protection." Journal of Economic Perspectives 25 (1): 91­114.

Cavallo, Alberto, Guillermo Cruces, and Ricardo Perez-Truglia. 2016. "Learning from potentially
    biased statistics." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 47 (1): 59­108.

      . 2017. "Inflation expectations, learning, and supermarket prices: Evidence from survey
    experiments." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 9 (3): 1­35.

Chetty, Raj, John N Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, Michael Stepner, and The Opportunity
    Insights Team. 2020. "How Did COVID-19 and Stabilization Policies Affect Spending and
    Employment? A New Real-Time Economic Tracker Based on Private Sector Data." NBER
    Working Paper No. 27431.

Coibion, Olivier, Dimitris Georgarakos, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Maarten Van Rooij. 2019.
    "How Does consumption Respond to News About Inflation? Field Evidence from a Ran-
    domized Control Trial." NBER Working Paper No. 26106.

Cravino, Javier, and Andrei A Levchenko. 2017. "The Distributional Consequences of Large
    Devaluations." American Economic Review 107 (11): 3477­3509.

Cullen, Zoë, and Ricardo Perez-Truglia. 2018. "How Much Does Your Boss Make? The Effects
    of Salary Comparisons." NBER Working Paper No. 24841.

D'Acunto, Francesco, Daniel Hoang, Maritta Paloviita, and Michael Weber. 2019. "IQ, Expec-
    tations, and Choice." NBER Working Paper No. 25496.

Dornbusch, Rudiger. 1987. "Exchange Rates and Prices." The American Economic Review 77
    (1): 93­106.




                                              31
Fehr, Dietmar, Johanna Mollerstrom, and Ricardo Perez-Truglia. 2019. "Your Place in the
    World: The Demand for National and Global Redistribution." NBER Working Paper No.
    26555.

Fuster, Andreas, Ricardo Perez-Truglia, Mirko Wiederholt, and Basit Zafar. 2020. "Expecta-
    tions with Endogenous Information Acquisition: An Experimental Investigation." Review
    of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming, Working Paper.

Ganong, Peter, and Pascal Noel. 2019. "Consumer Spending during Unemployment: Positive
   and Normative Implications." American Economic Review 109 (7): 2383­2424.

Gathergood, John, Neale Mahoney, Neil Stewart, and Jörg Weber. 2019. "How Do Individuals
    Repay Their Debt? The Balance-Matching Heuristic." American Economic Review 109 (3):
    844­875.

Giglio, Stefano, Matteo Maggiori, Johannes Stroebel, and Stephen Utkus. 2020a. "Five Facts
     About Beliefs and Portfolios." NBER Working Paper No. 25744.

       . 2020b. "Inside the Mind of a Stock Market Crash." NBER Working Paper No. 27272.

Gouvea, Raphael Rocha. 2020. "Large Devaluations and Inflation Inequality: Evidence from
   Brazil." UMass Economics Working Papers, UMass Economics Working Papers.

Hoff, Peter D. 2009. A first course in Bayesian statistical methods. Vol. 580. Springer.

Malmendier, Ulrike, and Stephan Nagel. 2016. "Learning from Inflation Experiences." Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 131 (1): 53­87.

McKenzie, David. 2012. "Beyond baseline and follow-up: The case for more T in experiments."
   Journal of Development Economics 99 (2): 210­221.

Perez-Truglia, Ricardo. 2020. "The Effects of Income Transparency on Well-Being: Evidence
    from a Natural Experiment." American Economic Review 110:1019­54.

Ponce, Alejandro, Enrique Seira, and Guillermo Zamarripa. 2017. "Borrowing on the wrong
    credit card? Evidence from Mexico." American Economic Review 107 (4): 1335­1361.

Roth, Chris, and Johannes Wohlfart. 2020. "How Do Expectations About the Macroeconomy
    Affect Personal Expectations and Behavior?" Review of Economics and Statistics 102 (4):
    731­748.




                                               32
                                  Figure 1: Experimental Design




                                   Information about
                                     exchange rate

Pre-treatment      Elicit prior      Information           Elicit posterior    Survey      Post-treatment
  behavior           beliefs        about inflation             beliefs       outcomes        behavior

                                   Information about
                                      inflation and
                                     exchange rate



Transaction Data                             Survey Data                                 Transaction Data




Notes: The figure summarizes the treatment conditions and timeline.




                                                      33
                       Figure 2: Inflation and Nominal Exchange Rate 1980-2019




                 40
                               Exchange rate depreciation

                               Inflation

                 30
                 20
       Percent
                 10
                 0
                 -10

                            0
                            1
                            2
                            3
                            4
                            5
                            6
                            7
                            8
                            9
                            0
                            1
                            2
                            3
                            4
                            5
                            6
                            7
                            8
                            9
                            0
                            1
                            2
                            3
                            4
                            5
                            6
                            7
                            8
                            9
                            0
                            1
                            2
                            3
                            4
                            5
                            6
                            7
                            8
                            9
                        198
                        198
                        198
                        198
                        198
                        198
                        198
                        198
                        198
                        198
                        199
                        199
                        199
                        199
                        199
                        199
                        199
                        199
                        199
                        199
                        200
                        200
                        200
                        200
                        200
                        200
                        200
                        200
                        200
                        200
                        201
                        201
                        201
                        201
                        201
                        201
                        201
                        201
                        201
                        201
                                                             Year

Notes: The figure shows the time series of the annual inflation rate and the time
series of changes in the nominal exchange rate of the Malaysian Ringgit against the
U.S. Dollar for the period 1980-2019. Source: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.




                                                            34
                                                      Figure 3: Public Interest in Inflation and the Exchange Rate
                            180




                                                                                                         180
                                  Exchange rate                                                                Exchange rate
                                  Inflation                                                                    Inflation
                            160




                                                                                                         160
                            140




                                                                                                         140
                            120




                                                                                                         120
         Search frequency




                                                                                      Search frequency
                            100




                                                                                                         100
                            80




                                                                                                         80
                            60




                                                                                                         60
                            40




                                                                                                         40
35




                            20




                                                                                                         20
                            0




                                                                                                         0
                                   1
                                   2
                                   3
                                   4
                                   5
                                   6
                                   7
                                   8
                                   9
                                  10
                                  11
                                  12
                                  13
                                  14
                                  15
                                  16
                                  17
                                  18
                                  19
                                  20
                                  21
                                  22
                                  23
                                  24
                                  25
                                  26
                                  27
                                  28
                                  29
                                  30
                                  31
                                  32
                                  33
                                  34
                                  35
                                  36
                                  37
                                  38
                                  39
                                  40
                                  41
                                  42
                                  43
                                  44
                                  45
                                  46
                                  47
                                  48
                                  49
                                  50
                                  51
                                  52




                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                4
                                                                                                                5
                                                                                                                6
                                                                                                                7
                                                                                                                8
                                                                                                                9
                                                                                                               10
                                                                                                               11
                                                                                                               12
                                                                                                               13
                                                                                                               14
                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                               16
                                                                                                               17
                                                                                                               18
                                                                                                               19
                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                               21
                                                                                                               22
                                                                                                               23
                                                                                                               24
                                                                                                               25
                                                                                                               26
                                                                                                               27
                                                                                                               28
                                                                                                               29
                                                                                                               30
                                                                                                               31
                                                                                                               32
                                                                                                               33
                                                                                                               34
                                                                                                               35
                                                                                                               36
                                                                                                               37
                                                                                                               38
                                                                                                               39
                                                                                                               40
                                                                                                               41
                                                                                                               42
                                                                                                               43
                                                                                                               44
                                                                                                               45
                                                                                                               46
                                                                                                               47
                                                                                                               48
                                                                                                               49
                                                                                                               50
                                                                                                               51
                                                                                                               52
                                                     Week of 2019                                                              Week of 2019


                                              (a) Google Searches                                                      (b) Newspaper Articles
     Notes: The figure shows descriptive statistics on public interest in inflation and the nominal exchange rate. Panel (a)
     shows the frequency of Google searches for the terms "inflation" and "dollar" in English and Malay between January
     and December 2019. Data on Google searches is reported only in relative terms with reference to a numeraire category.
     We therefore normalize the series so that exchange rate searches in the first week of 2019 are equal to 100. Panel (b)
     shows the frequency of articles containing the terms "inflation" and "dollar" in the country's most widely read English
     language newspaper between January and December 2019 (100=70 articles).
                       Figure 4: Expenditures by Category




                                                       1
Notes: Each of the 82 squares in the figure represent 82 of the total spending in the
credit card data. The leftmost group of squares corresponds to spending on nontrad-
able goods, the middle group corresponds to spending on tradables, the rightmost
group corresponds to spending that cannot be categorized. The leftmost and middle
groups are subdivided into nondurable spending and durable spending. All expen-
ditures were categorized based on MCCs. For additional details, see Table 1.




                                         36
                                                Figure 5: Self-Reported Spending Plans versus Actual Spending



                                                       .25
        Expected Change in Expenditures ({-1,0,+1} scale)
                                      .15      .2




                                                                                                     Slope=0.034 (0.020)
      -.05     0     .05      .1




                                                             -1.5   -1         -.5          0            .5         1      1.5
                                                                         Change in Expenditure, Monthly US$1,000s



Notes: The figure shows the relationship between the actual change in credit card ex-
penditures, measured in administrative data, and self-reported spending plans, based
on survey data. The regression controls for surveyor and week fixed effects. Expen-
diture in administrative data is measured as the difference in average monthly expen-
diture across three months post-treatment (the post-survey period for which data
is available) and average monthly expenditure for the twelve months pre-treatment
(the pre-survey period for which data is available). The predicted change in expen-
diture corresponds to survey responses on planned credit card expenditure, recorded
as 1 if a respondent expects to spend more, 0 if they expect to spend about the same,
and -1 if they expect to spend less. ` Slope' is the OLS coefficient of the relationship,
with robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                                                                        37
                                                 Figure 6: Distribution of Prior Expectations
        30




                                                                               30
               N=2,872                                                                N=2,872
                                                             Prior belief                                                                    Prior belief
                                                             Feedback                                                                        Feedback
        25




                                                                               25
        20




                                                                               20
     Percent




                                                                            Percent
       15




                                                                              15
38




        10




                                                                               10
        5




                                                                               5
        0




                                                                               0
                 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15                  3.75     3.85   3.95 4.05 4.15 4.25 4.35 4.45         4.55    4.65
                                    Expected Inflation (pp)                                            Expected Exchange Rate (USD to MYR)


                              (a) Inflation Priors                                                     (b) Exchange Rate Priors
       Notes: The figure shows the distribution of prior beliefs on future inflation in panel (a) and the future nominal exchange
       rate in panel (b), elicited prior to the information experiment for all survey respondents. Dashed vertical lines correspond
       to the feedback on the future inflation and exchange rate that was subsequently provided through our intervention.
                                                                                                         Figure 7: Belief Updating
                      4


                                               Control                                                                                                           Control
                                               Slope=0.247 (0.030), N=967                                                                                        Slope=0.255 (0.025), N=974
                                               Treated                                                                                                           Treated




                                                                                                                                                       2
                                               Slope=0.472 (0.025), N=1,905                                                                                      Slope=0.317 (0.019), N=1,898




                                                                                                                       Update Exchange Rate (Post-Prior)
                                     2
       Update Inflation (Post-Prior)
                          0




                                                                                                                                         0
               -2




                                                                                                                            -2
      -4              -6
39




                                                                                                                                        -4
                                         -13      -11      -9       -7     -5      -3      -1        1   3   5    7                                        -11       -9        -7      -5     -3     -1       1        3   5   7
                                                                      Gap Inflation (Signal - Prior)                                                                                Gap Exchange Rate (Signal - Prior)


                                                            (a) Inflation Expectations                                                                                    (b) Exchange Rate Expectations
     Notes: The figure shows the relationship between information shocks provided and changes in inflation expectations in
     panel (a), and information shocks provided and exchange rate expectations in panel (b). The x-axis in panel (a) plots
                                                                                                            signal    prior
     the gap between the inflation signal shown to respondents and their prior inflation expectations i,t          - i,t    , while
                                                                                             post    prior
     the y-axis plots the difference between prior and posterior inflation expectations i,t - i,t . The x-axis in panel
     (b) plots the gap between the exchange rate signal shown to respondents and their prior exchange rate expectations
     dsignal
      i,t    - dprior                                                                                                post     prior
                i,t , while the y-axis plots the difference between prior and posterior exchange rate expectations di,t - di,t .
     In panel (a), treatment and control groups denote whether the subject was chosen to receive feedback about the inflation
     rate or not. In panel (b), treatment and control groups denote whether the subject was chosen to receive feedback
     about the exchange rate or not. The analysis controls for number of dependents, week fixed effects, surveyors fixed
     effects, and 20 additional variables controlling for spending patterns during the four pre-treatment quarters.
                        Table 1: Durable and Tradable Expenditures

                            Avg. Monthly           Durables (%)            Tradables (%)
                             Expenditure
                                 (1)                     (2)                    (3)
Airline and travel              2,746                    0                       0
Apparel                         1,010                   100                     100
Automotive                      1,472                   100                     64
Books and stationery             168                    100                     100
Business services               1,706                     0                       0
Camera and photo                  75                     33                      33
Car rental                        58                      0                       0
Computer equipment               472                    100                     100
Department store                1,028                   100                     100
Dept store                      1,032                   100                     100
Dining                          2,224                    0                        0
Direct marketing                1,313                     0                       0
Education                        269                    100                       0
Electronics                      944                    100                      66
Entertainment                    198                      0                       0
Financial services               663                      0                       0
Food and beverage               2,054                     0                       0
Furniture                        695                    100                      66
Government                       750                      0                       0
Groceries                       1,970                     0                       0
Health and beauty               1,143                     0                      50
Home improvement                 539                    100                      60
Hotel                             82                      0                       0
Insurance                        672                      0                       0
Jewellery and watches            614                    100                     100
Medical and optical             1,089                   100                      16
Music store                      112                      0                     100
Others                           684                      0                       7
Petrol                          3,105                    0                      100
Retail                           930                      0                       0
Sporting store                   295                    100                     100
Telecommunication               1,665                   100                     33
Toys                              96                    100                     100
Utilities                        783                      0                       0
Uncategorized                   4,392                    ­                        ­

Notes: The table shows average monthly credit card spending by Merchant Category Code
(MCC) groups, and the classification of MCC groups according to whether they are tradable or
durable. Column (1) shows monthly spending by category. Columns (2) and (3) report the share
of purchases in each category that are classified as durable and tradable goods, respectively.


                                             40
              Table 2: Summary Statistics for Participants and Non-Participants
                                                 Responded to survey
                                    All           Yes           No            p-value
                                    (1)             (2)          (3)            (4)
          Panel A: demographics
          Male                    0.62           0.67            0.57          0.000
                                 (0.01)         (0.01)          (0.01)
          Age                    33.59          33.28           33.88          0.001
                                 (0.09)         (0.13)          (0.13)
          Monthly income         3,087          3,128           3,049          0.113
                                (24.97)        (34.28)         (36.09)
          Panel B: monthly expenditures, pre­treatment
          Total                   1,106.26      1,135.15       1,079.74        0.221
                                  (22.82)       (28.92)         (34.80)
          Durables                 349.09        371.08         328.90         0.012
                                   (8.27)       (13.56)          (9.80)
          Tradable durables        262.52        275.37         250.72         0.091
                                   (7.20)       (11.90)          (8.45)
          Debt balance              1,811        1,805           1,817         0.863
                                  (37.81)       (47.52)         (57.93)
          Observations              6,000         2,872          3,128

Notes: The table reports summary statistics on survey respondents and non-respondents. Panel
A reports demographic characteristics, based on the bank's administrative data. Panel B reports
summary statistics on pre-treatment spending, based on average monthly credit card spending
in the 12 months prior to the experiment. Column (1) reports summary statistics for the full
sample, column (2) reports summary statistics for credit card customers who participated in the
experiment and column (3) reports statistics for customers that we attempted to contact, but
who did not participate in the experiment. Column (4) reports p-values for a test for equality of
means between the group of survey respondents and non-respondents. Robust standard errors
of the mean in parentheses.




                                               41
                             Table 3: Randomization Balance Test

                                All                             Treatment
                                           Exchange      Inflation       Both         p-value
                                             Rate          Rate
                                (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)         (5)
  Panel A: demographics
   College                     0.87          0.86           0.87          0.86          0.36
                              (0.01)        (0.01)         (0.01)        (0.01)
  Married                      0.54          0.53           0.54          0.52          0.19
                              (0.01)        (0.01)         (0.01)        (0.02)
  Number of dependents         0.86          0.82           0.87          0.82          0.09
                              (0.02)        (0.03)         (0.03)        (0.04)
  Self-employed                0.10          0.09           0.09          0.09          0.61
                              (0.01)        (0.01)         (0.01)        (0.01)
  Monthly income              3,128         3,132          3,128         3,136          0.99
                             (34.28)       (42.53)        (41.81)       (60.45)
  Panel B: monthly expenditures, pre-treatment
   Total                     1,168.65      1,171.97       1,163.74      1,165.37        0.98
                             (33.69)        (44.79)       (40.61)        (66.65)
   Durables                   379.15        394.33         360.79        372.50         0.30
                             (16.82)        (24.13)       (13.08)        (21.10)
   Tradable durables          277.51        289.64         262.64        271.81         0.37
                             (15.34)        (22.33)       (10.31)        (16.64)
   Debt                        1,915         1,889          1,939         1,911         0.69
                             (47.64)        (57.41)       (61.13)        (88.00)
  Panel C: prior beliefs
   Prior exchange rate         -0.29          -0.37         -0.19         -0.27         0.16
                              (0.08)         (0.10)        (0.10)        (0.14)
   Prior inflation             3.39            3.47         3.28          3.32          0.13
                              (0.08)         (0.10)        (0.09)        (0.13)
 Observations                 2,872            967           974           931

Notes: The table reports pre-treatment characteristics and a test of randomization balance.
Panel A reports demographic characteristics, based on the bank's administrative data. Panel B
reports summary statistics on average monthly credit card spending in the 12 months prior to
the experiment by category. Panel C reports data on prior beliefs elicited before respondents
reached the information provision stage of the experiment. Column (1) reports pre-treatment
characteristics for all survey respondents, columns (2) to (4) report the same characteristics for
each of the three treatment conditions, that is, for respondents assigned to receive information
about the exchange rate, the inflation rate, or both. Column (5) reports p-values of a test for
the null hypothesis that the average pre-treatment characteristics are equal between the three
treatment groups. Robust standard errors of the mean in parentheses.




                                               42
                          Table 4: Effects of Information on Expectations and Behavior: Reduced Form Estimates

                                                     Survey Data                              Transaction Data
                                               (1)              (2)                 (3)           (4)           (5)        (6)
                                             Inflation      Depreciation        Durables     Trad. Dur.        Debt      Total
                  signal   prior
                  i,t    - i,t       
                                 · Ti,t     0.237              0.033               1.960        1.698        10.388      -2.082
                                            (0.037)          (0.026)             (2.797)       (2.095)       (6.534)    (6.253)
                  dsignal
                   i,t    - dprior
                             i,t
                                       d
                                   · Ti,t    -0.031          0.065                -3.238        -2.514         4.675     -4.835
                                            (0.023)          (0.031)             (2.599)       (1.944)       (6.901)    (6.114)
                Observations                  2,872            2,872               2,872        2,872         2,872       2,872
                R2                            0.393            0.237              0.256         0.202          0.049      0.367
                Outcome mean                 -0.369           -0.212            258.810       178.862         96.968    972.570
                Outcome SD                   2.695             2.837            342.577       254.511        760.368    926.298
43




     Notes: Each column corresponds to a separate OLS regression with the same independent variables but different dependent
     variables. These regressions present the reduced-form effects of the information provision experiment. Column (1) corresponds
                                                                                                                      signal    prior
     to equation (4), column (2) to equation (5) and columns (3) through (6) correspond to equation (6). i,t                 - i,t    is the
     gap between the feedback about inflation rate that could be shown to the individual and the individual's prior belief about the
                        
     inflation rate. Ti,t is an indicator variable that takes the value 1 if the feedback was shown to the subject and 0 otherwise.
       signal    prior       d
      di,t    - di,t   and Ti,t are the corresponding variables for the exchange rate instead of the inflation rate. All regressions control
            signal   prior
     for i,t       - i,t   and dsignal
                                  i,t  - dprior
                                           i,t   as well as the usual set of additional controls: number of dependents, week fixed effects,
     surveyors fixed effects, and 20 variables on the spending patterns during the four pre-treatment quarters. The dependent variables
                                                                                                                              post   prior
     are listed as follows.  Inflation is the difference between the posterior and prior beliefs on the inflation rate (i.e., i,t  - i,t   ).
                                                                                                                post    prior
      Depreciation is the difference between the posterior and prior beliefs on the exchange rate (i.e., di,t - di,t ). Durables is
     the monthly average expenditure across 3 months post-treatment in the durables category. Trad. Dur. is the monthly average
     expenditure across 3 months post-treatment in the tradable durables category. Debt is the monthly credit card debt accrued in
     the 3 months post-treatment. Total is the total average expenditure across 3 months post-treatment. Robust standard errors in
     parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
                              Table 5: Effects of Expectations on Behavior: Instrumental Variables Estimates

                                                                         Transaction Data
                                                            (1)           (2)              (3)      (4)
                                                         Durables     Trad. Dur.          Debt     Total
                                  Inflation               14.276        11.781           31.765    1.468
                                                         (12.681)       (9.379)         (31.557) (27.079)
                                  Exchange rate           -43.104       -33.132          87.071   -73.771
                                                         (42.963)      (32.161)        (110.008) (95.844)
                                 Observations              2,872         2,872            2,872    2,872
                                 Outcome mean            258.810       178.862           96.968  972.570
                                 Outcome SD              342.577       254.511          760.368  926.298
     Notes: Each column corresponds to a separate Instrumental Variables regression. The endogenous variables are:  Inflation is
44




                                                                                          post   prior
     the difference between the posterior and prior beliefs on the inflation rate (i.e., i,t   - i,t   );  Exchange Rate is the difference
                                                                          post   prior                                signal    prior     
     between the posterior and prior beliefs on the exchange rate (i.e., di,t - di,t ). The excluded instruments are i,t     - i,t    · Ti,t
     and dsignal
            i,t  - dprior
                    i,t
                              d
                          · Ti,t                               signal
                                 . All regressions control for i,t      prior
                                                                      - i,t   and dsignal
                                                                                    i,t   - dprior
                                                                                             i,t   as well as the usual set of additional
     controls: number of dependents, week fixed effects, surveyors fixed effects, and 20 variables on spending patterns during the four
     pre-treatment quarters. The dependent variables are listed as follows. Durables is the monthly average expenditure across 3 months
     post-treatment in the durables category. Trad. Dur. is the monthly average expenditure across 3 months post-treatment in the
     tradable durables category. Debt is the monthly credit card debt accrued in the 3 months post-treatment. Total is the total average
     expenditure across 3 months post-treatment. Robust standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
                                       Table 6: Effects of Expectations on Behavior: OLS Estimates

                                                                        Transaction Data
                                                             (1)            (2)            (3)         (4)
                                                         Durables      Trad. Dur.         Debt       Total
                                  Inflation                -1.706         -0.352         -5.402      5.793
                                                          (1.982)        (1.405)        (4.849)     (5.114)
                                  Exchange rate            -0.607         -0.686         -6.857      -4.419
                                                          (2.005)        (1.551)        (4.806)     (4.842)
                                 Observations               2,872          2,872          2,872       2,872
                                 R2                         0.255          0.201         0.049        0.367
                                 Outcome mean            258.810        178.862          96.968     972.570
                                 Outcome SD              342.577        254.511         760.368     926.298
45




     Notes: Each column corresponds to a separate OLS regression.  Inflation is the difference between the posterior and prior beliefs
                                  post   prior
     on the inflation rate (i.e., i,t  - i,t   ).  Exchange Rate is the difference between the posterior and prior beliefs on the exchange
                  post   prior
     rate (i.e., di,t - di,t ). All regressions include the usual set of additional controls: number of dependents, week fixed effects,
     surveyors fixed effects, and 20 variables on spending patterns during the four pre-treatment quarters. The dependent variables
     are listed as follows. Durables is the monthly average expenditure across 3 months post-treatment in the durables category. Trad.
     Dur. is the monthly average expenditure across 3 months post-treatment in the tradable durables category. Debt is the monthly
     credit card debt accrued in the 3 months post-treatment. Total is the total average expenditure across 3 months post-treatment.
     Robust standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
                      Table 7: Effects of Information on Expectations and Survey Outcomes: Reduced Form Estimates

                                                                                Survey Data
                                                        (1)            (2)         (3)           (4)      (5)    (6)
                                                      Inflation    Depreciation   Dur.      Trad. Dur. Debt     Total
                           signal   prior
                           i,t    - i,t       
                                          · Ti,t     0.237            0.033      -0.001        -0.001   -0.003 -0.006
                                                     (0.037)        (0.026)     (0.007)       (0.007)  (0.008) (0.006)
                           dsignal
                            i,t    - dprior
                                      i,t
                                                d
                                            · Ti,t    -0.031        0.065  
                                                                                 0.005         0.002     0.008  0.003
                                                     (0.023)        (0.031)     (0.007)       (0.007)  (0.007) (0.006)
                          Observations                 2,872          2,872       2,872         2,872    2,872  2,872
                          R2                           0.393          0.237      0.029          0.033    0.072  0.037
                          Outcome mean                -0.369         -0.212      -0.055        0.005    -0.055  0.088
                          Outcome SD                  2.695           2.837      0.857         0.775    0.857   0.665
46




     Notes: Each column corresponds to a separate OLS regression. These regressions present the reduced-form effects of the information
     provision experiment: column (1) corresponds to equation (4), column (2) to equation (5) and columns (3) through (6) correspond
                         signal    prior
     to equation (6). i,t       - i,t      is the gap between the feedback about inflation rate that could be shown to the individual and the
                                                                   
     individual's prior belief about the inflation rate, while Ti,t  is an indicator variable that takes the value 1 if the feedback was shown to
                                        signal     prior       d
     the subject and 0 otherwise. di,t         - di,t    and Ti,t are the corresponding variables for the exchange rate instead of the inflation
                                            signal   prior
     rate. All regressions control for i,t         - i,t   and dsignal
                                                                 i,t   - dprior
                                                                           i,t  as well as the usual set of additional controls: number
     of dependents, week fixed effects, surveyors fixed effects, and 20 variables on spending patterns during the four pre-treatment
     quarters. The dependent variables are listed as follows.  Inflation is the difference between the posterior and prior beliefs on the
                            post   prior
     inflation rate (i.e., i,t   - i,t   ).  Depreciation is the difference between the posterior and prior beliefs on the exchange rate
             post   prior
     (i.e., di,t - di,t ). The dependent variables in columns (3) through (6) correspond to the stated future consumption as measured
     in the survey, and they can take values +1 (if participants say they are going to spend more), 0 (if they say that they are going to
     spend about the same) or -1 (if they are going to spend less). Durables corresponds to the future spending in durables, Trad. Dur.
     correspond to the future spending in electronics, Debt corresponds to future credit card borrowing, and Total corresponds to total
     future spending. Robust standard errors in parentheses. p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
       Online Appendix (For Online Publication Only)

A      Proof of Propositions
A.1     Lemma 1
The three statements are true:
(1) CtN and CtT are non-decreasing in t   N        T
                                           +1 and t+1 .
(2) XtN is increasing in t
                         N        T                   T
                           +1 . Xt is increasing in t+1 .
(3) XtN is non-decreasing in t  T      T                      N
                                 +1 . Xt is non-decreasing in t+1 .



    Proof:
    Observe that Cobb-Douglas structure of preferences allows us to write a closed form solution
for CtN :
                                          
                                              P N Yt+k / k i=1 Rt+i
                        CtN =  k k=0 t+k N                          =
                                 k=0               Pt
                                                            k    N
                                                            i=1 t+i Yt+k
                                                              k
                                       k=0   k    k=0         i=1 Rt+i

    Hence:

                                                              k    N
                             dCtN                             i=2 t+i Yt+k
                               N
                                   =                            k            >0
                             dt +1          k=0   k   k=0       i=1 Rt+i

                                                  dCtN
                                                    T
                                                        =0
                                                  dt +1

From the first order conditions, one can obtain:

                                               CtT     PtN
                                                     =
                                            1 -  CtN   PtT

This implies similar conditions for CtT :

                                   dCtT                        dCtT
                                     N
                                         > 0 and                 T
                                                                     =0
                                   dt +1                       dt +1


, which concludes the proof of statement (1).
   From the first order conditions one gets:

                                                         N
                                (1 - )CtN               t +1
                                          = 1 - (1 -  )
                                   XtN                  Rt+1


                                                        i
                                                         T
                                (1 - )CtT               t +1
                                          = 1 - (1 -  )
                                   XtT                  Rt+1
                                      XI                 I                              I
    This implies that for I  {N, T }, C tI increases in t+1 . Since by statement (1), Ct does not
                                         t
              I      I
decrease in t  +1 , Xt has to increase. This proves statement (2).
                                                XI             I            I
Finally, since i) the conditions pin down the C tI for fixed t+1 , and ii) Ct is non-decreasing in
                                                 t
 -I     I                         -I
t +1 , Xt does not decrease in t+1 (-I denotes {N, T } \ I ), which proves statement (3).



A.2     Proof of Proposition 1
                                                          I
By Assumption 1, an increase in t+1 does not decrease t    +1 , I  {N, T } and has to strictly
increase at least one of them. By Lemma 1, this implies that XtI do not decrease and at least
one of them increases. Since XtI-1 and PtI are fixed, the same is true for PtI XtI . Hence,
PtN XtN + PtT XtT increases in t+1 .


A.3     Proof of Proposition 2
                  T                                                      T
By Assumption 2, t +1 increases in Et+1 . By Lemma 1, this implies that Xt increases in Et+1 .
Hence PtT XtT increases in Et+1 .


A.4     Proof of Proposition 3
                    At+1 = Pt Yt + Rt At - PtN (CtN + XtN - XtN     N
                                                              -1 + Xt )-

                                 -PtT (CtT + XtT - XtT     T
                                                     -1 + Xt )

                            T        T
By Assumption 1, neither t   +1 nor t+1 decrease, and at least one of them increases with t+1 .
This and Lemma 1 imply that neither of CtI and XtI , I  {N, T } decreases, and at least one of
XtI increases. Hence, At+1 decreases and At - At+1 increases.




                                                ii
B     Further Details and Analysis
B.1     Event-Study Falsification Tests
we leverage data on pre-treatment spending, which allows us to conduct a falsification test in
the spirit of an event-study analysis. We estimate a similar regression as in equation (6) but
using pre-treatment instead of post-treatment spending as the dependent variables:


                           signal   prior
                       
              Yi,t-1 = Y · i,t    - i,t       
                                          · Ti,t   d
                                                 + Y · dsignal
                                                        i,t    - dprior
                                                                  i,t
                                                                            d
                                                                        · Ti,t +
                                                                                            (B.1)
                       Y
                       
                         · dsignal
                            i,t    - dprior
                                      i,t
                                              d
                                            + Y   signal
                                                · i,t      prior
                                                         - i,t   + Xi,t Y +        i


    The dependent variable Yi,t+1 refers to the average monthly spending in the 3 months pre-
treatment, and the set of control variables (Xi,t ) include just the number of dependents, week
fixed effects, surveyors fixed effects.
    The results are presented in Table B.1. Since the outcomes are measured at a point in time
when participants had not yet been provided with information, there should be no effects of
the information on pre-treatment spending. As expected, we find no "effects" of the informa-
tion shocks on the pre-treatment spending outcomes. For example, the first coefficient from
column (1) indicates that a 1 pp increase in the inflation shock had an "effect" on pre-treatment
spending on durables that is close to zero ($0.185, or <0.001 standard deviations) and statis-
tically insignificant. Likewise, the rest of the coefficients from Table B.1 are close to zero and
statistically insignificant.




                                                iii
                               Table B.1: Effects of Information on Behavior: Event-Study Falsification Tests
                                                                           Transaction Data
                                                                (1)           (2)          (3)     (4)
                                                            Durables     Trad. Dur.       Debt    Total
                                  signal   prior     
                                  i,t    - i,t   · Ti,t       -0.185        -1.887        2.579   1.578
                                                             (2.711)       (1.972)       (6.619) (6.044)
                                  dsignal
                                   i,t    - dprior
                                             i,t
                                                       d
                                                   · Ti,t     0.006         -2.489       -10.559  0.929
                                                             (2.724)       (2.098)       (6.915) (6.329)
                                Observations                   2,872         2,872        2,872   2,872
                                R2                            0.225         0.165         0.024   0.349
iv




                                Outcome mean                287.275       197.855        155.947 992.434
                                Outcome SD                  355.020       261.687        798.017 931.151

     Notes: Each column corresponds to a separate OLS regression with the same independent variables but different dependent
                                                               signal    prior
     variables. All regression corresponds to equation (B.1). i,t     - i,t    is the gap between the feedback about inflation rate that
                                                                                                     
     could be shown to the individual and the individual's prior belief about the inflation rate. Ti,t is an indicator variable that takes
                                                                                  signal    prior       d
     the value 1 if the feedback was shown to the subject and 0 otherwise. di,t          - di,t   and Ti,t are the corresponding variables
                                                                                       signal   prior
     for the exchange rate instead of the inflation rate. All regressions control for i,t     - i,t   and dsignal
                                                                                                              i,t  - dprior
                                                                                                                      i,t   as well as the
     following set of additional controls: number of dependents, week fixed effects, and surveyors fixed effects. The dependent variables
     are listed as follows. Dur. is the monthly average expenditure across 3 months pre-treatment in the durables category. Trad. Dur.
     is the monthly average expenditure across 3 months pre-treatment in the tradable durables category. Debt is the monthly credit
     card debt accrued in the 3 months pre-treatment. Total is the total average expenditure across 3 months pre-treatment. Robust
     standard errors in parentheses. p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
C     Survey Instrument
Hello! My name is [Surveyor name]. I am working for researchers at the University
of California, Los Angeles, currently working in Malaysia. We are conducting a
short survey to know Malaysians overall economical situation. Do you have 5
minutes to respond to the survey?

     Yes

     No


   [If the answer to the previous question was "yes":] Great, thank you so much.
By the way, if you'd prefer to do the survey in Alternative Language, let me know.
I will start asking a few questions about your background.


    What is your current employment situation?

     Full-time employee

     Part-time employee

     Self-employed

     Not working

    What is your highest education level?

     No school

     High school

     College or some college

     After bachelor degree

    Are you married or single?

     Married

     Single

     Divorced


                                        v
  Do you have any children or other dependents that you look after?

    Yes

    No

  [If the answer to the previous question was "yes":] How many?

    1

    2

    3

    4

    5 or more

   Regarding business conditions in the country as a whole, do you think that
during the next 12 months the Malaysian economy will be better off, about the
same, or worse off?

    Better off

    About the same

    Worse off

    Now we want to ask you about the annual inflation rate, which is a measure
of how prices in Malaysia change in general. In your opinion, what will be the
inflation rate over the next 12 months?

    [    ]%

   Now we want to ask you about the exchange rate. As of April 2019, 1 U.S. Dollar
is worth around 4.05 Ringgit Malaysia. In your opinion, what will the exchange
rate be 12 months from now, in April 2020?

    [    ] Ringgit Malaysia

   In this stage, we randomly select respondents to receive some feedback about
the previous questions... subjects are randomly allocated to one of the following
three treatment groups:

                                        vi
   Treatment Exchange Rate: The consensus among economic experts both from
the government and the private sectors is that 1 U.S. Dollar will be worth 4.10
Ringgit Malaysia one year from now.

   Treatment Inflation: The consensus among economic experts both from the
government and the private sectors is that the inflation in Malaysia will be 2.3%
over the next 12 months.

   Treatment Both: The consensus among economic experts both from the gov-
ernment and the private sectors is that the inflation in Malaysia will be 2.3% over
the next 12 months and 1 U.S. Dollar will be worth 4.10 Ringgit Malaysia one year
from now.

   What will the inflation rate be over the next 12 months?

     [   ]%

  What will be the exchange rate from U.S. Dollar to Ringgit 12 months from
now, in April 2020?

     [   ] Ringgit Malaysia

   Regarding business conditions in the country as a whole, do you think that
during the next 12 months the Malaysian economy will be better off, about the
same, or worse off?

     Better off

     The same

     Worse off

   Looking forward, would you say that you and your family living with you will
be better off or worse off financially than you are now?

     Better off

     About the same

     Worse off

  Do you expect your credit card spending to go up, stay the same, or go down
during the next 3 months?

                                        vii
    Go up

    Stay the same

    Go down

  Do you expect that your spending on groceries to go up, stay the same, or go
down during the next 3 months?

    Go up

    Stay the same

    Go down

   Do you expect your total spending to go up, stay the same, or go down during
the next 3 months?

    Go up

    Stay the same

    Go down

   Do you think now is a good time, a bad time, or neither a good nor a bad
time to buy household items, such as furniture or a refrigerator? More examples:
television, stove or others

    Yes, it's a good time

    It's neither a good nor a bad time

    No, it's a bad time

   Do you think now is a good time, a bad time, or neither a good nor a bad time
to buy electronic items, such as a computer, TV, phone, washing machine and so
on?

    Yes, it's a good time

    It's neither a good nor a bad time

    No, it's a bad time


                                         viii
   Do you think now is a good time, a bad time, or neither good nor a bad time
to buy a vehicle, car or motorbike?

     Yes, it's a good time

     It's neither a good nor a bad time

     No, it's a bad time

   Do you think now is a good time, a bad time, or neither good or bad time to buy
big items on an installment basis? [If asked, provide the following examples: install-
ments such as AEON Credit, Courts Mammoth; items such as a car, motorbike,
television set, washing machine and so on.]

     Yes, it's a good time

     It's neither a good nor a bad time

     No, it's a bad time




                                          ix
