                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        INFRASTRUCTURE AND URBAN FORM

                                     Edward L. Glaeser

                                    Working Paper 28287
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w28287


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




I am grateful to Margaret Brissenden and Eliza Glaeser for editorial assistance. Greg Ingram
provided excellent comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Edward L. Glaeser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Infrastructure and Urban Form
Edward L. Glaeser
NBER Working Paper No. 28287
December 2020
JEL No. F61,N70,R14,R41

                                         ABSTRACT

Cities are shaped by transportation infrastructure. Older cities were anchored by waterways.
Nineteenth century cities followed the path of streetcars and subways. The 20th century city
rebuilt itself around the car. The close connection between transportation and urban form is
natural, since cities are defined by their density. Physical proximity and transportation
investments serve the common cause of reducing the transportation costs for goods, people and
ideas. The close connection between transportation and urban form suggests the need for spatial
equilibrium models that embed a full set of equilibrium effects into any evaluation of
transportation spending. Their connection implies that restrictions on land use will change, and
often reduce, the value of investing in transportation infrastructure. Future transportation
innovations, including autonomous vehicles and telecommuting, are likely to also change urban
form, although cities often take decades to adapt to new forms of mobility.


Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu
   I.      Introduction



Cities are defined by their density, which enables the movement of goods and the connection of
people. Transportation infrastructure is also meant to space to flow of goods and people over
space. Urban form reflects the interplay between the demand for space and the demand for
proximity, and the demand for physical proximity is shaped by transportation technology. In this
paper, I review how past transportation innovations have influenced the location and form of
cities and discuss both future trends and five policy questions related to cities and infrastructure.

Within metropolitan areas, the dominant effect of transportation technology has been to enable
the expansion of cities and increase the amount of living space consumed by households. Horse
drawn omnibuses and subways enabled the spread of 19th century cities. Elevators enabled
vertical mobility which further expanded the supply of space. Highways and cars expanded the
reach of a forty-minute commute more dramatically. The car had a particularly dramatic impact
on density and living space because, unlike older communal forms of transit, no outside walking
is required at any point along the journey.

Transportation innovations have also shifted populations across metropolitan areas, as well as
within metropolitan areas. The advantages of water-born mobility drove the location of most
pre-modern cities, from medieval Venice to Minneapolis. Only rarely did the location of roads
have so much power before the age of the car, but access to rail seems to boosted urban
population during the mid-19th century (Atack et al., 2010).

During the 20th century, the spread of highways was a great spatial equalizer. Transportation
costs for good fell dramatically, which allowed people and firms to move from areas where firms
had a productive advantage, because of access to rail, water and natural resources, to places
where people like to live, such as the temperate locations along the Pacific Ocean.     Consumer
amenities are powerful predictors of urban growth in the wealthy world (Glaeser, Kolko and
Saiz, 2001), but not in the poorer parts of the planet (Chauvin et al., 2017.

The impact of transportation technology on urban form takes decades, and proceeds in three
distinct steps. The first step is the vehicular innovation, such as the creation of the steam engine
locomotive or the horse drawn omnibus or the car. The second step is to build a transportation

                                                  2
network to accommodate the new form of mobility. The third step is to built or rebuild our
urban spaces around the new technology and its network. Arguably, much of the world is still in
the process of rebuilding its urban spaces around the automobile.

The connection between urban form and transportation infrastructure raises difficulties for the
evaluation of transportation infrastructure. The simplest, and often the safest, form of cost
benefit analysis simply asks whether the benefits to the users of a new road or highway can
justify the costs of that highway. A more complicated task is to consider the entire
transportation network and evaluate the overall improvement in mobility created by the new
investment holding location constant, as in Allen and Arkolakis (2019).

But the largest question asks value created by infrastructure when the entire system, including
housing and businesses, has rebuilt itself around the new roads or subway lines. This is
difficult, because there is no such thing as an optimal urban form. The welfare impact that when
infrastructure impacts form can be evaluated within the context of specific general equilibrium
model, such as Heblich, Redding and Sturm (2018), but we are far from having models that we
would fully trust as a basis for future infrastructure investments. The Henry George Theorem
(Arnott and Stiglitz, 1979) suggests that it is enough to know the impact of infrastructure on land
values to capture the overall social benefit of new investment, but the ex post impact on land
values is also unknown at the time of investment decisions, and practically unknowable for land
that is sufficiently distant from the infrastructure.

This paper is largely historical and does not try to develop the general equilibrium tools needed
for incorporating the impact of urban form on transportation evaluation. I try to illustrate that
transportation investments have shaped cities over time, which suggests the value of embedding
the malleable nature of the built environment into transportation analysis.

I with a conceptual discussion of three core concepts that shape this note. Transportation
innovation always comes in three steps. Cities are nodes of a large transportation network and
hubs of a local transportation network. The impact of new transportation is mediated by the
elasticity of the supply of local structures.

I then provide three historical sections, which suggest the enormous power that transportation
infrastructure has had to shape cities over history. Section VI then discusses two major


                                                   3
transportation innovations that are either here or on the horizon: autonomous vehicles and
telecommuting.

Section VII discusses five public policy areas that concern the interplay of infrastructure and
urban form. Section VIII concludes by emphasizing the limitations of this essay. I have chosen
to focus on transportation, but other forms of infrastructure, such as sewers may be at least as
important in developing world cities. Just as the urban ripples of transportation investment
should be incorporated into transportation evaluation, the city-building effects of sewers and
water-pipes should enter into analyses of those investments.



   II.     Three Concepts



I begin my discussion of infrastructure and urban form by laying out three core ideas that help
organize the more historical passages that follow.    The first idea emphasizes a three-step
process through which transportation innovation shapes cities. The second idea is that most
cities are both the hub of a local transportation network and a node in a larger network that
connects across cities and countries. The third idea is that both housing technology and
regulation often limits the ability of infrastructure to change the built environment.



The Three Steps of Transportation Innovation and Urban Change

Karl Benz built his "Patent Motorwagon" in 1885, arguably the first true car.     Henry Ford
produced his first Model T 23 years later.    By that time, the basic technology of the car had
been established, but no country had yet adapted its transportation network or its cities to the car.

Cars first travelled along the dirt roads that were meant to accommodate foot traffic, carts and
bicycles, but smooth paving is more important for a car than for a horse or a pedestrian. Both
bumps and extra entrants coming onto the road have more impact when vehicles are moving
more quickly. America spent at least 60 years after Henry Ford's first Model T building a new
transportation network for the car. The construction of the Eisenhower Interstate Highway



                                                  4
System may be the most famous episode in this network-building odyssey, but the building of
limited access highways began in greater New York in 1907.

The final step of the process occurs when urban form reshapes itself around the technology and
the network. After World War II, car-oriented suburbs were mass-produced, even within well-
established metropolitan areas, to take advantage of the fast commutes made possible by
highways. New metropolitan areas like Las Vegas, which lacked access to the older forms of
transportation, became accessible and grew, thanks to the car and its network.

This three-part pattern repeated the earlier path followed by steam-powered trains, which
depended even more heavily on the network of rails, and also reshaped cities. In the case of
water-borne transportation, there were major innovations (like steam boats) and major network
construction (canal systems) that complemented one another. The Erie Canal became more
valuable because technology enhanced New York's value as a port.          But the new technologies
mostly used the old network of oceans and the new network of canals typically relied on
traditional barges. Nonetheless, those innovations also reshaped cities.      Future transportation
innovations, such as autonomous vehicles, are likely to follow a similar course.

Cities are Nodes in the Large Network and Hubs in the Local Network

A map of the London Underground system shows a central oval, which is the path taken by the
ancient Circle Line, connected to lines that lead off to far flung parts of the metropolis.    That
central oval is the hub of the local transportation network.    The other lines and above ground
roads are the spokes that connect to that hub.    The hub is less compact than in smaller cities,
for London's center includes both the financial square mile of the old city and the political
capital in Westminster. It has seven rail stations with more than ten tracks. Nonetheless, the
basic structure of the metropolitan area's internal transport lines is clearly a center linked to
periphery.

Almost all pre-car cities have some structure of this form, and often the central hub is literally a
rail station. Transport hubs can be at the center of a city because they were placed there to begin
with, or because transportation is so important that the hub because the new city center. New
York City's Grand Central was originally placed at the edge of the developed city, but the city
then reformed itself around the station, which anchors the midtown financial district


                                                   5
The hub of a metropolitan area is less obvious in the polycentric car-oriented cities that have
grown up during the age of the car. In Phoenix, a rectangle made by Highway 10 and Highway
17 bounds the central city. Five different highway rays shoot off away to the suburbs.

Cities are also part of an external transport network that links them to other cities close and near.
Phoenix's airport lies right outside that rectangle formed by Highways 10 and 17. Los Angeles'
Union Station, which is still at the center of the city, was once the western terminus of
intercontinental rail trips. The river Thames was once London's connector to the North Sea and
the world.

The internal transport network shape the city; the external network explains the location of the
city itself. Waterways significantly determined the location of most pre-modern cities. The rise
of the train and the automobile has reduced the power of natural geography, and made the
accidents of road and rail location far more important. Some also argue that airports have come
to play an outsized role in the growth of particularly metropolitan areas (Kasarda and Lindsay,
2011).

Central nodes become more important, when there are larger returns to scale in transportation. In
the colonial era of 300 ton ships there was a rough equality between Boston, New York,
Philadelphia, Baltimore and Charleston. As ships grew during the early 19th century, New York
became the dominant node on America's inter-city Atlantic network. The large economies of
scale in rail also abetted the dominance of particular cities, like Chicago and New York. Truck
transport has levelled the playing field. The links between within-city network and the across-
city network are strong when the same mode travels within and between cities, like rail and cars,
and weaker when the modes are distinct, like water and ox-cart.



The Elasticity of the Building Stock determines the Impact of the Transportation on Urban Form

If all structures were malleable clay, then they could react swiftly to changes in any external
conditions. If a new freeway was built along a particular route to the central city, then houses
would immediately spring up near freeway entrance, and the buildings at the city center would
stretch a little higher to the sky. But structures are durable and cannot be easily relocated.
Land use regulations and historic preservation commissions further limit streetscapes' ability to

                                                  6
change. Natural geography further constrains the reshaping of cities.              As Harrison and Kain
(1974) emphasized, the many limitations on change meant that obsolete transportation systems
have left sizable imprints on most older cities and that the impact of new transportation
innovations may be limited.2

The older cities of Europe were built when mobility was overwhelmingly pedestrian.                   Humans
on foot and on donkeys are nimble and have little need for wide or even straight streets.
Consequently, we still find dense mazes of narrow, winding streets in central Rome, Barcelona's
Barri Gotic or even Boston's North End.           These neighborhoods still function superbly as
pedestrian spaces, attracting thousands of tourists who just want to walk, but they can be
practically impassable to automobiles.

Cars are particularly demanding of street space, yet the durability of urban structures meant that
many older cities could never really adapt well to the car. Indeed, one reason why Americans
left their older eastern cities and moved to newer sunbelt metropolises is that those new cities,
like Phoenix and Los Angeles, were built to enable the easy use of automobiles.

The elasticity of housing can also be restricted in green fields by regulation, which also mediate
the impact of transportation on urban form. If a new train line into Paris runs through a leafy
townlet 50 kilometers away, then the value of space in that townlet will soar and the natural
impulse will be to build more housing near the train station. However, if land use regulations
block the supply of new housing, then those regulation may also limit the benefits of building the
the train line.



    III.     The Large Network and Urban Form before the Car



Before the automobile, the world was spanned by three important transportation networks made
of water, road and rail.      The water network was typically the most important for long distance
trade, and since it is mostly natural, it persisted even during periods of political chaos. In places

2
 Harrison and Kain (1974) emphasized that post-war building in metropolitan Boston was actually lower density
than post-war building in greater Los Angeles. Boston was denser than L.A. because it was built before widespread
automobile ownership.

                                                       7
with high state capacity, most notably China, canal building extended the water network. The
Romans built a road network that still influences the shape of urban Europe today. During the
19th century, the rail network made swift land travel possible and had a particularly large impact
on urban growth in areas with productive land and initially low population densities, such as
non-coastal America.

Water and Urban Growth

Throughout most of human history, the connection between water and urban growth has been
enormous. Water provided mobility, but also safety, drinking water and energy. If anything,
the importance of water to urban location is even more visible in the U.S. than in Europe or Asia.
All of America's twenty largest cities were on waterways in 1900.

The power of water in U.S. urban location is so clear both because transportation costs were such
an important part of early U.S. history and because the other factors that influenced European
and Asian urban development mattered less. Nineteenth century America was a country of great
agricultural abundance and enormous distances. Cities like Buffalo, Detroit and St. Louis, all
grew up at major nodes of a transportation network that facilitated the flow of agricultural wealth
towards the east. Waterways dominated that network until 1850.

Population was dispersed throughout Europe by the 13th century, probably roughly proportional
to the ability of the land to feed its own residents. Luxury goods, like high quality wool, were
shipped, and cities, like Bruges and Florence, were important centers for the trade in cloth.     But
regions typically had limited food surpluses. Consequently, European cities did not grow up
around the production and shipping of basic foodstuffs, as Cincinnati did as America's
"Porkopolis."

Walter Christaller's "Central Place Theory" emphasizes the link between modest local shipping
and urban growth that seems to fit many parts of Western Europe.         In Christaller's view, small
towns served local agricultural communities by providing commonly needed services, like
blacksmithing or brewing. Larger towns provided rarer, less common commodities, and so forth.
In this view, the point of cities is not to link to each other, but to link to the surrounding
countryside. Waterways still mattered for these small local towns, but they matter less than
when cities exist primarily to facilitate the flow of grain or beef to the Atlantic and beyond.


                                                   8
Political and ecclesiastical factors were more important in the growth of European cities than
they were for American cities. Historically, cities were defined by the presence of a Bishop,
who could be a major temporal as well as spiritual force. Pre-modern Europe had an abundance
of petty potentates, each of which supported a court and often a small city. The cultural
flowering of urban Weimar in the 18th century, for example, came out of the interests of Duke
Karl August of Saxe-Weimar and his mother.

Nonetheless, almost all of the large, historic European cities are on waterways. As all cities
need to import food to survive, the rivers often served as a nutritional lifeline and usually as a
means of exporting manufacturing commodities as well. Cites often emerge at points where
goods move from water to another transportation mode. Bleakley and Lin (2012) show that
American cities remain disproportionately located on the fall lines of major rivers, where goods
need to be loaded onto or off of boats.

Exports were less important for imperial cities, such as Rome, that acquired their wealth through
political and military power rather than through trade. For some of the most famous political
cities, water seemed to have originally served for protection rather than transportation. The
original settlement of Paris on the Ile de La Cite seems to have served primarily to protect the
residents from raids. Similarly, the Tiber seems to have played a defensive role for the early
Romans, even after they built the Pons Sublicius that spanned the river. Horatius allegedly was
able to defend the narrow bridge against Etruscan onslaught practically singlehanded.       Water
similarly served to defend Venice against land-based aggression.

Access to water was also important to provide drinking water and, during the early days of the
industrial revolution, power. The capital of Massachusetts, for example, was relocated from
Charlestown to the south side of the Charles River to provide better access to a good spring.
Larger cities, however, tend to pollute or overtax their local water sources, and must either purify
or import water from lower density locales through aqueducts.

Aqueducts represent another form of transportation infrastructure that has played an outsized role
enabling city growth. Water-borne pandemics, such as Cholera, can be a particularly fearful
scourge on urban life. Other forms of water-related infrastructure, such as purification plants
and Singapore's remarkable water-recycling system, can be vital for urban health, but they don't
shape the form of cities in the same way as transportation infrastructure. Similarly, power-

                                                  9
related infrastructure is also vital for urban survival, but since the coming of the steam engines,
sources of power can also generally be relocated and power can be moved along the electric grid.

Before those steam engines existed, waterways also served as a source of power and helped
determine the location of early industrial cities.        In 1769, Arkwright patented his water frame
that used water power to spin thread, and two years later he located his mill at Cromford on the
River Derwent     Industrial towns then expanded along the Derwent Valley. Some of these early
factories were then visited by Americans, such as Samuel Slater and Francis Cabot Lowell, who
brought the technology to the United States, and also located along rivers, like the Blackstone
River of Rhode Island and the Charles and Merrimack Rivers in Massachusetts. The textile
mills on the Merrimack then produced the large factory towns of Lowell and Lawrence.

Steam power eventually made water less important both as a source of power and as a means of
transportation, because steam trains could replace canals. But the industrial revolution also made
transportation more important, since there was so much more to move, and for a while,
waterways became even more important.

Their importance led to increased investment in man-made waterways to supplement rivers,
lakes and ocean. The Bridgewater Canal connected Manchester with the port of Liverpool in
1776. Liverpool's access to the waterways of the world would bring raw cotton to Manchester
and Manchester's cotton fabric to the world. Between 1811 and 1831, as the cotton industry
boomed, Liverpool's population rose from 106,000 to 195,000.            Matthew Boulton, proto-
industrialist and maker of Boulton and Watt Steam Engines, was one of the early supporters of
the Birmingham's Main Line Canal, which would eventually connect the other birthplace of the
industrial revolution to the Staffordshire and Worcestershire Canal, which provided access to
some of England's greatest waterways.

In the mature urban systems of 19th century England and Europe, canals typically connected
well-established urban areas. Cities and towns had emerged over centuries into any area with
fertile soil, and canals made it easier for those places to connect with each other.     Over a
millennium earlier, China's Grand Canal had been built to connect the even more ancient urban
areas of that civilization. In sparsely populated 19th century America, canals provided access to
the natural wealth of the American interior.


                                                     10
Chicago's real estate boom of the 1830s was precipitated by the news that the Illinois and
Michigan Canal would make that city that a major node on a transportation network that spanned
from New York to New Orleans. Cleveland's initial growth owed much to its location as the
spot where the Ohio and Erie Canal brought commerce from the Cuyahoga and Ohio Rivers into
Lake Erie.    Buffalo was the western terminus of the Erie Canal. While later rail and road
networks were built to accommodate new forms of transportation technologies, canal boats were
an ancient form of transport. The innovations came from creating the locks and the
organizations that built them.

Roads before Cars

Just as canal boats are ancient, wheeled vehicles pulled by animals have also traversed our planet
for millennia. For just as long, it has been known that some form of planking or paving
facilitates the speedy rotation of those wheels.   When terrain is rough, goods must be carried
directly by animals, as they were upon the Silk Road that connected Europe with China, or the
Inca roads that spread out from Cusco. Both Bukhara and Samarkand were great cities along
that unpaved thoroughfare, although their existence long predated regular trade between Europe
and Asia. Transport over land becomes much cheaper if animals can pull wagons.

The first and greatest of Roman roads was the Appian Way, built to enable the passage of both
troops and military supplies through the malaria-filled Pontine marshes during the Samnite Wars.
By the time of the Emperor Hadrian, you could march along Roman roads from Gesoscribate
(Brest) to Byzantium, passing through Lugdunum (Lyon) and Mediolanum (Milan) along the
way.    It is hard to assess today the exact contribution that road access made to urban growth
during the Roman era, since we lack clear data on population growth and on the other factors that
might explain growth (Hitchner, 2012). Nonetheless, Milan could not have emerged as the
capital of the Western Roman Empire if it did not sit in the middle of the Roman road network.

There is a robust literature that investigates the impact of the Roman road network on cities
todays. Dalgard et al. (2018) show a correlation between Roman road density with both
population density in 500 c.e. and the density of economic activity today. Interestingly, Roman
roads do not predict modern urban agglomerations in those parts of Europe that abandoned
wheeled transport during the medieval period.      Wahl (2017) finds that even today, the parts of
Germany that were in the Roman Empire are more developed, at least as measured by night

                                                   11
lights, than the parts of Germany that were non-Roman. Percoco (2016) shows that the location
of Roman roads in Italy predicts economic activity there today.

Roman roads also helped to mold the internal shape of cities, by contributing to the internal
network that supplements the extent network. Garcia-Lopez (2012) shows that suburbanization
in Barcelona followed the path of old Roman roads that formed the basis for subsequent
highways. Garcia-Lopez et al. (2015) show that Roman roads helped shape the highways of the
Bourbons, and the presence of those roads predicts the level of population decentralization
within Spanish cities today.

The fundamental problem of assessing the impact that inter-urban roads had on urban growth
during the pre-modern era is the endogeneity of road locations. Roads and cities grew side-by-
side. While the course of the river Thames was in place before the Tower of London was built,
every road that led out of London owed its existence to the presence of the city.

The United States did build several large-scale roads to the west that clearly preceded the
existence of the cities and towns that would spring up along their routes. The Philadelphia and
Lancaster Turnpike connected Philadelphia with the west after 1795. That paved road reached
the Susquehanna River and Columbia. While it was an impressive piece of engineering, none of
the cities along its path exploded in population during the road's brief heyday. The National
Road or Cumberland Pike was an even more impressive stretch of Macadamized road running
from the Potomac to the Ohio Rivers and then further west. Towns like Unionville,
Pennsylvania, and Zanesvillle, Ohio, gained population due to their position along the road, but
these early roads were just far less important pieces of infrastructure that either the waterways
that preceded them or the highways that followed them.

The Train and the City

The train is our first full example of the three steps in technological innovation: vehicle
invention, network-building and urban transformation, which includes both the reshaping of
older cities, like London and New York, and the emergence of newer cities, like Los Angeles,
whose growth was enabled by rail, such as Los Angeles.

The steam-powered vehicle itself required several distinct breakthroughs. James Watt first had to
create his separate condenser steam engines, which required his to connect with and learn from a

                                                 12
top scientist (Joseph Black at the University of Glasgow), a superb ironmaker (John Wilkinson in
Birmingham) and a brilliant entrepreneur (Matthew Boulton). Converting reciprocating motion
into the rotary motion that would turn a wheel then requires the sun and planet gear devised by
Boulton and Watt employee William Murdoch, and used both for the first working model of a
locomotive and for a steam-powered paddle-wheeler. Even so, it took 17 more years before
Richard Trevithick built a steam locomotive that carried passengers up a hill.3

While steam powered cars can travel on streets, the early engines were both heavy and fragile.
Trevithick's own engine appears to have lasted only three days before it was grounded by an
accident in a rough road. Locomotives were better matched with rails that could reduce friction,
and the chance of becoming bogged down in soft earth. Luckily, short stretches of rail already
existed in the late 18th century. The Middleton Railway started hauling coal in 1758 by horse.

Building the world's rail network is one of the greatest industrial sagas of the 19th century.
George Stephenson was an early locomotive builder, but he is even more important railway
developer.4 His first railways carried coal, like the Hetton Colliery Railways and the Stockton
and Darlington Railway, but then moved to passengers, as the Stockton and Darlington did after
1833. Stephenson then built the Liverpool and Manchester Railways, which was the first railway
to carry passengers between two major population centers

The vast scale of railway building in North America required both engineering and organization
innovation, which was also true for large scale infrastructure investment.             Nineteenth century
U.S. cities were able to invest in sewers and watermains because bond markets were increasingly
willing to trust those cities with financing (Cutler and Miller, 2007). The creation of railroads
was associated with the growth of stock markets, the development of the modern corporation
(Jenks, 1944, Chandler, 1993). Railroads, like the Union Pacific, were also subsidized with vast
Federal land grants.

The third step of the innovation process occurred when railroad transformed cities. The
literature on the economic impact of railroads is dominated by the enormous contributions of


3
  Cugnot created an earlier steam wagon, but his work was abandoned in 1772 with little obvious impact on the
later development of transportation technology.
4
  He was most certainly not the first railway builder, however. Jessop, for example, engineered the Kilmamook and
Troon in 1812, and I have already mentioned earlier railways built for horse-drawn carriages.

                                                       13
both Fogel (1964) and Fishlow (1965). Fogel famously concluded that railroads contributed
little to America's economic transformation, because canals could have done the work. Fishlow
estimated that a larger impact of railroads, because he compared railroads only with the canals
that did exist in 1840.

Even if Fogel is right, the coming of the railroads still shaped the locational choices of both
people and firms. Los Angeles' population would not have reached 320,000 in 1910 ­ four years
before the opening of the Panama Canal-- without railroads. Los Angeles' own boosters fought
hard to bring the Southern Pacific Railroad to the city.

Atack et al. (2010) compare Midwestern counties that received rail station between 1850 and
1860 with comparable control counties that did not have a rail connection. In 1840, neither the
counties that were treated by rail nor the control counties had an average urbanization rate over
three percent. By 1860, the treated counties had an urbanization rate of 14.3 percent while the
control counties had an urbanization rate of 2.5 percent. Berger and Enflo (2017) perform a
similar analysis on railroads and urban growth in 19th century Sweden and draw similar
conclusions about the last impact of railroad access on population growth.

Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016) advanced the methodology of 19th century railroad analysis by
using the market access measures that come from international trade. Their work recognizes the
general equilibrium nature of a rail network, which means that a new railroad in Ohio can
increase the value of agricultural land in California. Their focus is on agriculture, rather than
urban growth, but they conclude that removing access to all railroads in 1890 would reduce the
value of U.S. agricultural land by 60 percent.5

Nagy (2016) also uses a formal general equilibrium model with specialization and innovation to
assess the impact of railroads on the urbanization of 19th century America. He estimates that
"railroads were responsible for 23% of U.S. growth before the Civil War," and that much of their
impact occurred because they enabled urbanization. Fajgelbaum and Redding (2018) use similar
methods and draw similar conclusions about the Argentine rail network.

This general equilibrium approach raises the even larger question of whether overall U.S.
urbanization would have been significantly lower in 1890 without access to the rail network,

5
    Donaldson (2018) similarly found large impacts of railroad on the 19th century economy of India.

                                                          14
because eastern cities needed to import food from midwestern farms. Perhaps that transportation
could have been done by canal, but Donaldson and Hornbeck's work seems to suggest not.
Developing country cities today can import their food by water, which perhaps explains why
urbanization in the developing world can proceed despite low levels of income (Glaeser, 2014).



    IV.      The Local Network and Urban Form before the Car



While the larger network shapes where cities locate within a country or a continent, the local
network determines the shape of the city itself, most obviously in the pre-modern commercial
cities, such as Venice, Bruges and Amsterdam, that relied on canals for local movement. Almost
all cities bear the imprint of the transportation technology that was dominant during the epoch in
which that city came of age.

Walking, Wagons and the Rise of the Grid

Amsterdam and Venice were exceptions. Movement within most older cities depended on
walking, animals and vehicles drawn by animals.              Few cities predate the wheel or domesticated
animals, and so these modes of transportation have been almost universally available in urban
history.6

Pedestrians and animals can easily walk narrow, curved streets. Consequently, many of our
oldest urban spaces have densely packed dwellings separated by semi-lightless alleys. Short
blocks aid pedestrian maneuverability, but in weak legal environments, defending road space
against encroachment is difficult. A clear system of roads is a boon for strangers, but what
strangers would be wandering around a modestly sized 11th century town? Consequently,
travelling through a medieval quarter can be dank and disorienting.

Wagons, which require less human labor per pound carried, benefit from wider, straighter streets.
Urban thoroughfares that could accommodate the cart had the added advantage of providing fine
marching space for triumphs or other displays of the power of potentates. The Romans built


6
 The Incas may have had one of the few great civilizations without the wheel, and even their greatest cities, such
as Cusco, had a population of less than 50,000 at the time of the Spanish conquest.

                                                        15
relatively wide, paved roads even in lesser cities like Pompeii, presumably to accommodate both
the legions and wagons. Julius Caesar was sufficiently interested in the problem of street
congestion that he banned wheeled vehicles form Rome for much of the day.

Street widening is a simple accommodation of wheeled vehicles. A grid is a more complete
restructuring of urban space to accommodate movement. Nowhere is that fact more obvious that
in Barcelona, which provides pedestrians with a dramatic shift from the medieval alleyways of
the Barri Gothic to Cerda's unique design for Eixample.

Grid plans are ancient. Mohenjo-Daro appears to have been built on a grid 4500 years ago. Yet
urban spaces have gone back and forth in their use of rectilinear grids, depending on the state of
both transportation technology and political order. Grids also need to be defended against
encroachment by abutters, who may put a structure in the middle of thoroughfares, and convert
public spaces into private space.

Bertaud (2018) provides a compelling argument for the case for laying down grids, even in areas
that will not be occupied for decades.    Certainly, grid users often express considerable
satisfaction with the clarity of their street plan (Ballon, 2012).   Yet we have relatively little hard
evidence on the longer-term benefits of different road structures. We know only that these
structures, such as Haussman's Parisian Boulevards or the dense warren of streets in old
Jerusalem, shape our experience of a city.

Streetcars and Omnibuses

New York adopted its' grid in 1811, sixteen years before Abraham Brower's horse drawn
omnibus provided the city's first public transportation. Horse drawn buses or streetcars are a
relatively simple technology, relative to the steam engine locomotive, but cities still went
through the three stages with omnibuses.      The basic technology was just a long carriage pulled
by a horse, and that could travel on existing streets, like Trevithick's steam carriage. However,
also like steam engines, horse drawn omnibuses work better with rails that reduce friction. Rails
were embedded into existing city streets to enabled buses to move more quickly.

Finally, as streetcars made it far easier to commute longer distances, the city began to sprawl
outwards. New York's Greenwich Village was an early example of a leafy suburb that became



                                                  16
connected to the city through a streetcar. Warner (1978) describes the growth of "streetcar
suburbs" outside of Boston that were connected to the city through streetcar lines.

The streetcars reshaped the city mostly by expanding its size, but there were more subtle changes
as well. The streetcar was the mode of the prosperous; feet were the mode of the poor. Since
the mode of the poor was so much slower, the poor started to live closer to the city center after
the coming of the streetcar. Gin and Sonstelie (1992) document how this pattern of centralized
poverty emerged in 19th century Philadelphia. The poor were only able to afford proximity to the
city center because they crammed into less than hygienic tenements. The rich who paid for
streetcars gained access to cheaper land that enabled them to build more comfortable homes,
such as brownstones in Greenwich Village and detached cottages in Brookline.

The streetcar, like the elevated railway that followed it, did not, completely alleviate the need for
walking. Travelers typically walked from their streetcar stop to their home. This meant that
while streetcars could expand the city, buildings still needed to be close enough to a streetcar line
so that they could be reached on foot. Streetcars enabled sprawl, but still required density.

Subways and Elevators

In the first half of the 19th century, urban public transit innovation made animal power more
efficient. In the late 19th century, transit innovations replaced living sources of energy with steam
and electricity. Intra-urban rail provided a faster alternative to the horse. Overhead
electrification and traction provided mobility with less burning of coal. Vertical mobility
increased with Elisha Otis' safety elevators that were powered first by steam and then after 1880
by electricity.

Cities built new networks for their intra-urban railways both to save space and to reduce the
smoke created by the steam trains. London puts its trains below ground. New York initially ran
them above ground. At their most basic, these urban trains were just like omnibuses on steroids.
The city could expand further. The rich were more likely to take the train than the poor, and so
this continues to abet the pattern of decentralization of the wealth. Yet still, people had to walk
to their train stops and so the basic pattern of walking densities persisted.

The revolution in vertical transportation may have had the most visible impact on urban form.
Powered, safe elevators were as crucial to the success of skyscrapers as the steel frames that

                                                  17
define them. Before the elevator, residential buildings almost never reached above six stories,
which still defines the upper limit of many older European cities. These two revolutions in
urban mobility ­ urban rail and the elevator ­ shaped the city of 1910. The new towers rising in
Chicago's Loop or on Wall Street reflected both the ability to build up, thanks to the elevator,
and the apartment buildings in the Upper West Side of Manhattan reflected the ability to build
out.

Heblich, Redding and Sturm (2018) provide a quantitative assessment of the impact of the
London underground on the development of that metropolis between 1801 and 1930. They
document that the introduction of the underground is associated with the spatial segregation of
residences from workplaces, and with the overall growth of the city. They provide a counter-
factual of removing trains from London that suggests that "removing the entire railway network
reduces the population and the value of land and buildings in London by up to 51.5 and 53.3
percent respectively, and decreases net commuting into the historical center of London by more
than 300,000 workers."



   V.      The Automobile and the 20th Century Restructuring of Urban Areas



While the 19th century's transportation innovations produced tall downtown buildings and
immense public transit systems, the 20th century's dominant transportation innovation was the
mass-produced, inexpensive internal combustion-engine powered vehicle.

Cars and Suburbanization

German engineers, including Nikolaus Otto, Gottfried Daimler and Karl Benz, developed the
internal combustion engine and the first cars. American entrepreneurs, including Henry Ford,
Billy Durant and Ransom E. Olds, developed the mass production techniques that made cars
affordable. A new network was then built up around cars, that included paving and limited
access highways.    The Federal government became a large-scale highway funder during the
New Deal and especially after Federal Highway Aid Act of 1956.




                                                18
The rebuilding of urban space around the car began before World War II, with car-based suburbs
such as Palos Verdes Estates outside of Los Angeles. After World War II, the process expanded
dramatically, with help from the highway system and an expansion of Federal support for home
lending.   The view that cars enabled the growth of suburbs seemed obvious even before
economists had solid empirical tools for estimating the impact of highways on suburbanization.
How could the vast number of American suburbs without any public transportation have grown
without the car?

Baum-Snow (2007) uses the 1947 Highway Plan which designated routes between metropolitan
areas based largely on military, rather than economic, benefits, to identify the causal impact of
highways on suburbanization. He found that each new highway that run through a city increase
suburban population, relative to central city population, by eighteen percent. He also documents
the clustering of new developments around the highway routes than provide fast access into the
central city. In one way, the highways were just like 19th century streetcars and subways in that
they allowed the central city to sprawl.

But highways were also quite different from these older forms of mobility because cars are
generally use from start to finish and require almost no walking at all. Indeed, that fixed time
cost, is responsible for most of the gap in average commute times between cars and public transit
(Glaeser, Kahn and Rappaport, 2008). Office buildings clustered around stops on Chicago's El or
New York City's Grand Central Station, but cars allowed dispersed low-rise offices and housing,
enabling the consumption of vast amounts of land relative to all previous transportation modes.
The ease of driving led many businesses to relocate away from dense urban centers to suburban
office parks, where the space was cheap and there was plenty of parking. Garreau (1992) called
these sprawling areas "edge cities," which captures the reality that both jobs and homes moved
away from older, urban cores.

Glaeser and Kahn (2004) discuss the decentralization of employment across American cities, and
argue that few modern urban areas fit the monocentric structure of the Alonso-Muth-Mills mode.
People may commute as long as always, but the most common commute is now from one non-
central location to another, often at relatively high speeds. Space-intensive industries, such as
manufacturing, were particularly prone to decentralize after the coming over the car.



                                                19
Cars and the Rise of the Sunbelt

Cars and highways moved people across metropolitan areas, for three distinct reasons. Some
areas received more highways than others and those areas with more highways grew more
(Duranton and Turner, 2012). It was easier to add car-oriented infrastructure into newer cities
and consequently, there was a shift away from old metropolitan areas to new metropolitan areas.
Highways eliminated most of the remaining transportation cost related advantages of the
countries northern and midwestern cities. Firms and people could move to areas that had other
advantages, including both car-based infrastructure and a warm climate. That combination of
rising populations and declining prices in America's sunbelt is best understood as reflecting a
highly elastic supply of housing that is created by the combination of abundant highways, simple
topography and few restrictions on local land use.

The coming of the highway decreased the cost of moving goods over space. The real cost of
moving a ton over a mile of rail has declined by over ninety percent since the late nineteenth
century (Glaeser and Kohlhase, 2004). In the 19th century, cities grew because of access to
waterways or coal mines, even in climates that were less than hospitable. In the 21st century,
low transportation costs mean that few locations offer any natural production advantages because
of proximity to either inputs or outputs.

When traded goods are easy to ship, then it makes sense to build cities around amenities that are
valued by consumers. The rise of Los Angeles in the late 19th and early 20th centuries provides
an early example of a city whose appeal was tied to its Mediterranean climate. Over the 20th
century, January temperature has regularly been the strongest predictor of metropolitan area
population growth.

Retrofitting Older Cities for the Automobile

The final shift in urban form occurred within older cities that tried to fit cars into older urban
infrastructure.   In some cases, older neighborhoods were leveled to create space for highways.
In other cases, highways were elevated to add extra road space and leave existing arrangements
intact. As cities became more concerned about the local disamenities of elevated highways and
neighborhood destruction, tunneling became more appealing despite its high cost.



                                                  20
Many of the most spectacular infrastructure projects of the past 75 years can be interpreted as
attempt to retrofit older cities for the car. While many of Manhattan's bridges predate the
automobile, the George Washington and Triboro Bridges were both built to enable more driving,
as were the major tunnels under the Hudson and East Rivers

Caro (1973) argues that Robert Moses' attempts to allow cars into New York City were
misguided failures, but there are no compelling economic studies analyzing the counter-factual.
Older cities, like New York, were competing against cities like Los Angeles that were
overwhelming car-based. New York City suffered in the 1970s, but it is hard to know if that
suffering was exacerbated or alleviated by Moses' infrastructure.



   VI.     Current Innovations and Urban Change



In the speculative section, I consider two innovations that both have the potential to shift urban
form in the future: autonomous vehicles and telecommuting. These discussions are brief,
because these topics are more fully addressed by the Verma chapter in this volume on
automation and the Agarwal and Salzberg chapter on the sharing economy.



Autonomous Vehicles

Autonomous vehicles can, in principle, eliminate the need to human labor to direct the path of a
moving vehicle, which effectively reduces the time cost of driving. The first order impact of
autonomous vehicles will presumably be an increase the number of vehicles miles travelled.
Lower costs of drive should increase the willingness to drive long distances and leisure which
would normally lead to even more decentralized cities.

Autonomous vehicles are easy to fit with real time pricing mechanisms that toll based on route
travelled. Limiting congestion pricing to autonomous vehicles might also reduce the political
backlash to congestion pricing. If autonomous vehicles then lead to a wider embrace of
congestion pricing or automobile sharing, then autonomous vehicles might do less to
decentralize urban arears. If the congestion charge was applied following the standard Pigouvian


                                                 21
formulas, then it would only offset the lower cost of driving on crowded highways and in the
urban core. On lower density roads away from the city center, autonomous vehicles would work
to lower the cost of driving, and generate even more development on the exurban fringe

Autonomous vehicles create particular advantages for the mobility of the young and the elderly.
With autonomous vehicle, older people with weak eyesight could remain in homes that were
only accessible by car. Autonomous vehicles might also reduce time spent by suburban parents
ferrying teenage children to far flung activities. These possibilities increase the centrifugal
power of driverless cars.

Autonomous vehicles have a particular advantage in ride sharing, because autonomous vehicles
can travel around the city on their own. Improved bus or ride sharing will be move valuable in
moderately dense environments. The ability to design dedicated neighborhoods for autonomous
vehicles, as Sidewalks Labs designed in Toronto, enhances natural complementarity between
autonomous driving and urban density. An autonomous on a dedicated highway may be able to
drive safely at 150 miles per hour, thereby eliminating much of the speed advantage currently
enjoyed by inter-urban rail. The more that autonomous vehicles are shared vehicles, the more
that they are likely to increase the demand for urban proximity.

Telecommuting

For decades, pundits have predicted that the ability to connect electronically would make face-to-
face interactions and the cities that enable those interactions obsolete. For decades, those seers
have largely been wrong, perhaps because electronic interactions and face-to-face interactions
have largely been complements rather than substitutes or perhaps because other forces made
cities more attractive in the late 20th century (Gaspar and Glaeser, 1998).

Yet the COVID-19 pandemic has made working from home the new normal for vast swathes of
the global economy. Bureau of Labor Statistics data founds that about 50 million Americas had
switched to remote work in May of 2020. The education gap associated with telecommuting was
enormous. Almost 70 percent of Americas with advanced degrees but only five percent of high
school drop outs were remote working. The knowledge workers in the large cluster known as
professional and business services were able to keep working on-line, but the thirty-two million
Americans working in retail trade, leisure and hospitality had a more difficult time.


                                                 22
Many businesses have already declared that they are sticking with remote working after the
pandemic ends. Bartik et al. (2020) report that more than 40 percent of firms in their sample of
small businesses say that forty percent of more of their workers who switched to remote work
will continue to work remotely. Some firms have discovered that working remotely is less
painful than they expected, and they have now paid the fixed costs of learning the new
technology. Nonetheless, a switch to telecommuting could easily reduce the demand for big city
office space going forward. Even a modest switch to tele-commuting, involving a few days a
week or ten percent of the population, could have a significant impact on urban traffic congestion
and commuting costs.

A post-pandemic increase in telecommuting will have more of an immediate effect on urban
rents than on urban form. In the world's more expensive cities, the gap between current
commercial rents and the rents that can cover maintenance costs are sufficiently large so that the
offices will remain occupied even after rents. In the medium term, lower commercial prices
mean that fewer downtown high rises will get built. Some office buildings in low cost
metropolitan areas may actually go vacant. Others will convert to residential uses.

A switch to remote working could lead both to a shift away from commercial districts within
metropolitan areas, but also a shift across metropolitan areas. If remote work is concentrated in
highly educated, better paid workers, then some of those workers will choose to move to
metropolitan areas with robust consumption amenities. Vacation destinations and college towns
seem most likely to attract more footloose knowledge workers.

The rise in remote working may not mean an urban exodus. Many of our cities have succeed
over the past forty years as places of consumption as well as production (Glaeser, Kolko and
Saiz, 2001). The young, in particular, are likely to continue to demand the pleasures of city life,
even if they do their jobs from their apartments. As cities switch from production to
consumption, intra-urban trips will be increasingly motivated by leisure rather than work.




   VII.    Policy Choices about Infrastructure and Urban Form



                                                23
In this section, I discuss five policy decision that impact both infrastructure and urban form.
These are meant to provide example of the integration of urban form considerations into
transportation policy analysis.

Policy Decision # 1: Subsidizing Infrastructure and its Use

Governments have subsidized infrastructure and its usage for centuries. The connection between
infrastructure and urban form should enter into any evaluation of transport subsidies.
Subsidizing highways implicitly subsidizes the move from cities to suburbs. Do those spatial
consequences cause the optimal highway subsidy to rise or fall?

The Whig Party advocated so-called "internal improvements," including both canals and
railroads, as "nation-building" investments that would create common markets and a common
national identity. Transportation links, including both the railroads the enabled speedy German
mobilization in 1914 and the Eisenhower interstate highway system, were also understood to
have national security value. If roads and rails carry sizable fixed costs and low marginal costs,
then subsidizing construction enable more efficient use, although economists have long
questioned the existence of a large gap between marginal and average costs. Finally, subsidizing
public transportation is also seen as a tool for reducing traffic congestion and enabling the labor
market access of the poor.

Americans have used general tax revenues to fill the highway trust fund for almost 15 years.
Europeans significantly subsidize passenger rail. Few if any public transit systems cover their
full costs. In every canonical urban model, subsidizing the cost of mobility will induce people to
live further away from the city center. Glaeser and Kahn (2004) found that countries that with
higher gas taxes have higher levels of urban density.

We also subsidize public transportation, which should induce consumers to live near existing
public transit stops and encourage more building near those stops.7 Yet, many of America's
older cities have inelastic housing supply either because prices that are below construction costs
(Glaeser and Gyourko, 2005) and because new construction is highly regulated. The more




7
 Baum-Snow and Kahn (2005) suggest that demand has been limited for new American metro systems built since
the coming of the car, which seems likely to limit their impact on urban form.

                                                    24
elastic supply of housing in the exurbs than in the urban core suggests the new highways will
have a larger impact on urban form than new mass transit stops.



Policy Decision # 2: Urban Land Use Regulations and Infrastructure Usage

In the United States, a plan to build a new rail line would emanate typically from a State
Secretary of Transportation, usually with support from a state Governor and probably with some
additional funding from the national Department of Transportation. Yet the social value of that
speedy rail line depends on the number of people who will take it each morning to get into the
city. The number of people who will get on the train depends on the amount of new housing
that is built around the new rail stations, and those decisions are made at the hyper-local level, by
the dispersed townships that maintain iron control over the ability to build any new housing.
The possibility that only a small amount of new housing will be built, in turn radically reduces
any benefits that might come from this new construction.

Coordinating land use decisions and infrastructure decisions is an old problem, because
infrastructure itself requires land. In the days of corrupt urban machines, overcompensation for
land purchases produced rents for privileged insiders. As George Washington Plunkitt of
Tammany Hall explained that when "it's a new bridge they're goin' to build," then "I get tipped
off and I buy as much property as I can that has to be taken for approaches," only to "sell at my
own price later on" (Riordan, 1995). Twentieth century infrastructure projects, such as those run
by Robert Moses, were more honest, but also more likely to meet with neighborhood opposition
to the use of eminent domain. The strength of local community opposition to rail lines has
bedeviled attempts to straighten the Acela route in New England and to build the California High
Speed Rail.

As Altshuler and Luberoff (2004) demonstrate, community power to block new projects
expanded steadily from the 1950s to the 1970s, which led to the emergence of more sensitive,
and more expensive projects, like the Big Dig. Communities have also become more
empowered in their ability to block new buildings, and that creates an indirect challenge for
infrastructure spending. When rails were laid down along the course of Manhattan, developers
could easily erect high rises to take advantage of the speedy access to the city's business


                                                 25
districts. When the Eisenhower highway system connected cities with the open space
surrounding them, developers similarly enjoyed a free hand in building suburban tract housing.
Today, however, communities are far more likely to block the new construction that would
increase the value of the infrastructure (Glaeser, Gyourko and Saks, 2005).

If infrastructure planners are hoping to deliver more value to their users, then the regulatory
environment matters. If place A is likely to build 1,000 new homes in response to a new rail
stop and place B is only like to build 10 new homes in response to a rail stop, then a planner that
desires to deliver more value may want to build in place A rather than place B, even if place B is
better from an engineering perspective. The number of people who will actually move in
response to new infrastructure is presumably significant for any cost-benefit analysis.

A second implication is that there may be gains from integrating land use planning with
infrastructure provision. At the small scale, this integration occurs already. Towns control both
local roads and new building.        But the transportation agencies that oversee large scale projects
rarely have control over new building.         It is at least be legally possible, if politically difficult,
for a state government to impose a new zoning code along with new infrastructure.



Policy Decision # 3: Durability vs. Flexibility; Rail vs. Bus

Economists have been skeptical about intra-urban rail transit since Meyer, Kain and Wohl (1965)
pointed out that a bus on a dedicated lane could achieve almost all of the speed of rail at a
fraction of the cost. From the perspective of city spaces, the most obvious distinction between
bus and rail is permanence. Bus routes can change quickly. Even, designated bus tunnels can
be repurposed.      Train routes can be even more durable than housing. Routes designed for 19th
century needs still shape the 21st century city.

Most train systems use rails that allowed George Stephenson's steam engines to glide over the
English countryside, which are not compatible with any other transit mode.8 Buses can be




8
 Some light right system share road infrastructure with cars, but others do not. Gomez-Ibanez (1981) discusses
many of the ways in which light rail systems are not so different from heavy rail systems.

                                                       26
rerouted over the existing road network or removed altogether. The flexibility of the bus would
seem to be a major advantage in an uncertain world.

Yet that flexibility has sometimes been seen as a downside of buses. The durability of trains is
seen as a way of resolving uncertainty and coordination problems.       For example, a real estate
investor who is considering building a new project on the edge of a high poverty neighborhood
may take confidence from a new rail line is much less likely to be rerouted. A new bus route
carries no security.

In a sense, the decision to invest fixed local infrastructure can be understood as a game between
the public sector and private investors, where all actors want someone else to bear the risk. The
permanence of rail loads the risk onto the public sector and makes the private sector less
vulnerable. But in many cases, the public sector will benefit from keeping its options open.

Policy Decision # 4: Public Health and Public Transportation

Cities are defined by the absence of physical space between individuals, but that urban proximity
becomes a threat during a time of pandemic. The density of travelers on an urban bus or rail car
can seem life-threating in a time of plague.   In a Suffolk University PRC/WGBH/Boston Globe
Poll of Massachusetts residents taken from April 29 to May 2, 2020, 79.2 percent of respondents
said that they would not be "comfortable riding buses, subways and commuter trains when it is
allowed." Even if there was treatment (but not a vaccine), 56.6 percent said that they would not
be comfortable taking public transit.

If the threat recedes quickly, then the simple steps that are being taken now should help bring
riders back onto public transportation. Regular disinfection and a norm of wearing masks should
help a bit. Plastic barriers can reduce the risk of infection for drivers; autonomous vehicles
would pose even less of a risk. Riders are already receiving real-time information about the
level of crowding, but we lowering the density level in buses and trains is a two-edged sword. If
public transit runs at 25 percent of capacity for the foreseeable future, then it will be even further
away from covering its costs.

If the threat of pandemic persists, and all shared public transit is shunned, then cities will have to
fall back on three older technologies-- walking, cars and bicycles--and hope that new
technologies can help fill in the gaps. Autonomous cars and buses with airtight barriers between

                                                  27
passengers might provide a feasible form of ridesharing. Walking and riding are easiest at high
densities, where there is proximity between workplace and home. Cars and lower density ride
sharing will work better at more suburban densities.

To allow more space for bicycles and walking, the inner city could in principle ban cars
altogether, and have parking structures at the end.    Health concerns can further limit high
densities if elevators or shared air systems are also seen as dangerous. In that case, we may see
an even larger move away from high density metropolitan areas altogether, especially in the U.S.
In that case, cars rather that walking or bicycling seem like to be the dominant transportation
mode in a world with recurring pandemics, just as cars are the dominant mode in lower density
America today.



Policy Decision # 5: Infrastructure and Natural Disasters

Before the coming of COVID-19, urban leaders were far more worried about the threat of global
warming than the threat of pandemic. Climate change is more addressed in the Henry Lee
chapter of this volume. Here I will briefly discuss responding to the possible impacts of global
warming rather than reducing the extent of global warming.       These issues are handled far more
completely by essays later in this Those impacts include rising sea levels, rising temperatures
and the increased threat of natural disasters, especially hurricanes. The potential responses
include relocation, shields and more resilient infrastructure.

Many cities are near the water and close to sea level, precisely because waterways were the
critical inter-urban transportation network in the pre-modern period. Access to those waterways
is less valuable today, and urban populations can potentially be moved out of range of water-
related risk. If urban infrastructure was mobile, then relocation provides a relatively easy
solution to flood. Indeed, a crucial issue is the speed of climate change relative to infrastructure
depreciation. If change is sufficiently slow, then perhaps we can gradually move population
centers away from high risk areas. Yet it seems unlikely that we will even abandon the
enormous investments that have been made in cities like New York, Boston and San Francisco.
Cities of the developing world have less infrastructure to lose, which might make the case for



                                                 28
relocation stronger in poorer places. Yet the political capacity to move large population will be
limited in poor countries.

If cities remain vulnerable to the sea, then shields, such as sea walls, become a plausible solution
to climate risk. In principle, such barriers can protect both against storm surges and against the
relentless rise of the seas, but the costs can easily be enormous. The political norm in which
protection from natural disasters is the job of the Federal government seems to reward risky
behavior. If the owners of the sea-front property pay for their sea walls, then there are stronger
incentives again building in more vulnerable settings.

A third response is to make structures and infrastructure more resilient to flooding. Resilience is
unlikely to solve the problem is the city is going to be under a foot of water, but public transit
systems and power grids can be protected against the threat of flood.     Again, this increases costs
and helps make the case for building in less vulnerable areas in the future.

I chose not to dwell on the goal of reducing carbon emissions, but that goal will remain and
shape both urban form and infrastructure. Looking forward, this goal will create a conflict
between the post-COVID-19 desire to segregate oneself in a car and the pre-COVID-19 desire to
reduce carbon usage.



   VIII.   Conclusion



Infrastructure has shaped cities for thousands of years, since ancient walls provided protection
against marauders and paved roads made it easier for the passage of wheeled vehicles. This
essay has focused primarily on the transportation infrastructure that has played a primary role in
shaping the cities of the wealthy world today, and that seem most likely to influence the future of
those cities. Water, sewers and power generation have played much less of a role in this essay,
and yet these are particularly central to life in developing world cities today.

Manila is a metropolitan area with more than twelve million inhabitants, yet only a small fraction
of that population has access to sewers. Septic tanks are a far more common, even if extremely
dense parts of the region. In many cities of India and Sub-Saharan Africa, pit latrines are far


                                                 29
more common than either sewers or septic tanks. The cities of the west only became healthy by
spending vast sums on their sewers. Will the cities of the developing world continue to grow
without spending on public health related infrastructure?

The current residential electricity demand of much of the developing world are relatively limited,
because populations are too poor to expect their homes to artificially air conditioned throughout
much of the year. As these populations become richer, their desire for electricity at home seems
likely to increase enormously. That demand for electricity will either require more power
generating infrastructure or will lead to prices that are so high that they are sure to engender
discontent.

Infrastructure is at the center of our urban world. The connection between transportation and
urban density is particularly tight, since the ultimate purpose of density is to reduce
transportation costs between people and firms. That is also the purpose of transportation
infrastructure. The need for serious cost-benefit analysis to bring intellectual rigor to future
infrastructure investments is one of the great policy planning tasks of the 21st century.




                                                 30
References
Allen, Treb, and Costas Arkolakis. The welfare effects of transportation infrastructure
improvements. No. w25487. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2019.

Altshuler, Alan A., and David E. Luberoff. Mega-projects: The changing politics of urban public
investment. Brookings Institution Press, 2004.

Arnott, Richard J., and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "Aggregate land rents, expenditure on public goods,
and optimal city size." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 93, no. 4 (1979): 471-500.

Atack, Jeremy, Fred Bateman, Michael Haines, and Robert A. Margo. "Did Railroads Induce or
Follow Economic Growth? Urbanization and Population Growth in the American Midwest,
1850-1860." Social Science History (2010): 171-197.

Ballon, Hilary, ed. The Greatest Grid: The Master Plan of Manhattan, 1811-2011. Museum of
the City of New York, 2012.

Bartik, Alexander W., Zoe B. Cullen, Edward L. Glaeser, Michael Luca, and Christopher T.
Stanton. What jobs are being done at home during the COVID-19 crisis? Evidence from firm-
level surveys. No. w27422. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.

Baum-Snow, Nathaniel. "Did highways cause suburbanization?." The quarterly journal of
economics 122, no. 2 (2007): 775-805.

Baum-Snow, Nathaniel, Matthew E. Kahn, and Richard Voith. "Effects of urban rail transit
expansions: Evidence from sixteen cities, 1970-2000 [with comment]." Brookings-Wharton
papers on urban affairs (2005): 147-206.

Berger, Thor, and Kerstin Enflo. "Locomotives of local growth: The short-and long-term impact
of railroads in Sweden." Journal of Urban Economics 98 (2017): 124-138.

Bertaud, Alain. Order without design: How markets shape cities. Mit Press, 2018.

Bleakley, Hoyt, and Jeffrey Lin. "Portage and path dependence." The quarterly journal of
economics 127, no. 2 (2012): 587-644.

Caro, Robert A., and Robert A. Caro. The power broker: Robert Moses and the fall of New York.
Alfred a Knopf Incorporated, 1974.

                                                 31
Chandler Jr, Alfred D. The visible hand. Harvard University Press, 1993.

Chauvin, Juan Pablo, Edward Glaeser, Yueran Ma, and Kristina Tobio. "What is different about
urbanization in rich and poor countries? Cities in Brazil, China, India and the United
States." Journal of Urban Economics 98 (2017): 17-49.

Cutler, David, Grant Miller, Edward Glaeser, and Claudia Goldin. "Water, Water, Everywhere:
Municipal Finance and Water Supply in American Cities." Corruption and Reform: Lessons
from America's Economic History (2006).

Dalgaard, Carl-Johan, Nicolai Kaarsen, Ola Olsson, and Pablo Selaya. "Roman roads to
prosperity: Persistence and non-persistence of public goods provision." (2018).

Donaldson, Dave. "Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the impact of transportation
infrastructure." American Economic Review 108, no. 4-5 (2018): 899-934.

Donaldson, Dave, and Richard Hornbeck. "Railroads and American economic growth: A
"market access" approach." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131, no. 2 (2016): 799-858.

Duranton, Gilles, and Matthew A. Turner. "Urban growth and transportation." Review of
Economic Studies 79, no. 4 (2012): 1407-1440.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo, and Stephen Redding. "Trade, structural transformation and development:
Evidence from Argentina 1869-1914." NBER Working Paper 20217 (2018).

Fishlow, Albert. American Railroads and the Transformation of the Ante-bellum Economy. Vol.
127. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1965.

Fogel, Robert William. Railroads and American economic growth. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
Press, 1964.

Garcia-López, Miquel-Àngel. "Urban spatial structure, suburbanization and transportation in
Barcelona." Journal of Urban Economics 72, no. 2-3 (2012): 176-190.

Garcia-López, Miquel-Àngel, Adelheid Holl, and Elisabet Viladecans-Marsal. "Suburbanization
and highways in Spain when the Romans and the Bourbons still shape its cities." Journal of
Urban Economics 85 (2015): 52-67.

Garreau, Joel. Edge city: Life on the new frontier. Anchor, 1992.
                                                32
Gin, Alan, and Jon Sonstelie. "The streetcar and residential location in nineteenth century
Philadelphia." Journal of Urban Economics 32, no. 1 (1992): 92-107.

Glaeser, Edward L., and Joseph Gyourko. "Urban decline and durable housing." Journal of
political economy 113, no. 2 (2005): 345-375.

Glaeser, Edward L., and Matthew E. Kahn. "Sprawl and urban growth." In Handbook of regional
and urban economics, vol. 4, pp. 2481-2527. Elsevier, 2004.

Glaeser, Edward L., Matthew E. Kahn, and Jordan Rappaport. "Why do the poor live in cities?
The role of public transportation." Journal of urban Economics 63, no. 1 (2008): 1-24.

Glaeser, Edward L., and Janet E. Kohlhase. "Cities, regions and the decline of transport costs."
In fifty years of regional science, pp. 197-228. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2004.

Glaeser, Edward L., Jed Kolko, and Albert Saiz. "Consumer city." Journal of economic
geography 1, no. 1 (2001): 27-50.

Glaeser, Edward L. "A world of cities: The causes and consequences of urbanization in poorer
countries." Journal of the European Economic Association 12, no. 5 (2014): 1154-1199.

Glaeser, Edward L., and Bryce A. Ward. "The causes and consequences of land use regulation:
Evidence from Greater Boston." Journal of urban Economics 65, no. 3 (2009): 265-278.

Gomez-Ibanez, Jose A. "A dark side to light rail? The experience of three new transit
systems." Journal of the American Planning Association 51, no. 3 (1985): 337-351.

Harrison Jr, David, and John F. Kain. "Cumulative urban growth and urban density
functions." Journal of Urban economics 1, no. 1 (1974): 61-98.

Heblich, Stephan, Stephen J. Redding, and Daniel M. Sturm. The making of the modern
metropolis: evidence from London. No. w25047. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2018.

Hitchner, R. Bruce. Roads, integration, connectivity, and economic performance in the Roman
Empire. Vol. 5. Chichester, West Sussex: John Wiley & Sons, 2012.

Jenks, Leland H. "Railroads as an economic force in American development." The Journal of
Economic History 4, no. 1 (1944): 1-20.


                                                33
Kasarda, John D., and Greg Lindsay. Aerotropolis: The Way We'll Live Next. Farrar, Straus and
Giroux, 2011.

Meyer, John Robert, John F. Kain, and Martin Wohl. The urban transportation problem.
Harvard University Press, 1965.

Nagy, Dávid Krisztián. "City location and economic development." Princeton University,
mimeograph (2016).

Percoco, Marco. "Highways, local economic structure and urban development." Journal of
Economic Geography 16, no. 5 (2016): 1035-1054.

Riordan, William L. Plunkitt of Tammany Hall: A series of very plain talks on very practical
politics. Penguin, 1995.

Wahl, Fabian. "Does European development have roman roots? Evidence from the German
Limes." Journal of Economic Growth 22, no. 3 (2017): 313-349.

Warner, Sam Bass. Streetcar suburbs. Vol. 133. Harvard University Press, 1978.




                                               34
