                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        DIGITAL CAPITAL AND SUPERSTAR FIRMS

                                        Prasanna Tambe
                                            Lorin Hitt
                                          Daniel Rock
                                        Erik Brynjolfsson

                                       Working Paper 28285
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28285


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




We are grateful for valuable feedback from Guy Berger, Di Mo, Diego Comin, Frank Nagle,
Chad Syverson, Jonathan Haskel, and Lynn Selhat and from seminar participants at MIT, the
NBER Conference on Research on Income and Wealth, the Workshop on Information Systems
and Economics, the International Conference on Information Systems, LinkedIn, the Brookings
Institute Initiative on Productivity Measurement, the NBER Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
and the INFORMS Conference on Information Systems and Technology. We thank the LinkedIn
Economic Graph Research team for providing access to firm-level skills and employment data.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Prasanna Tambe, Lorin Hitt, Daniel Rock, and Erik Brynjolfsson. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Digital Capital and Superstar Firms
Prasanna Tambe, Lorin Hitt, Daniel Rock, and Erik Brynjolfsson
NBER Working Paper No. 28285
December 2020
JEL No. D24,D25,M21,O32,O33

                                         ABSTRACT

General purpose technologies like information technology typically require complementary firm-
specific investments to create value. These complementary investments produce a form of capital,
which is typically intangible and which we call digital capital. We create an extended firm-level
panel on IT labor investments (1990-2016) using data from LinkedIn. We then apply Hall's
Quantity Revelation Theorem to compute both prices and quantities of digital capital over recent
decades. We find that 1) digital capital prices vary significantly over time, peaking around the
dot-com boom in 2000, 2) significant digital capital quantities have accumulated since the 1990s,
with digital capital accounting for at least 25% of firms' assets by the end of our panel, 3) that
digital capital has disproportionately accumulated in a small subset of "superstar" firms and its
concentration is much greater than the concentration of other assets, and 4) that digital capital
accumulation predicts firm-level productivity about three years in the future.


Prasanna Tambe                                  Daniel Rock
Wharton School                                  Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania                      University of Pennsylvania
3730 Walnut Street                              3730 Walnut Street
558 Jon M. Huntsman Hall                        Philadelphia, PA 19104
Philadelphia, PA 19104                          rockdi@wharton.upenn.edu
tambe@wharton.upenn.edu
                                                Erik Brynjolfsson
Lorin Hitt                                      Stanford Digital Economy Laboratory
Wharton School                                  366 Galvez Street, Room 238
University of Pennsylvania                      Stanford, CA 94305
3730 Walnut Street                              and NBER
Jon M. Huntsman Hall                            erik.brynjolfsson@gmail.com
Philadelphia, PA 19104
lhitt@wharton.upenn.edu
1        Introduction

Superstar firms, unique in their capabilities to scale up innovations, have become increasingly im-

portant in the US economy (Autor et al., 2020; Hall, 2018; Van Reenen, 2018; De Loecker et al.,

2020). Investments related to digital technologies are likely to play a particularly important role,

reflecting, among other things, economies of scale and network effects. For instance, as of February

2020, the five most valuable firms in the S&P 500 were all firms from the tech industry ­ Microsoft,

Google, Facebook, Amazon, and Apple. Moreover, their share of stock market capitalization has

been growing. Figure I illustrates that as a fraction of the overall value of firms in the S&P 500

index, the value of the top five most valuable firms has been increasing since about 2010, with an

especially rapid rise in this fraction in the last few years.

        Much of the rise in the concentration of power in these firms has been attributed to intangible

investments (Crouzet and Eberly, 2018; Ayyagari et al., 2019; Covarrubias et al., 2019). For digitally-

focused firms, investments in the intangible assets needed to realize value from new technologies

­ like cumulative investment in skills training, new decision-making structures within the firm,

management practices, and software customization ­ often account for significantly greater total

costs than the technologies themselves. These assets comprise digital intangible capital (hereafter,

interchangeably referred to in this paper as "digital capital") (Hall, 2001; Brynjolfsson et al., 2002).1

The importance of these types of investments has been well documented and spans a number of

academic literatures (e.g., see Bresnahan et al., 2002; Black and Lynch, 2001; Corrado et al., 2009;

McGrattan and Prescott, 2010; Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou, 2013; Sculley et al., 2014; Crouzet and

Eberly, 2018; McGrattan, 2020; Wu et al., 2020). As the economy becomes increasingly digitized,

these assets can be expected to grow even further in importance. For instance, there has been a

wave of interest in the potential of data analytics and artificial intelligence (AI) to become the next

important general purpose technology that drives economic growth and business value (Brynjolfsson

et al., 2018).

        The economics of these assets have both similarities to and differences from physical capital.

Firms invest in both physical capital, like factories or manufacturing equipment, and digital capital

to increase their capacity to produce in future years. While these assets take time to build, the market
    1
    In a later section, we present a more comprehensive definition of digital intangible capital. We also compare it to
the related concept of "e-capital" as defined by Hall (2000).


                                                          2
value of firms should reflect the expected net present value of the cash flows they can generate in

the future. Furthermore, like physical capital, digital capital can depreciate over time and must be

replenished through additional investment. However, unlike physical capital, intangible capital is,

by definition, difficult, if not impossible, to see or touch. In addition, the value of intangible capital

may be closely tied to a particular firm and sensitive to external economic conditions, so it can

fluctuate more than can the value of physical assets such as buildings or property which are more

fungible and typically have active secondary markets.

   Because of the differences in measurability between physical and intangible capital, generally

accepted accounting principles often fail to capture the value of new business processes or other

types of intangible capital on a firm's balance sheet. Measurement of the stock of digital intangibles

has proven particularly elusive because gross investment in digital capital is largely invisible to

researchers and depreciation rates are unknown, so the methods that are conventionally used to

assess the accumulation of capital stocks are not easily applied (e.g. see Hall, 1993). For other kinds

of assets, one might use market transactions (such as a lease or resale price) to derive prices, but

there are no markets for individual digital intangible capital assets through which prices can be

directly and readily observed. Even when the total value for bundles of these intangible assets can

be estimated, fundamental distinctions, such as their price and quantity, remain elusive. This price-

quantity distinction is especially important because it is the stock (quantity ) of capital, not its value

(price x quantity ), that contributes to a firms' productive capacity. When the price of digital capital

rises, higher market values may reflect little or no actual improvements in aggregate productive

capacity, with most of the increase in market value reflecting rents. On the other hand, if the price

of digital capital is stable or falling, high values reflect genuine improvements to productive capacity.

As digital capital becomes a greater component of overall capital stock, differences in the quantities

of digital capital across firms (driven by the accumulated stock as well as variations in the marginal

cost of investment in digital capital), may increasingly explain differences in performance between

new digitally-focused firms and older firms.

   This paper uses an alternative approach to create measures of changes in the prices and quantities

of digital capital in US firms over the last three decades. Earlier work has shown that under certain

assumptions, the quantities of a firm's capital stock­and specifically, its intangible capital stock­

can be inferred from the value of its securities (Solow et al., 1960; Baily, 1981), and that the values

                                                    3
inferred using this method reasonably describe the accumulation of intangible assets in US firms

over the second half of the twentieth century (Hall, 2001). However, to the best of our knowledge,

no prior work has applied these methods to firm-level data. This precludes the application of these

intangible capital stock measures to explaining the distribution of productivity among firms.

       While Hall computed his estimates on aggregate (economy-level) data, it has previously not

been possible to perform these estimates at the firm level because the recursive nature of the

approach requires a relatively long time series. Existing data on firm-level digital investments such

as the CI Technology Database database (or CITDB, also known as the Harte-Hanks database) is

too short and lacks the necessary year-to-year consistency needed for Hall's approach.2 Thus, an

indispensable input to this analysis is a new firm-level data series on a key input to many forms

of digital capital3 : IT-labor based on data from LinkedIn, a popular online professional networking

platform (http://www.linkedin.com).

       To compute these measures, we use LinkedIn profiles to track the employment of information

technology workers by firms, and we make a variety of adjustments to account for sampling differ-

ences across occupations, regions, and industries.4 The data source that is generated extends and

improves upon prior approaches that computed IT labor inputs from employment data (e.g., Tambe

and Hitt (2012b)). With this longer and more precise series on IT labor, combined with other, more

conventional, firm-level financial data, we can recover estimates of digital capital quantities and

prices from a time series of changes in digital capital values.

       The central contribution of this work then is in using new IT investment data along with

Hall's approach to provide the first firm-level measures of prices and quantities of digital intangible

capital. Prior work has reported correlations between IT investments, firms' market value, and

the risk-reward profile of firms' traded assets. This tells us something important about the value

and pricing of these assets (Bharadwaj et al., 1999; Brynjolfsson et al., 2002; Dewan et al., 2007).

The value the market assigns to these assets, however, cannot tell us about their productivity or

contribution to economic growth. By using Hall's approach with firm-level data, this paper is able

to directly tie the flow of services that firms derive from their digital intangible capital to economic
   2
     This reflects, among other things, significant changes in data collection methods and sampling.
   3
     Such a measure potentially misses some forms of digital capital, such as open source software repositories. Later
in the paper, we are explicit about the mapping between a firm's IT labor measure and its digital capital.
   4
     Details of this measure construction and benchmark tests of the data are provided later in the paper.



                                                          4
outcomes such as productivity. The identification of these flows and their economic properties can

then be used to explain productive differences across firms. The ability to measure digital capital

also creates further possibilities to measure the implications of digital capital accumulation for

important macroeconomic trends.

   This work builds on prior research connecting IT investments to differences in the productivity

of US firms (Dewan and Min, 1997; Stiroh, 2002; Brynjolfsson and Hitt, 2003), and the important

role in this relationship played by complementary organizational investments (Bresnahan et al.,

2002). In contrast to these latter studies, we measure the quantity of intangible capital directly

rather than making inferences about its presence through observing correlations between business

practices and IT investment, productivity, or market value. While this approach cannot identify

the specific business practices that make up digital capital, it has the advantage of creating an

aggregate measure of the overall stock of digital capital without having to identify and measure

all of its constituent investments. Once this stock is identified, it becomes possible to study the

properties of digital capital and the statistical distribution of these digital capital assets across

firms and over time. As noted earlier, the separation of price and quantity of digital capital also

enables a distinction between digital capital-related rents and increases in productive capacity.

   Our approach reveals four important facts about the role of digital capital in explaining features

of the modern economy. First, the market value of digital capital rose sharply during the late 1990's

but then fell in the early 2000's, reflecting changes in the price of digital capital during the dot-com

boom and subsequent bust.

   Second, the value of digital capital began to rise again from 2010 onward, with the timing

coinciding with a wave of innovations based on mobile technologies, cloud computing, big data,

data science, and most recently, artificial intelligence (AI). With the important exception of the

period corresponding with the dot-com boom and subsequent bust, the long run increases in value

can largely be attributed to changes in digital capital quantities, rather than prices. Quantities of

digital capital rise fairly steadily and substantially over the course of our nearly thirty-year panel.

By the end of the panel, digital capital quantities account for 20-25% of the levels of physical capital

for firms in our sample.

   Third, there is substantial heterogeneity among firms in terms of quantities of digital capital they

own. The majority of the increase in quantities concentrated in a subset of superstar firms, which we

                                                   5
define as those within the top decile of our sample in terms of market value. This concentration can

be observed not only in terms of aggregate digital capital accumulation, but also for the development

of digital capital on a per-employee basis, and it contrasts with patterns of accumulation of other

assets such as those classified as property, plant, and equipment. Furthermore, heterogeneity has

been increasing during the course of our panel, as the top firms have pulled increasingly further

away from the rest.

    Fourth, by creating firm-level measures of digital capital quantities, we can estimate how the

accumulation of this form of capital contributes to productivity and growth. In productivity regres-

sions, we estimate the contributions of our digital capital quantity measures along side IT capital

stock measures. We find that the contribution of digital capital to growth during this period was

approximately double that of IT capital stock. Moreover, current year levels of digital capital are

most predictive of productivity levels about three years in the future, suggesting that while its value

is reflected in firm's stock prices immediately, it takes several years to fully install into the firm and

become productive. Consistent with this finding, the contribution of digital capital to productivity

in long-differences grows larger over longer difference lengths. This is consistent with the finding in

Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2003) that the contributions of computer investments themselves are also

greater over longer differences.

    In sum, because we have access to technology and skill data at the firm level, we can estimate

not only how quantities of digital capital have been growing, but also how these quantities vary

across firms, and how this might be connected to the growing importance of superstar firms in the

US economy.



2     Theoretical framework: Asset values and adjustment costs

2.1   Defining digital capital

In this paper, "digital capital" refers to factors of production that are 1) complementary to recorded

investments in IT assets (such as hardware and software), but 2) that are not otherwise recorded

on a firm's balance sheets. Examples include employee training that is related to new information

technologies, firm-specific human capital related to technology systems, and the development and

implementation of business processes and other forms of organizational transformation required


                                                    6
to support or use new information technologies. There are many other forms of intangible capital

that are not digital intangible capital, such as brands and intellectual property, and some of these

have been studied in the literature. If these types of capital are not (conditionally) correlated with

the firm's IT investment, they will not be measured by the empirical approach we use below and

therefore are not measured as digital capital. Some capital that complements IT investment, such

as general human capital, is not owned by the firm and it is not part of the firm's digital capital.

   Firms produce digital capital through investment. Like other types of capital, digital capital

produces a flow of services that is useful for business operations. Unlike most forms of tangible

capital, however, digital capital cannot easily be used for collateral and it cannot be exchanged on

secondary markets. This makes it hard to measure the unit price of digital capital, and therefore,

to infer quantities from measures of value.


2.2   Theoretical framework

Our goal is to reveal differences in firms' quantities of digital capital. The notion that the value of

a firm's securities reveals its capital stock has appeared in several forms in the literature (Solow

et al., 1960; Baily, 1981).

   In this paper, we rely principally on Hall's formulation, which is applied to intangible assets. Hall

argues that under assumptions of 1) competitive markets, 2) constant returns to scale production,

and 3) full factor adjustment, prices and quantities of tangible and intangible capital can be recovered

from the value of a firm's securities (Hall, 2001). The main difference in our approach is that we

estimate key parameters with firm-level data, using a time-series of investment into a correlate of

the firm's intangible investment. In addition, rather than using the total value of a firm's securities

as our dependent variable, we use the component of its market value correlated with IT investment.

After separating digital capital values into prices and quantities, we use the quantities to estimate

the contribution of digital capital to productivity.

   From Hall (2001), we have two equations relating investment and market value in the presence

of adjustment costs:



                                              Vt /Kt = qt                                           (1)



                                                   7
                                         qt = 1 + c (it /Kt-1 )                                     (2)

   The first equation indicates that the ratio of market value (V ) to dollar of capital value (K ) is

Tobin's q (1). Then, the adjustment cost condition is that the marginal q value is 1 plus the marginal

cost of adjustment at that amount of investment growth ( Ki t
                                                          t-1
                                                              ) (2). The 1 in the equation represents

the numeraire price of capital purchase costs and the adjustment cost function is assumed to be

convex in time. We follow the convention in Hall (2001) (following Hayashi (1982)) that demonstrates

an equivalence between the average q in (1) and marginal q in (2) given our assumptions.

   Once capital is installed in a firm, its value to shareholders is greater than its purchase price.

This difference reflects the adjustment costs that competitors would need to incur to duplicate the

same productive capacity. For instance, simply having a computer delivered to a company's loading

dock will not increase the firms output, but installing productivity software, integrating it securely

into the firm's computer network, and training a worker to use it effectively may. These additional

steps are costly, often far more costly than the hardware itself, and thus lead to values of q that

exceed 1. Furthermore, sunk adjustment costs can lead to an ex-post quasi-rent of installation equal

to the difference between the competitive value of installed capital less the firm's specific adjustment

cost. The sum of these values accrues to the shareholders to produce the identity:

                                                     J
                                            Vt =             qj,t Kj,t                              (3)
                                                    j =1

   The market value of the firm at time t is the sum of the values of its constituent assets (indexed

by j ), priced at their respective q values. Solving the system of equations above leads to a convenient

way to recover q and K at some time t if we know the market value and previous period's capital

stock of the firm.

   Not knowing the adjustment cost function precisely, we have that:


                                                  Kt - (1 -  )Kt-1
                            c (it /Kt-1 ) = c (                    ) = qt - 1                       (4)
                                                        Kt-1

   We can observe market values, and we have to pick a starting capital value to solve the recurrence

relation above. With last period's capital stock and the current market value, we can infer q and


                                                         8
K in the current period. This also requires knowing the adjustment cost function. If we assume a

quadratic function for adjustment costs (Holt et al., 1960; Hamermesh and Pfann, 1996; Belo et al.,

2014), we can solve for the convexity of the adjustment cost function with a similar recurrence

relation.


                                               it    t Kt - Kt-1 2
                                         c(        )= (         )                                              (5)
                                              Kt-1   2   Kt-1


                                             it           it
                                       c(        ) = t (      ) = qt - 1                                       (6)
                                            Kt-1         Kt-1

       These two equations are taken directly from Hall (2001).

       Convexity need not be symmetric, and in that Hall (2001) the downward adjustment alpha

is set to a constant value that is ten times the upward adjustment alpha. Asymmetric adjustment

might, for example, motivate regression specifications that include a dummy and interaction term to

distinguish growing firms from shrinking firms. But, importantly the recurrence relation can extend

to difference quotients to get a time-varying estimate of alpha. Importantly,  can vary across firms,

capital varieties, industries, regions, or other relevant groupings of capital. Because it refers to the

firm's adjustment cost function for new capital, the choice of how  varies is constrained by available

data.  is assumed to vary over time and by firm in the present case (firm subscript suppressed

here).5

       The marginal adjustment cost at a given level of net investment per unit of capital stock in the

previous period is equal to the q value of investment in the current period minus the numeraire.

From equation 1, we have that q is equal to the market value of a given asset divided by the asset

replacement value. The point where the marginal adjustment cost function intersects the hyperbola

Vt = qt Kt defined by the market value sets the equilibrium price and quantity of capital (Hall (2001)

illustrates this as shown in Figure II). With measures of a capital panel Kt and net investment it

(or gross investment and asset-specific depreciation rates), these equations can be solved to yield qt

and Kt .
   5
   With the additional assumption that q is stable, the second order condition is useful for recovering an approxi-
mation of t as follows:
                                                      it
                                                c (       ) = t                                                 (7)
                                                    Kt-1




                                                        9
        Note that the q curve can be interpreted as the full market value of the firm or the q values

of specific assets. Cash, for example, has low adjustment costs, so the supply curve of cash is close

to flat with a price of one dollar. Property, plant, and equipment has a higher installed price. The

reason is that the asset replacement costs are set in competitive equilibrium.

        Differentiation in adjustment costs of highly liquid assets like cash is likely limited. The market

does not permit rents in assets with no protection from competition. Sometimes capital quantities

can be inferred from secondary market prices or from estimates of capital rents. However, in the

case of intangible assets, this is generally not possible.

        Rather than solving directly for q , we can estimate the following hedonic regression from observed

capital stocks and observed market values to recover the q value as a vector of coefficients:



                                      Vi,t = Ki,t  + Xi,t  + i + t +         i,t                                   (8)

        The value of a firm is decomposed into its constituent assets K with controls X and fixed effects

for firm i and time t. If all assets are measured perfectly, then the coefficient vectors return the asset

q values. Note that the controls and fixed effects are not necessarily required in this case.



3        IT investment time-series

3.1        IT labor measures

Applying this approach to digital intangible capital measurement requires a measure that allows us

to estimate the firm's IT capital stock. We use IT employment as a proxy measure for annual IT

investment.6

        The IT labor measures are constructed from data on the employment histories of US IT workers,

which are used to infer the distribution of IT employment in US firms. The data were obtained from

LinkedIn, the leading online professional network upon which individuals post employment histories,

which include data on each job they have held: information on employer, job title, and years spent at
    6
    Our analysis is based on a hedonic regression of the firm's market value on its capital assets. We relate IT labor
to the firm's IT capital stock by making the assumption that a dollar of IT capital requires a fixed amount of IT
labor to maintain it. That is, a firm that doubles its IT capital would require twice the IT labor to maintain it. This
assumption allows us to use IT labor expenditure as a proxy measure for the firm's aggregate IT capital stock. Prior
work that has examined correlations between IT capital and IT employment at the firm level finds a correlation of
0.56 for those measures in levels (versus 0.62 for those measures in logs) (Tambe and Hitt, 2012a).


                                                          10
the firm. The data on employers generally include name, size, and industry.7 We use the employment

histories of the workers on LinkedIn who have job titles identifying them as IT workers to measure

IT employment in public firms over the duration of our panel.8

       In brief, using the employment histories of all US workers who post on the site, we generate

a proxy measure for US IT workers employed at each firm-year combination. Because these em-

ployment histories archive prior job positions, we can trace backwards in time to create historical

firm-year employment measures for a set of workers. We then employ a variety of sampling adjust-

ments that account for varying rates of site participation by year, occupation, and other factors that

can influence the number of workers who post on the site to create a normalized IT employment

measure for each firm-year. For a more detailed discussion of the measure creation, sampling ad-

justments, and validation of these measures using other data sets with known sampling properties

(e.g., the BLS Occupational Employment Survey), see Data Appendix A.

       A similar approach, using different sources of IT employment information, has been used in

prior work (Tambe and Hitt, 2012b). That data source included years until 2007, so the data

used in this paper adds approximately a decade of additional observations. For this analysis, IT

employment, which is a proxy for IT labor expenditures, offers some advantages when compared

to other available proxies that one might use for IT investment such as the CITDB database. This

database has probably been the most commonly used database for measuring firm-level IT spending

(e.g., see Bresnahan et al. (2002)).

       Our IT labor series spans a longer time period, which is important for two reasons. First, it

is available on a consistent basis through the dot-com boom, the bust, the Great Recession, and

through the last decade of technology spending, which includes the rise in investment in big data,

data science, and machine learning. Because the data analyzed in earlier work on IT value ends in

the mid- to late-1990's, our longer time period addresses a significant gap in terms of observability

of IT spending. Second, in the absence of direct measures of spending on digital infrastructure, the

wages paid to IT labor are the principal observable inputs into the construction of digital capital. In

other words, firms can build new information structures around old IT capital. Therefore IT wages

may be a more relevant input to firm-level digital capital investment than IT hardware spending.
   7
     The data were obtained in early 2018, but we only use the years through 2016 because the lag in workers updating
their profiles could otherwise add significant noise to our measures.
   8
     Tambe (2014) uses a similar approach.


                                                         11
This is especially important given the rapid adoption of cloud computing in recent years, which has

decoupled total IT investment from direct expenditures in IT hardware. Moreover, IT labor tends

to be a much higher component of IT spending than IT capital in recent years.

   IT employment has been used in earlier work as a measure of IT spending (Lichtenberg, 1995;

Tambe and Hitt, 2012b), but the consistency of the time series over almost three decades makes

the dynamic recursion methods used in this paper newly feasible, and the availability of firm-level

measures (rather than an industry or economy-level time series) allows us to take these data to the

question of how these differences matter for heterogeneity in firm-level outcomes.


3.2   Discussion of measurement error

The data we use are collected through a partnership with LinkedIn, not scraped, so we are not

subject to types of measurement problems that arise when using scraped or incomplete data from a

website. Nonetheless there are gaps. Many workers do not participate on LinkedIn, and some of those

who do might report inaccurate or incomplete employment history information. This inaccurate or

incomplete reporting can generate error in our IT employment measures. The high participation

rate of IT workers within the US on the LinkedIn platform suggests that measurement error should

be less than what we might otherwise observe in the CITDB IT capital data or other comparable

IT data sources. Prior work has argued that the error variance in the data on CI capital may be as

high as 30-40% of the total measure variance (Brynjolfsson and Hitt, 2003) and that employment

data, as a proxy for IT investment, are subject to less measurement error (Tambe and Hitt, 2012b).

   Another source of measurement error when using IT labor as an IT input measure is IT employ-

ment outsourcing, which can include investments in cloud computing. If firms outsource a significant

fraction of their IT employment, they would appear to derive the full value of IT investment from

their in-house and outsourced labor inputs but IT labor expenditure would be under-reported. The

impact of IT employment outsourcing for the use of measures of this type is considered in Tambe

and Hitt (2012b). Using survey data, that analysis finds that including measures of IT outsourcing

directly in regressions of internal IT employment on value (productivity) does not substantially

change the estimated value of IT labor.

   Various indicators have placed outsourcing at about 10-15% of the total budget. This compares

with about 14% or so in the sample from Tambe and Hitt (2012b). In either case, this compares

                                                12
favorably with the 30-40% measurement error if using historical firm-level IT capital stock data.

It is also useful to note the direction of biases imposed by missing data on IT outsourcing. If all

firms outsource similar fractions of their IT employment, it will not impact our estimates, and if

outsourcing levels are random with respect to the firm's IT spending, then ceteris paribus, it will

attenuate the coefficient estimates on IT and understate measures of the value of digital capital.

If larger, more valuable firms tend to use more IT outsourcing, it will tend to lower the estimated

contribution of IT to value.



4     Descriptive statistics and empirical analysis

4.1    Data, sample, and statistics

Applying Hall's Quantity Revelation Theorem to uncover firm-level digital capital quantities requires

a firm-level time series of market and asset values that includes a correlate measure for digital capital

as described above. To create a panel from these measures, we combined the IT labor series with

firms' market values and assets collected from the Capital IQ database. Below, we report results

from an analysis of two different panels, 1) a balanced panel consisting only of firms that appear in

all years from 1987 to 2016 (n=277), and 2) an unbalanced panel over the same time period that

can include firms that enter or exit the panel (n=5,215). Tests performed on the balanced panel

have the advantage of consistency in sample composition over the duration of the panel, but they

exclude firms that fail part way during the sample period as well as firms that only appeared in

the late 1990's and after. For the balanced panel, the firms are disproportionately larger, older, and

more established firms, so on a per-employee basis, our estimates of digital capital using this sample

could be understated.

    In Table I, we report key statistics from the firm-level data in our panel. Statistics are reported

from firms' 2005 values. The year 2005 was chosen because it is close to the midpoint of our

panel but is not during the dot-com bust, which triggered large layoffs in IT sectors. The figures

in the table indicate that firms in our sample are large, with an average market capitalization of

about $35 billion and with roughly 60,000 employees. The average firm in our sample has slightly

more than 3,000 IT employees, or about 5% of their workforce. This can be compared with BLS

Occupational Employment Statistics that report that the IT workforce comprised slightly more


                                                   13
than 2% of the overall US workforce in 2005.9 This difference suggests that IT labor is employed in

disproportionately larger numbers by the firms in our sample. The Data Appendix contains more

detailed comparisons of occupational coverage in the LinkedIn data.


4.2      Digital capital market values, prices, and quantities

4.2.1      IT and market value

Table II reports results from regressions of market value on PP&E, IT, and other inputs using

the Tobin's q framework shown in 8. The form of this regression is similar to that used in prior

work Brynjolfsson et al. (2002) (hereafter, referred to as BHY), except that the IT investment

data source for this research is different and the panel is longer. These regressions a) benchmark

how the IT employment data perform in market value regressions and b) estimate contributions of

IT investment to market value in a panel that post-dates the IT data used in existing firm-level

research by almost two decades. We report estimates from Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) and fixed

effects models as well as Least Absolute Deviation (LAD) models and all of the regressions in the

table include year and two-digit industry fixed effects. In a market value context, LAD regressions

reduce the impact of outliers (e.g. very large market value firms) on the estimates, although our

point estimates do not change substantially when using these methods. For ease of interpretation,

we scale the IT employment measures to millions of dollars by multiplying it by 0.10, which implies

a cost of $100,000 per "unit" of IT labor. Below, we discuss how this wage assumption affects

interpretation of our estimates. We first present results from the larger unbalanced panel and then

from the balanced panel of firms for which data are available for all the years in our panel.

       We first replicate results from earlier studies using our new IT employment dataset. Column (1)

of Table II replicates the specification from BHY, using IT capital stock measures for the years from

1987 to 1998, constructed from the CITDB data, which is the same data set that was used in that

paper.10 For the unbalanced panel, estimates on Property, Plant, and Equipment (PPE) and other
   9
     The BLS Occupational Employment Statistics reports that employment in Computer and Mathematical Occu-
pations accounted for 2.27% of total US employment in 2005. Historical BLS occupational employment statistics can
be found at https://www.bls.gov/oes/tables.htm. Last accessed on July 3, 2019.
  10
     A detailed description of how these capital stock figures were created can be found in Brynjolfsson et al. (2002).
Some of the description is replicated here for convenience, but the paper has additional details. "The measures of
computer use were derived from the Computer Intelligence Infocorp (CII) installation database, which details IT
spending by site for Fortune 1000 companies. Data from approximately 25,000 sites were aggregated to form the
measures for the 1,000 companies that represent the total population in any given year. This database is compiled


                                                          14
assets (total assets minus physical capital) are close to their expected theoretical values of one, plus

an increment for adjustment costs for that type of capital.

    The coefficient estimate on IT capital indicates that a dollar of IT capital is associated with

about 12 dollars of market value, although standard errors are large so we cannot reject the the

hypothesis that the contribution of this type of capital to value is zero. However, it is notable that

the point estimate is very close to the BHY estimates, which found that each dollar of computer

investment was correlated with 11 dollars of market value.

    In column (2), we substitute our new IT employment based measures for the IT capital mea-

sures, while using the same restricted time period used in column (1). The point estimate on IT

employment suggests that a dollar of IT labor is associated with around nine dollars of market value

(8.62, t=1.80). Interpretation of the magnitude of this estimate in dollar terms is sensitive to our

assumptions about IT wages. If IT workers earn more than we have assigned on average, it will

lower the estimate, and if they earn less, it will raise the estimate. Unlike IT capital, IT labor is

not owned by the firm's shareholders. Therefore, most of the dollar value implied by the coefficient

estimate on IT labor should be assigned only to intangible correlates and their adjustment costs.

That is, we do not need to subtract out the contribution of IT labor to the firm's market value.

    Column (3) includes both IT measures in the same regression. The change in estimates on the

IT labor and capital coefficients suggests that IT labor is a more precise measure of this type of

investment, perhaps due to greater measurement error in the IT capital figures (Tambe and Hitt,

2012b) or as might be the case if spending on IT labor is a better indicator than IT capital of

the development of new digital capital (17.70, t=1.83). This would be the case, for instance, if IT

workers could build new digital intangibles on old servers or if the use of cloud computing is making

measures of in-house IT capital a less informative measure of computing capacity relative to IT

labor.11
from telephone surveys that gather detailed information about the ownership of computer equipment and related
products. Most sites are updated at least annually, with more frequent sampling for larger sites. The year-end state of
the database for each year from 1987 to 1997 was used for the computer measures. From these data we obtained the
total capital stock of computers (central processors, personal computers, and peripherals). The IT data do not include
all types of information processing or communications equipment and are likely to miss some portion of computer
equipment that is purchased by individuals or departments without the knowledge of information systems personnel."
   11
      IT labor spending may also be a proxy for technology asset utilization. Although many firms may have a PC
on every desk, the percent of time each PC is in use might vary from firm to firm with the percent of workers'
jobs that use a PC. Moreover, even if worker use PC constantly, the CPU utilization of PCs might vary from firm
to firm with the sophistication and computational intensity of the firm's software. Both of those utilization factors
would presumably be correlated with IT labor and with returns. Returns on IT investments would be more strongly


                                                          15
    Having shown that these new data generate results largely consistent with prior results that

had an overlapping (but considerably smaller) time period, we now report estimates from our full

available sample that ranges from 1987 to 2016 (see Column (4)). In the extended panel, each IT

employee is associated with about fourteen dollars of employer value (14.12, t=3.44). That is, the

coefficient estimate on IT grows if we include the post-2001 years into the panel. In column (5),

which includes firm fixed-effects, the magnitude of the IT estimate falls to nine dollars of market

value per dollar spent on IT labor (9.38, t=2.75). This indicates that about a third of the estimate on

the IT variable from the prior column is due to cross-sectional heterogeneity in firms that invest in

IT and those that do not. Finally, the estimate in (6), which uses a somewhat more precise measure

of IT wages, rises to about twelve dollars per IT employee (12.10, t=2.39). This more precise wage

measure is computed by using the LinkedIn data to determine the mix of IT occupations within the

firm, and using BLS occupation-level wages to compute the weighted IT wage number. In summary,

the estimates in columns (4) through (6) suggest that in the last decade, the market continued

to assign significant value to IT based assets as estimated when using a proxy measure based on

IT labor. The higher estimate in column (6) than in column (5) is consistent with the idea that

measurement error in IT wages in the prior column slightly reduces the estimate.

    Table III shows results for the balanced panel, which is limited to firms that do not enter or exit

the panel between 1987 and 2016. The pattern of results is similar to that reported in II, although

there is a fall in the magnitudes of the IT estimates, which suggests that the older firms in this

sample have developed less digital capital and are less likely to be among the "superstar" firms that

do especially well. Nevertheless, as with the unbalanced panel, the magnitude of the estimate on

IT investment suggests the presence of significant correlated but unmeasured assets. Moreover, the

estimated coefficients when using the IT employment measures suggest effects of similar size on the

larger panels, and the estimate in column (3) is again consistent with the argument that IT labor

is a more precise measure of the firm's IT assets than our IT capital measures.
correlated to IT labor than IT asset because although the IT asset is necessary, it is not sufficient ­ idle PCs produce
no returns.




                                                          16
4.2.2      Prices and quantities of digital capital

Recovering prices and quantities for digital capital requires a time-series of digital capital values.

To estimate year-to-year changes in the value of firms' digital capital, we use the specification in

equation 8 with the balanced panel, but we limit the sample for each regression to observations in

a window around the focal year.12 The IT coefficient estimates generated using this approach are

shown in Figure V. They rise and fall in a pattern that is consistent with some of the changes in

levels of IT investment that occurred from 1995 through 2001 ­ the dot-com "boom" ­ and again

in the years after 2010, which coincide with a recent wave of investment around data collection and

mobile technologies as well as the data science and AI tools that are increasingly being used for

data-driven decision-making.

      Figure VI plots the average of the imputed digital capital values for firms in the balanced panel

over the course of our panel. The average digital capital value (i.e., the component of market value

correlated with measures of IT employment) has fluctuated substantially, and the dot-com bubble

and bust appears to have had a significant effect on the value of digital capital computed using this

method. For the average firm in our panel, digital capital values rose to about $5 billion during the

height of the dot-com boom, before falling to about half that number in the years following the

bust. These values then continued to fall through the early and mid 2000's, before beginning to rise

again shortly after the Great Recession and onward through the most recent time period covered

in the sample.

      The fluctuations in digital capital value shown in Figure VI suggest changes in the value of

firms' digital capital over time. The conditions in equations 1 and 2 enable us to separate the role of

changes in price and quantity in explaining these changes in value. Solving this system of equations,

Figures VII and VIII depict how the prices and quantities of digital capital have been changing for

these firms during the years covered by our panel. The prices and quantities shown in the charts

are average values for firms in the balanced panel.

      The dominant feature for the price series in Figure VII is its rise and subsequent fall corre-

sponding to the late 1990's dot-com boom and bust. The theoretical prediction is that as Tobin's

q for this asset rises above one, firms will invest greater amounts into the asset. This theoretical
 12
      See Table 3 of Brynjolfsson et al. (2002) for use of a similar approach.




                                                           17
relationship appears to be consistent with the two illustrations, as the rise in Tobin's q corresponds

to accelerated investment by firms during the late 1990's. The dominant feature in Figure VIII is the

rise in digital capital quantities in the panel, which occurs particularly rapidly during the dot-com

boom years.

   It is worth noting that, in contrast to the period around the dot-com boom, digital capital prices

in the later part of the panel were stable despite a similar run-up in market values. Aside from the

late 1990's and early 2000's, the price stays close to its theoretical value of one. Figure VIII implies

a corresponding accumulation of digital capital quantities, except for a slowdown in the growth rate

after the dot-com bust and a decline in quantities for a few years after. These figures suggest that

the large market value changes around the dot-com boom and bust can be partly attributed to

changes in digital capital price, not only to changes in the quantities of digital capital possessed by

the firms in our sample. The bust removed the effects of possible investor mispricing from digital

capital values, and the slowdown in the accumulation of digital capital stocks continued through the

Great Recession. In contrast, there is little evidence that changes in price explain the more recent

increases in digital capital value.

   To place the growth of digital capital quantities in perspective, we can compare how digital

capital growth compares to the growth of physical capital. Figure IX makes this comparison explicit.

By the end of our sample period, our imputed digital capital quantities had grown to approximately

25% of the size of measured physical capital. It is worth noting that the sample for this comparison

is the balanced panel, which does not include any firms such as Google or Facebook, which were

founded later. In that respect, this comparison is likely a conservative one.


4.3   Firm-level heterogeneity in digital capital

The construction of firm-level measures allows us to analyze how firms differ in terms of digital

capital. In particular, there has been growing interest in the literature in the concentration of some

types of capital in superstar firms in the US economy (Autor et al., 2020; Hall, 2018; Crouzet

and Eberly, 2018; De Loecker et al., 2020). Using the firm-level data generated on digital capital

quantities, we can compute distributional statistics on how digital capital has been accumulating

in firms. Our approach to measuring digital capital is particularly useful here because we define

superstar firms based on market value. By removing the effects of digital capital price and focusing

                                                  18
solely on digital capital quantity, we eliminate the possibility that superstar firms appear to have

more digital capital because they receive greater value for all their assets.

    Figures Xa and Xb plot changes in the prices and quantities of digital capital when grouping

firms in the sample into four quartiles according to their market values in the final year of the panel.

In the two figures in the top panel, the different trend lines in each chart correspond to one of the

four quartiles. The most salient feature in this set of charts is the relative concentration of digital

capital quantities in the highest quartile group and that the gap in digital capital quantities between

the top quartile and the bottom three quartiles has been growing larger over time. In particular,

there appears to be less accumulation of digital capital in the lower quartiles and essentially no

accumulation in the two bottom quartiles at all. Even within this limited sample of firms that

appears in the balanced panel, therefore, there is evidence that the accumulation of digital capital

assets is in line with a rise in the concentration of assets among US firms.

    The charts in Figures Xc and Xd further subdivide firms in our sample into even narrower groups:

into deciles in the bottom left figure and into ventiles in the bottom right figure. Both charts echo

the finding of Figure Xb, which is that digital capital quantities are concentrated in firms at the

top of the market value distribution. Digital capital appears to be especially concentrated in the

top decile of firms, and this group seems to be pulling away from other firms during the years in

the panel.

    It is notable that this result cannot be driven principally by new digital firms because, as

mentioned above, these firms are not in the balanced panel sample. Our sample excludes Google,

Facebook, Amazon, and other technology-intensive firms that emerged in years after the 1987 start

date of our panel. Therefore, the divisions in these charts are even more striking because the sample

does not include firms that we might consider to be the most obvious candidates for this type of

effect.

    We make the effects of this sample restriction explicit in Figure XI which uses the unbalanced

panel that includes the newer firms that we might expect to be the most digital capital-intensive.

Relative to the result from the balanced panel, average digital capital quantities fall because the

unbalanced sample includes firms that enter midway during the panel and are smaller. The key

observation, however, is that for the unbalanced panel, differences between the top decile and other

deciles are even more pronounced than those shown in Figure Xb. This is consistent with what

                                                  19
we would observe if relatively more digital capital-intensive firms were entering the panel. For this

sample of firms, an even greater fraction of the total digital capital is concentrated in the highest

decile firms in terms of market value.

    Part of this concentration effect may be due to the fact that capital of all types may have been

accumulating in firms that were growing larger than others during the years covered by our panel.

This would not be inconsistent with our prior arguments, but it is useful to determine whether

the growth in digital capital concentration is in proportion to the change in concentration in other

assets, or whether digital capital is accumulating in higher-value firms at a rate that outpaces that

of overall asset concentration.

    The charts in Figure XII suggest that digital capital may be unique in its pattern of accumulation

in more valuable firms, at least when considered in relation to employment share. Figure XIIa

illustrates digital capital quantities per employee. In contrast, Figures XIIb and XIIc show changes

in quantities of two other asset types normalized by employment: property, plant, and equipment as

well as a measure of all other types of recorded assets (i.e., all assets excluding digital capital and

PPE). These two figures indicate that while there is rising concentration within the deciles for these

different asset classes, only digital capital is rising faster than employment share in higher value

firms. In other words, after normalizing by employment, quantities of digital capital per worker were

becoming particularly concentrated in the highest decile firms in terms of market value.

    The Gini coefficient of the overall concentration in assets is plotted in Figure XIII and these

findings echo those shown in Figure XII. Figure XIIIa shows that while concentration levels have

been rising for most assets, they have been rising more rapidly for digital capital for those firms in

our sample. This rise in the concentration was most rapid in the years that immediately followed the

dot-com bust, but the rising trend has continued in recent years. Similar and even more pronounced

trends can be observed in Figure XIIIb, which plots changes in concentration of the employment

normalized measures of digital capital quantities. In this plot, concentration rises rapidly after 2000

but plateaus after the Great Recession in 2008. Within the last decade, therefore, most of the rise

in concentration in digital capital from Figure XIIIa has been moving in step with growth in firm

size.

    Figures XIIIc and XIIId analyze the change in asset quantities and Gini coefficient concentration

if firms are grouped by one-digit NAICS industry. In these figures, only the four one-digit industries

                                                  20
with the highest numbers of firms are shown: NAICS sector "2" (Construction and Utilities), NAICS

sector "3" (Manufacturing), NAICS sector "4" (Trade, Retail, and Transport), and NAICS sector

"5" (Information, Finance, Insurance, Real Estate, and Professional Services). Figure XIIIc suggests

that digital capital appears to be accumulating mostly rapidly within firms in the NAICS "5" sector

and that most of the concentration effects documented earlier are due to a rise in concentration

within this sector. In contrast, there does not appear to be a significant change in concentration in

the other three sectors.


4.4   Digital capital and productivity

The IT productivity literature has found that the estimated output elasticity for IT capital in

firm-level productivity regressions is typically two to three times larger than its cost share (see e.g.,

Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2003)). Researchers have suggested this discrepancy is likely due to the output

contribution of omitted but correlated factors of production such as the types of intangible assets

that, in this paper, we call digital capital. Directly computing measures of digital capital quantities

at the firm-level allows us to separately estimate the output contributions of IT capital stock and

digital capital stock. It is worth noting that production functions are engineering definitions that

require measures of quantities (i.e., capital stocks) to estimate output. The overall value of a firm's

IT assets would be of little use here. Therefore, it is precisely the separation of IT market values

into prices and quantities ­ the central contribution of this paper ­ which newly enables this type

of analysis.

   Table IV reports results from productivity equations that include measures of labor, non-IT

capital, IT capital, and digital capital in the same balanced panel of firms that was used to compute

digital capital quantities. We assume production can be approximated by a Cobb-Douglas function,

which has been the model of production most commonly used in the literature in this area, and

the dependent variable we use is value-added, which is computed as output minus materials. The

CITDB IT capital stock measures used in the regression are the same measures used in prior work

on IT productivity at the firm-level unit of analysis (Brynjolfsson and Hitt, 2003). These data were

collected through surveys, and they have the limitation that the data consistency begins to decline

notably after the mid 1990's and particularly after 2000, so we limit our productivity estimates

using these data to a shorter panel of years that ends in the late 1990's.

                                                   21
   Column (1) includes IT capital, but not digital capital, as a factor of production and the esti-

mated coefficient on the IT capital term suggests an output elasticity (0.037, t=2.31) that is similar

to that found in other work that performs cross-sectional comparisons. Directly introducing digital

capital measures in column (2) produces estimates which indicate that the contribution of digital

capital to value-added is positive and about the same order of magnitude as IT capital (0.034,

t=2.12). However, the relative magnitude of the coefficient estimate on digital capital stock is lower

than what might be expected from survey-based estimates of the shares commanded by each of these

inputs. For instance, Saunders and Brynjolfsson (2016) estimates that 70-80% of IT spending is on

complementary organizational assets. One possible reason for the smaller than expected estimate is

that the years that comprise most of the sample in our productivity regression are the late 1980's

and early 1990's, which, as shown in our earlier figures, precede the larger run-up in digital capital

stocks in this sample of firms.

   We can directly test this assertion in column (3) by restricting our sample to observations that

appear in the latter part of the sample used in column (2). The sample in column (3) is limited to

the years 1997 to 2000, which were associated with a rapid increase in quantities of digital capital.

The coefficient estimates on digital capital from these years suggest an output elasticity for digital

capital that is more than double that of IT capital stock (0.093, t=1.90). In column (4), we introduce

narrower, two-digit industry controls to remove some of the effects of industry-level heterogeneity

on these estimates. This specification produces estimates of the output elasticity of digital capital

that are similar in magnitude but because the standard errors rise, the estimates are no longer

significantly different than zero. Column (5) adds R&D investment as a factor of production that

generates another type of intangible asset, intellectual property. R&D has been used extensively in

prior work on the measurement of a firm's intangibles.

   To the extent that digital capital is serving as a proxy measure for other intangibles, including

R&D may absorb some of this effect. R&D investment is not available for all of the firms in our

sample (typically because the innovative investments in some industries cannot be treated as R&D

under standard accounting principles), so we also include a dummy variable which indicates that

data is not available for the firm. The digital capital estimates are of the same magnitude as the

estimate in (2) which covers the same years, although in the limited sample, the estimate is no longer

significantly different than zero. Because the figures we produced earlier suggested that digital

                                                 22
capital quantities grew substantially after 2000, these productivity estimates probably provide a

lower bound on more recent contributions of digital capital to productivity. However, we do not

have firm-level measures of IT capital stock in more recent years.

   Errors in the measurement of digital capital quantities may not only exert a downward bias on

the digital capital coefficient estimate, but can also transmit an upward bias on the IT capital stock

measure because of the correlations between these two inputs. Fixed-effects estimates may remove

some of this measurement error, but they may also remove some of the estimated effect of digital

capital if the input varies slowly. As it turns out, prior work has indeed argued that IT organi-

zational assets do change slowly relative to IT capital because of the high costs of organizational

transformation and re-engineering (Bresnahan et al., 2002). Columns (6) and (7) report estimates

after introducing firm fixed-effects. The magnitude of the coefficient estimates on IT and digital

capital in column (6) (0.026, t=2.00) and column (7) (0.023, t=1.92) are similar in size although

slightly smaller than in the cross-sectional regression results from columns (2) and (3) of the table.

   Table V augments these analyses with measures of the firm's human capital computed from the

LinkedIn data. The literature on skill-biased technical change links human capital to the productivity

of digital enterprises. It argues that information technologies are complementary to higher levels of

human capital in workers. Moreover, the notion that technology investments and skilled workers are

key inputs into the production of digital capital is reflective of Hall's argument that college-educated

workers are the key input into building "e-capital" (Hall, 2000), suggesting how these two are related

in terms of a production relationship. In other words, technology and human capital are inputs into

the production of digital capital, which, in turn, increases productivity levels.

   Table V estimates a production function for digital capital stock that uses IT and human capital

as inputs. The dependent variable in this table is digital capital intensity (i.e., computed on a

per employee basis). Independent variables are capital intensity, IT intensity, and human capital

intensity where all measures are computed as logs of the per-employee values. The regression output

in column (2) indicates that higher levels of IT are correlated with the overall digital capital stock

(0.350, t=2.97), but combinations of greater IT and human capital intensity are correlated with still

greater levels of digital capital intensity (0.048, t=3.20). These estimates are consistent with the

claim that these two factors are complementary in the production of digital capital. Columns (3)

and (4) reproduce these tests after including firm fixed-effects. The significant coefficient estimate

                                                  23
on the interaction term persists, in column (4), after including firm fixed-effects (0.048, t=3.00),

which indicates that the development of digital capital in firms coincides with simultaneously raising

levels of IT and human capital.

   The productivity results suggest that digital capital is a form of productive capital stock that

is generated by combining technology and human capital (as well as other, possibly unmeasured,

complements). However, it is often hypothesized that intangible capital of this type takes time to

create, install, and become productive (Brynjolfsson and Hitt, 2000; Brynjolfsson et al., 2002) and

especially so in larger, higher value firms that require greater organizational changes, but for which

the payoff to productivity may be higher (Tambe and Hitt, 2012a).

   The next table tests the hypothesis that although digital capital is reflected in current market

values, it impacts productivity only after a delay (Brynjolfsson et al., 2002). Table VI tests timing

for the baseline production regression, in which digital capital quantities are introduced with varying

lags, such that moving across the table tests conditional correlations between levels of digital capital

and future productivity levels. In each column, digital capital is lagged by the number of years spec-

ified in the column header. All columns in this table include firm fixed-effects. The estimates suggest

that digital capital is correlated with future productivity as much as it is with contemporaneous

productivity. The magnitude of the correlation peaks at around two years (0.024, t=2.40), which is

consistent with the argument that digital capital requires installation time. Such a pattern, in which

intangible capital contributes to the firm's current market value but does not contribute to produc-

tivity levels for a few years, is entirely consistent with the broader empirical literature on returns

to IT investment (Brynjolfsson et al., 2018) broadly and digital capital specifically (Brynjolfsson

et al., 2002).

   A second way to test the argument that digital capital requires installation time is by estimating

productivity in long-differences (Bartelsman et al., 1994; Brynjolfsson and Hitt, 2003). If digital

capital requires time to install, we should observe returns in longer time differences that are larger

than those in shorter time differences. The results of the long-differences tests are shown in Table

VII. The first column of estimates is from the main productivity regression computed in long-

differences, where changes in the difference length, which range from 1 year to 10 years, are shown

on the left of the table, and only the coefficient estimates on digital capital are shown in the table.

Moving down the table (longer difference lengths) corresponds with estimates that grow from .005

                                                  24
in one-year differences to .026 in 10-year differences (t=2.36), which is consistent with the argument

that digital capital requires time to be adapted to the organization, and that its productivity effects

appear only after a delay. The second column in the table adds two-digit NAICS industry into the

regression, but the pattern of correlations moving down the table is very similar to that in the

previous column. In sum, the estimates in Tables VI and VII are consistent with the argument that

the productivity of digital capital assets takes several years to fully appear.


4.5   Robustness to assumptions about key parameter values

The construction of digital capital quantity measures as plotted in Figure VIII is dependent upon

assumptions about two parameters required for the recursive methods used to recover prices and

quantities from digital capital values. Specifically we have: a) an adjustment cost parameter ()

which indicates the costs of installing new digital capital into the firm and b) initial quantities

of digital capital owned by firms in the first year of the panel. Hall (2000) argues that using the

recursive methods to compute digital capital quantities in the way described earlier is not overly

sensitive to either of these two assumptions. In this section, we explicitly test the sensitivity of our

estimates to these assumptions using the time series data.

   Figure XIVa illustrates how different values of the adjustment cost parameter  affect the es-

timated trajectory of digital capital quantities. Our adjustment cost parameters are estimated at

the firm-level. In Figure XIVa, along with the computed quantity series that was already shown in

Figure VIII (which uses  = 3.0), we also present digital capital quantities generated by halving and

doubling the  parameter (setting it equal to 1.5 and 6.0, respectively). Using these different values

implies larger and smaller costs of installing new capital in the firm, respectively, and it shifts the

computed levels of estimated digital capital quantities up and down, but does not impact the overall

trajectory of the curve. In other words, digital capital quantities follow the same accumulation path,

but assumptions about higher (lower) adjustment costs attenuate (amplify) the increase in price

that occurs around the late 1990's as well as the size of the fall in quantities of digital capital that

occurred after the 2001 technology recession.

   In Figure XIVb, we test how setting initial quantities of digital capital stock to zero affected

the digital capital quantities we computed in later years. As an alternative, we change initial digital

capital values such that instead of being zero, they are proportional to firms' levels of physical

                                                  25
capital, 20% and 40%, respectively. As another alternative, we can seed firms with an initial digital

capital quantity that is randomly drawn from a range between zero and twice the mean digital

capital quantity computed for firms in 1990 and then 1995. All of the data series that result from

using these alternative starting points are supportive of the notion that assumptions about initial

levels of intangible capital do not significantly impact the inferences drawn from subsequent values

due to the convergent nature of the process.

    In sum, although it is difficult to pin down precise values for firms' adjustment costs and digital

capital quantities in the years preceding the years in our panel, Figures XIVa and XIVb support

the argument that estimated digital capital quantities are not particularly sensitive to these two

choices in the recursion model. When these parameters are fixed, the quantity of intangible capital is

revealed by its market value if firms make capital investments in a manner consistent with financial

investment theory. Hall shows that over a long enough panel, this assumption was a reasonable one

for the last half of the twentieth century. It may not describe firms' behaviors on a year-to-year

basis, but it is a reasonable approximation over a longer time period.



5    Conclusions

This paper uses new firm-level data on IT investment to develop panel measures of digital capital

prices and quantities. In particular, building upon earlier work by Hall and others, we compute

firm-level measures of intangible IT capital quantities that allow us to: 1) generate estimates of the

annual growth of this asset, 2) to compare how these growth rates differ among firms of different

value, and 3) analyze how the accumulation of these assets contributes to productivity differences

among firms. We find that by 2016, the stock of digital capital accounted for about 25% of total

capital stock for firms in our sample. Changes in the value of digital capital in the years before and

after the dot-com boom and bust appear to primarily be due to price fluctuations; after the bust,

firms continued to accumulate significant amounts of digital capital while prices varied little. The

most recent technology-related increases in the market value of firms appear to be due to changes

in quantity, not price, as firms accumulate more and more digital capital.

    We find evidence of striking firm-to-firm heterogeneity in digital capital value, with most of

the value concentrated in a small group of superstar firms with market values in the top decile.


                                                  26
Inequality in digital capital among firms is growing as the top firms pull further away from the rest.

Moreover, per-capita digital capital stocks are substantially greater in firms with more educated

workers. These findings are consistent with the emphasis that technology-intensive firms place on

making investments in training and skills.

   Our findings suggest that the higher values the financial markets have assigned to firms with large

digital investments in recent years reflect greater digital capital quantities, rather than simply higher

prices for existing assets. In other words, they reflect genuine improvements to firms' productive

capacity. In fact, we find that digital capital, if included as a separate factor in firm-level production

functions, predicts differences in output and productivity among firms.

   Our estimates of the output elasticity of digital capital suggest that it is several times greater

than the output elasticity of IT capital. Our estimates are broadly consistent with earlier evidence

(Saunders and Brynjolfsson, 2016) that indicates that IT hardware accounts for only about 10%

of total digital investment, with investments in complementary intangibles­that is, digital capital­

accounting for the rest.

   One interpretation of our findings is that translating organizational innovations into produc-

tive capital requires significant investment in organizational re-engineering and skill development.

Therefore, even if firms have the appropriate absorptive capacity, knowledge of how to construct

digital assets will not automatically generate productive digital capital any more than access to the

blueprints of a competitor's plant will directly lead to productive capacity.


References
Autor, D., Dorn, D., Katz, L. F., Patterson, C., and Van Reenen, J. (2020). The fall of the labor
 share and the rise of superstar firms. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135(2):645­709.
Ayyagari, M., Demirguc-Kunt, A., and Maksimovic, V. (2019). The Rise of Star Firms: Intangible
  Capital and Competition. The World Bank.
Baily, M. N. (1981). Productivity and the services of capital and labor. Brookings Papers on
  Economic Activity, 12(1):1­66.
Bartelsman, E. J., Caballero, R. J., and Lyons, R. K. (1994). Customer-and supplier-driven exter-
  nalities. The American Economic Review, 84(4):1075­1084.
Belo, F., Lin, X., and Bazdresch, S. (2014). Labor hiring, investment, and stock return predictability
  in the cross section. Journal of Political Economy, 122(1):129­177.
Bharadwaj, A. S., Bharadwaj, S. G., and Konsynski, B. R. (1999). Information technology effects
  on firm performance as measured by tobin's q. Management science, 45(7):1008­1024.

                                                   27
Black, S. E. and Lynch, L. M. (2001). How to compete: the impact of workplace practices and
  information technology on productivity. Review of Economics and statistics, 83(3):434­445.

Bresnahan, T. F., Brynjolfsson, E., and Hitt, L. M. (2002). Information technology, workplace orga-
  nization, and the demand for skilled labor: Firm-level evidence. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  117(1).

Brynjolfsson, E. and Hitt, L. M. (2000). Beyond computation: Information technology, organiza-
  tional transformation and business performance. Journal of Economic perspectives, 14(4):23­48.

Brynjolfsson, E. and Hitt, L. M. (2003). Computing productivity: Firm-level evidence. Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 85(4):793­808.

Brynjolfsson, E., Hitt, L. M., and Yang, S. (2002). Intangible assets: Computers and organizational
  capital. Brookings papers on economic activity, 2002(1):137­181.

Brynjolfsson, E., Rock, D., and Syverson, C. (2018). The productivity J-curve: How intangibles
  complement general purpose technologies.

Corrado, C., Hulten, C., and Sichel, D. (2009). Intangible capital and US economic growth. Review
  of income and wealth, 55(3):661­685.

Covarrubias, M., Gutiérrez, G., and Philippon, T. (2019). Explaining the rising concentration of us
  industries: Superstars, intangibles, globalization or barriers to entry? In NBER Macroeconomics
  Annual 2019, volume 34. University of Chicago Press.

Crouzet, N. and Eberly, J. (2018). Understanding weak capital investment: The role of market
  concentration and intangibles. In prepared for the Jackson Hole Economic Policy Symposium.

De Loecker, J., Eeckhout, J., and Unger, G. (2020). The rise of market power and the macroeconomic
  implications. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135(2):561­644.

Dewan, S. and Min, C.-k. (1997). The substitution of information technology for other factors of
  production: A firm level analysis. Management Science, 43(12):1660­1675.

Dewan, S., Shi, C., and Gurbaxani, V. (2007). Investigating the risk­return relationship of informa-
  tion technology investment: Firm-level empirical analysis. Management science, 53(12):1829­1842.

Eisfeldt, A. L. and Papanikolaou, D. (2013). Organization capital and the cross-section of expected
  returns. The Journal of Finance, 68(4):1365­1406.

Hall, B. H. (1993). The stock market's valuation of R&D investment during the 1980's. The
  American Economic Review, 83(2):259­264.

Hall, R. E. (2000). E-capital: The link between the stock market and the labor market in the 1990s.
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2000(2):73­102.

Hall, R. E. (2001). The stock market and capital accumulation. American Economic Review,
  91(5):1185­1202.

Hall, R. E. (2018). New evidence on the markup of prices over marginal costs and the role of
  mega-firms in the us economy. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.



                                                28
Hamermesh, D. S. and Pfann, G. A. (1996). Adjustment costs in factor demand. Journal of
  Economic literature, 34(3):1264­1292.

Hayashi, F. (1982). Tobin's marginal q and average q: a neoclassical interpretation. Econometrica,
  (50):213­224.

Holt, C. C., Modigliani, F., Muth, J., and Simon, H. (1960). Planning production, inventories, and
  work force.

Lichtenberg, F. R. (1995). The output contributions of computer equipment and personnel: A
  firm-level analysis. Economics of innovation and new technology, 3(3-4):201­218.

McGrattan, E. R. (2020). Intangible capital and measured productivity. Review of Economic
 Dynamics.

McGrattan, E. R. and Prescott, E. C. (2010). Technology capital and the us current account.
 American Economic Review, 100(4):1493­1522.

Rock, D. (2019). Engineering value: The returns to technological talent and investments in artificial
  intelligence. Unpublished Working Paper.

Saunders, A. and Brynjolfsson, E. (2016). Valuing information technology related intangible assets.
  Mis Quarterly, 40(1).

Sculley, D., Holt, G., Golovin, D., Davydov, E., Phillips, T., Ebner, D., Chaudhary, V., and Young,
  M. (2014). Machine learning: The high interest credit card of technical debt.

Solow, R. M. et al. (1960). Investment and technical progress. Mathematical methods in the social
  sciences, 1:48­93.

Stiroh, K. J. (2002). Information technology and the US productivity revival: what do the industry
  data say? American Economic Review, 92(5):1559­1576.

Tambe, P. (2014). Big data investment, skills, and firm value. Management Science, 60(6):1452­
  1469.

Tambe, P. and Hitt, L. M. (2012a). Now IT's personal: Offshoring and the shifting skill composition
  of the US information technology workforce. Management Science, 58(4):678­695.

Tambe, P. and Hitt, L. M. (2012b). The productivity of information technology investments: New
  evidence from IT labor data. Information Systems Research, 23(3-part-1):599­617.

Van Reenen, J. (2018). Increasing differences between firms: market power and the macro-economy.

Wu, L., Hitt, L., and Lou, B. (2020). Data analytics, innovation, and firm productivity. Management
 Science, 66(5):2017­2039.




                                                 29
 Figure I: Market capitalization of top 5 firms in the S&P 500




Figure Notes: This chart illustrates changes in the market capitalization of the top
5 firms in the S&P 500 as a percent of the total market value of the S&P 500.
The chart was created by Goldman Sachs Global Investment Research and was re-
produced from https://markets.businessinsider.com/news/stocks/sp500-concentration-
large-cap-bad-sign-future-returns-effect-market-2020-4-1029133505, accessed on May 14,
2020.




                                         30
                 Figure II: Price and quantity of capital




Figure Notes: This chart is reproduced from (Hall, 2001). It graphs the solution to
Hall's Quantity Revelation Theorem, which solves for the equilibrium price and quantity
of capital.




                                          31
            Table I: Summary statistics for firm-level measures


Statistic              Mean           St. Dev.        Min           Max             N
Market value       35,042.34        64,248.57       143.06     471,424.40         264
PPE                 6,158.58        12,808.84         3.74     107,010.00         264
Employment             56.74           137.39         0.32       1,800.00         231
Other assets       14,857.04        38,089.26        55.66     397,677.00         264
IT employment       3,197.72         7,631.98        12.71      93,652.23         264
Value added         4,582.25         7,947.51        21.88      58,131.00         231
Capital            10,262.37        22,297.88        11.89     223,252.00         231
Labor               2,396.43         4,323.38        23.99      39,186.00         231
Materials          12,408.07        28,907.59        40.94     244,953.70         231
Log wage bill          18.03             1.49        13.66          22.54         264
Table Notes: This table reports the summary values of key statistics for firms from the
2005 sample year of the panel. Values are collected from the Capital IQ database, except IT
employment measures, which are generated using the LinkedIn database, as described in the
paper and Data appendix. Wage bill measures are computed using BLS occupational wages
and the occupational mix of the firm as computed from the LinkedIn database. Employment
is measured in thousands, and IT employment figures are not scaled. All other variables are
measured in millions.




                                            32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Percent of sample                                                                                                                                                        Percent of sample




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      30




                                                                                                                                                                           Accom                                                                                                                                                                     Accom
                                                                                                                                                                                    modatio                                                                                                                                                                    modatio
                                                                                                                                                                                            n      and Fo                                                                                                                                                                 n and Fo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     od Ser
                                                                                                                                                                                                            od Ser                                                                                                                            Admin,                                           vices
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      vices                                                                                                                             Suppo
                                                                                                                                                                    Admin,
                                                                                                                                                                             Suppo                                                                                                                                                                            rt,   and Was
                                                                                                                                                                                      rt, and                                                                                                                                                                                   te Man
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Waste                                                                                                                                                                                  agemen
                                                                                                                                                                                                       M     anagem                                                                                                                           Agricul
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ture, Fo                                     t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ent                                                                                                                                          restry,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fishing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     and Hun
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Arts, E                                    ting
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Constru                                                                                                                                           nter tain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ction                                                                                                                                            ment, an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     d Recre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ation
                                                                                                                                                                                              Financ
                                                                                                                                                                                                       e and In
                                                                                                                                                                                                                suranc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           e                                                                                                                                                         Constru
                                                                                                                                                                            Health                                                                                                                                                                                                             ction
                                                                                                                                                                                      Care an
                                                                                                                                                                                                  d Socia                                                                                                                                                                 Educatio
                                                                                                                                                                                                            l Assis                                                                                                                                                                  nal Ser
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tance                                                                                                                                                                      vices
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Financ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                e and In
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         suranc
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Informat
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ion                                                                                                                                                                    e




     firms in the balanced panel cross section.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Health
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Care an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           d Socia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     l Assis
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Manufac                                                                                                                                                                            tance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  turin     g




33
                                                                                                                                                               Mining,
                                                                                                                                                                         Quarryi
                                                                                                                                                                                  ng, and                                                                                                                                                                                             Informat
                                                                                                                                                                                               Oil and                                                                                                                                                                                           ion
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Gas Ext
                                                                                                                                                                Other S                                           ra  ction
                                                                                                                                                                         ervices                                                                                                                                                         Mining,                                 Manufac
                                                                                                                                                                                   (excep                                                                                                                                                                                                    turing
                                                                                                                                                                                          tP     ublic A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Quarryi
                                                                                                                                                                                                         dm   inistratio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ng, and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Oil and
                                                                                                                                                               Profess                                                   n)                                                                                                               Other S                              Gas Ext
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ra
                                                                                                                                                                      ional, S                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ction




                                                                                                                                        NAICS classification
                                                                                                                                                                                 cientific
                                                                                                                                                                                          ,   and Te                                                                                                              NAICS classification             ervices
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (excep
                                                                                                                                                                                                       chnica                                                                                                                                                       tP    ublic A
                                                                                                                                                                                                              l Service                                                                                                                                                           dm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            s                                                                                                            Profess
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ional, S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       inistratio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  n)
                                                                                                                                                                          Real E                                                                                                                                                                          cientific
                                                                                                                                                                                    state an                                                                                                                                                                       , and Te
                                                                                                                                                                                                d Renta
                                                                                                                                                                                                           l and Le                                                                                                                                                           chnica
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       l Service
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      asing                                                                                                                         Real E                                           s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              state an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          d Renta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  l and Le
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Retail Tr                                                                                                                                                                          asing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ade
                                                                                                                                                                              Transp
                                                                                                                                                                                     or




                                                                                               (b) NAICS industries in balanced panel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Retail Tr
                                                                                                                                                                                              tation an                                                                                                                                                                                       ade
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (a) NAICS industries in unbalanced panel


                                                                                                                                                                                                         d Wareh                                                                                                                                         Transp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ousing                                                                                                                                       or   tation an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 d Wareh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ousing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Utilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Utilities
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Wholesa                                                                                                                                                                  Wholesa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  le Trad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           e                                                                                                                                                               le Trad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e




     level). There are a total of 5,215 firms in the unbalanced panel cross section and 277
     tions of the unbalanced and balanced panels over major NAICS industry codes (2 digit
     Figure Notes: These charts illustrate the distributions of firms in the 2005 cross sec-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Figure III: NAICS industry distributions of balanced and unbalanced panels
   Figure IV: Year-to-year measures of firms' IT employment


                                                                                                                                                                           q    q
                                                                                                                                                                       q


                                                              4000
      Mean number of IT workers for firms in balanced panel




                                                                                                                                                                   q




                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                              3000                                                                             q   q
                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                        q       q

                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                          q                     q
                                                                                     q
                                                                                 q              q   q   q
                                                                             q                              q
                                                                     q   q
                                                              2000




                                                              1000




                                                                 0


                                                                                         1990                                       2000                                       2010
                                                                                                                                     Year

                                                                                                Data source             q   Resume bank 1                  Resume bank 2




Figure Notes: This chart illustrates changes in measures of IT employment using data
from the two different resumé banks where normalized quantities from the two different
resumé banks are denoted with the two sequences of plotted points. The height of the
gray bar indicates a synthetic measure that combines the two different data sources into
a single IT employment sequence.




                                                                                                                                34
                    Table II: Regressions of assets on market value using the unbalanced panel


                                                                      DV: Market Value
                             OLS                 OLS                 OLS            OLS                      FE                  OLS
                             (1)                 (2)                  (3)                 (4)                 (5)                 (6)
     PPE                      1.667               1.833               1.606               1.527               1.303               1.531
                             (0.133)             (0.157)             (0.141)             (0.119)             (0.134)             (0.126)
     Other assets             1.084               1.057               1.049               1.004               0.998               1.004
                             (0.128)             (0.018)             (0.131)             (0.006)             (0.006)             (0.006)
     IT capital              12.226                                 -1.851
                             (8.040)                                (10.816)
     IT labor                                     8.623              17.702              14.116               9.378
                                                 (4.789)             (9.694)             (4.102)             (3.408)
     IT wage bill                                                                                                                12.103




35
                                                                                                                                  (5.066)
     Year FE                 Yes                  Yes                Yes                  Yes                Yes                  Yes
     Firm FE                 No                   No                 No                   No                 Yes                   No
     Industry FE             Yes                  Yes                Yes                  Yes                 No                  Yes
     Observations           2,957               16,722              2,922               84,045              84,045              65,238
     R2                     0.736                0.939              0.739                0.990              0.995                0.990
     Table Notes: This table reports results from the regression M Vit = P P Eit + OASSETit + ITit + it + it . M V is market value,
     P P E is property, plant, and equipment, IT is IT capital, OASSET is all other assets, i indexes the firm, t indexes the year, and 
     is a vector of fixed effects that can include year, industry, or firm as indicated in the table. It uses data from the unbalanced panel.
     Column (1) is an OLS regression using the IT capital measures with the sample restricted to the years 1987-1998. Column (2) is
     an OLS regression using the IT employment measures with the sample restricted to the years 1987-1998. Column (3) is an OLS
     regression using the IT capital and IT employment measures with the full sample for the years 1987-1998 for which both measures
     are available. Column (4) uses the IT employment measures for the full sample of years. Column (5) adds firm fixed effects to the
     specification used in column (4). Column (6) uses firm-level IT occupational mix from LinkedIn along with BLS salary data to
     translate IT labor to a wage bill. Where included, industry fixed-effects are included at the two-digit NAICS level. Standard errors
     are clustered on firm and shown in parentheses, with *, **, and *** denoting significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
                     Table III: Regressions of assets on market value using the balanced panel


                                                                    DV: Market Value
                            OLS                OLS                 OLS            OLS                     FE                 OLS
                             (1)                (2)                 (3)                (4)                (5)                 (6)
                                                                                                                 
     PPE                     1.651               1.453              1.630              1.495               1.272              1.529
                            (0.128)             (0.152)            (0.126)            (0.232)             (0.207)            (0.238)
     Other assets            0.990               1.120              0.952              1.258               1.328              1.269
                            (0.174)             (0.173)            (0.177)            (0.189)             (0.254)            (0.189)
     IT capital              8.580                                -0.265
                            (8.825)                               (10.409)
     IT labor                                    3.533              3.170              9.099              10.381
                                                (1.489)            (3.139)            (2.357)             (3.736)
     IT wage bill                                                                                                            12.215




36
                                                                                                                              (3.397)
     Year FE                Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes
     Firm FE                No                  No                 No                  No                 Yes                  No
     Industry FE            Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                No                  Yes
     Observations          1,604               3,017              1,603               8,521              8,521               5,540
     R2                    0.724               0.760              0.725               0.814              0.902               0.808
     Table notes: This table reports results from the regression M Vit = P P Eit + OASSETit + ITit + it . M V is market value, P P E
     is property, plant, and equipment, IT is IT capital, and OASSET is all other assets. It uses data from the balanced panel. Column
     (1) is an OLS regression using the IT capital measures with the sample restricted to the years 1987-1998. Column (2) is an OLS
     regression using the IT employment measures with the sample restricted to the years 1987-1998. Column (3) is an OLS regression
     using the IT capital and IT employment measures with the full sample for the years 1987-1998 for which both measures are available.
     Column (4) uses the IT employment measures for the full sample of years. Column (5) adds firm fixed effects to the specification
     used in column (4). Column (6) uses firm-level IT occupational mix from LinkedIn along with BLS salary data to translate IT labor
     to a wage bill. Industry fixed-effects are included at the two-digit NAICS level. Standard errors are clustered on firm and shown in
     parentheses, with *, **, and *** denoting significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
Figure V: IT coefficients from year-to-year market value regressions

                                4




                                3
       IT coefficient ( IT )




                                2




                                1




                                0




                               -1

                                    1990   2000                 2010
                                              Year

 Figure Notes: This chart plots the estimated IT coefficient (IT ) from the regression
 M Vit = P P E P P Eit + OA OAit + IT ITit + it + it using a rolling window around each
 focal year [-1, +1], and where i indexes the firm and t indexes the year.  is a vector
 of fixed effects that include industry and year. Standard errors are clustered at the firm
 level. The shaded region represents the standard error band.




                                            37
                                      Figure VI: Digital capital market value




                               5000
       Digital capital value




                               2500




                                  0




                                           1990           2000          2010
                                                             Year

Figure Notes: This chart illustrates average values of digital capital for the firms in our
balanced panel. The market value of digital capital is computed in two steps. First, we
estimate the regression M Vit = P P E P P Eit + OA OAit + IT ITit + it using a rolling
window around each focal year. Then, the coefficient IT for each firm is multiplied
by the firm's IT employment to compute the component of its market value that is
correlated with the firm's IT assets.




                                                        38
                                         Figure VII: Digital capital prices

                              3




                              2
      Digital capital price




                              1




                              0

                                  1990              2000              2010
                                                           Year

Figure Notes: This chart illustrates average prices for digital capital for firms in the
balanced panel. The price of digital capital for each firm-year is computed by solving
equations 1 and 2 in the main text, and the index in the chart above is computed by
averaging across firms in each year.




                                                           39
                                           Figure VIII: Digital capital quantities




                                    4000
       Digital capital quantities




                                    2000




                                       0




                                                1990           2000          2010
                                                                  Year

Figure Notes: This chart illustrates average quantities of digital capital for firms in the
balanced panel. The average quantity of digital capital for each firm-year is computed by
solving equations 1 and 2 in the main text, and the index in the chart above is computed
by averaging across firms in each year.




                                                             40
Figure IX: Comparison of changes in PPE and digital capital quantities
          Digital capital and PPE quantities




                                               10000




                                                5000




                                                   0

                                                       1990                 2000                     2010
                                                                            Year

                                                              Asset type     Digital capital   PPE




   Figure Notes: This chart compares year-on-year accumulation of quantities of digital
   capital with that of Property, Plant, and Equipment (PPE) for the balanced panel. The
   average quantity of digital capital for all firms in a year is computed by solving equations
   1 and 2 in the main text. Average PPE quantities for firms are computed from data from
   Capital IQ.




                                                                       41
 Figure X: Digital capital prices and quantities computed by market value quantiles
                                                                                                                                              12000
                               2.5




                               2.0                                                                                                             9000




                                                                                                                 Digital capital quantities
       Digital capital price




                               1.5                                                                                                             6000




                               1.0                                                                                                             3000




                               0.5                                                                                                                0

                                     1990                      2000                        2010                                                          1990               2000                    2010
                                                                      Year                                                                                                     Year

                                            Quartile    0% - 25%   25% - 50%   50% - 75%     75% - 100%                                               Quartile   0% - 25%   25% - 50%   50% - 75%     75% - 100%




   (a) Digital capital prices by market value                                                              (b) Digital capital quantities by market value
                                                                                                           (25%)
                               20000




                               15000                                                                                                          20000
                                                                                                                 Digital capital quantities
       ITIC quantities




                               10000


                                                                                                                                              10000


                                5000




                                     0                                                                                                            0

                                                 1990                 2000                  2010                                                         1990               2000                    2010
                                                                        Year                                                                                                   Year

(c) Digital capital quantities by market value (d) Digital capital quantities by market value
(10%)                                          (5%)
Figure Notes: These charts illustrate prices and quantities of digital capital where firms are separated into quantiles
according to their market values at the end of the panel. Annual quantities are computed by solving equations 1 and
2. Subfigure (a) shows prices by quartile and (b) shows quantities by quartile. Subfigure (c) shows quantities with
firms separated into ten quantiles. Subfigure (d) shows quantities with firms separated into twenty quantiles. The
darker line in each chart is the top quantile of firms in terms of market value.




                                                                                                          42
 Figure XI: Digital capital quantities for the unbalanced panel


                                   1500
      Digital capital quantities




                                   1000




                                    500




                                      0

                                                   1990                 2000                   2010
                                                                            Year
                                                    1% - 10%    21% - 30%     41%-50%     61% - 70%   81% - 90%
                                          Decile
                                                    11% - 20%   31% - 40%     51% - 60%   71% - 80%   91%-100%




Figure Notes: This chart illustrates average quantities of digital capital for firms by
market value decile in the unbalanced panel. The average quantity of digital capital for
each firm-year is computed by solving equations 1 and 2 in the main text and then
averaged across firms in each year. The darker line is the top decile group in terms of
market value.




                                                                      43
                      Figure XII: Per capita values of factors separated by market value deciles

                                                  120
                                                                                                                                                                     600
        Digital capital quantities per employee




                                                                                                                                         Other assets per employee
                                                   80
                                                                                                                                                                     400




                                                   40
                                                                                                                                                                     200




                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                  1990                  2000                   2010                                                                         1990                 2000                       2010
                                                                                             Year                                                                                                                     Year
                                                                   1% - 10%     21% - 30%      41%-50%      61% - 70%   81% - 90%                                                            1% - 10%     21% - 30%      41%-50%         61% - 70%    81% - 90%
                                                         Decile                                                                                                                   Decile
                                                                   11% - 20%    31% - 40%      51% - 60%    71% - 80%   91%-100%                                                             11% - 20%    31% - 40%      51% - 60%       71% - 80%    91%-100%




                                                                  (a) Digital capital                                                                                                         (b) Other assets

                                                                                                                                                                            200
                                                  1500
        PPE quantities per employee




                                                                                                                                                                            150
                                                                                                                                                    IT labor per employee




                                                  1000


                                                                                                                                                                            100




                                                   500
                                                                                                                                                                             50




                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                    0
                                                                  1990                  2000                   2010                                                                         1990                      2000                   2010
                                                                                             Year                                                                                                                      Year
                                                                    1% - 10%     21% - 30%      41%-50%     61% - 70%   81% - 90%                                                             1% - 10%     21% - 30%         41%-50%      61% - 70%    81% - 90%
                                                         Decile                                                                                                                    Decile
                                                                    11% - 20%    31% - 40%      51% - 60%   71% - 80%   91%-100%                                                              11% - 20%    31% - 40%         51% - 60%    71% - 80%    91%-100%




                                                                                (c) PPE                                                                                                             (d) IT labor
Figure Notes: These charts illustrate per capita quantities of different assets where firms are separated into deciles
according to their 2016 market values. Digital capital quantities for each year are computed by solving equations 1
and 2. Subfigure (a) illustrates digital capital quantities, subfigure (b) shows other assets (total assets minus physical
capital, including receivables, inventories, cash, and other accounting assets), subfigure (c) shows Property, Plant,
and Equipment, and subfigure (d) shows IT labor. The darker line in each chart is the top quantile of firms in terms
of market value.




                                                                                                                                    44
   Figure XIII: Digital capital concentration separated by capital type and industry

                                                                                                                                                             1.00




                             0.8


                                                                                                                                                             0.75
       Gini coefficient




                                                                                                                                          Gini coefficient
                             0.7                                                                                                                             0.50




                                                                                                                                                             0.25


                             0.6




                                                                                                                                                             0.00


                                           1995            2000                     2005              2010                2015                                                1995             2000                     2005                  2010               2015
                                                                                    Year                                                                                                                                Year

                                                  Capital type    Digital capital          MV   Other assets        PPE                                                              Capital type     Digital Capital          MV       Other assets       PPE




                                    (a) Digital capital concentration                                                                 (b) Digital capital per capita concentration

                                                                                                                                                                       1.00

                                    6000




                                                                                                                                                                       0.75
       Digital capital quantities




                                    4000
                                                                                                                                                    Gini coefficient




                                                                                                                                                                       0.50




                                    2000

                                                                                                                                                                       0.25




                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                       0.00

                                                    1990                        2000                           2010                                                                   2000                    2005                         2010                  2015
                                                                                     Year                                                                                                                                year

                                                            NAICS 1-digit code              2   3      4        5                                                                             NAICS 1-digit code               2    3         4        5




   (c) Digital capital quantities by industry                                                                                         (d) Digital capital concentration by industry
Figure Notes: These charts illustrate changes in digital capital concentration over time. Subfigure (a) shows digital
capital concentration and (b) shows concentration in digital capital per capita. Subfigure (c) charts digital capital by
industry, where firms are placed in industries at the 1 digit NAICS level, and only quantities from the four industries
with the largest number of firms in the sample are shown. Subfigure (d) shows capital concentration by the same
industry categories used in (c).




                                                                                                                                 45
                                              Table IV: Regressions of digital capital on productivity


                                                                                     DV: Log(Value Added)
                                    OLS                 OLS                 OLS              OLS                   OLS                  FE                  FE
                                     (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)                (5)                 (6)                 (7)
                                                                                                                                               
     Log(Non-IT capital)              0.259              0.250               0.259               0.290               0.242              0.402               0.394
                                     (0.027)            (0.025)             (0.035)             (0.045)             (0.025)            (0.113)             (0.109)
     Log(Labor)                       0.672              0.662               0.587               0.592               0.646              0.435               0.429
                                     (0.044)            (0.047)             (0.097)             (0.112)             (0.048)            (0.139)             (0.138)
     Log(IT capital)                  0.037              0.031               0.031               0.018               0.015              0.026               0.027
                                     (0.017)            (0.015)             (0.026)             (0.023)             (0.014)            (0.013)             (0.013)
     Log(DC)                                             0.034               0.093               0.077               0.022                                  0.023
                                                        (0.016)             (0.049)             (0.047)             (0.016)                                (0.012)
     Log(R&D)                                                                                                        0.064




46
                                                                                                                    (0.017)
     R&D reported?                                                                                                 -0.346
                                                                                                                    (0.101)
     Year FE                         Yes                 Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                Yes
     Industry FE                     Yes                 Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                 No                 No
     Firm FE                         No                  No                  No                 No                   No                 Yes                Yes
     Observations                   1,827               1,827                610                610                1,827               1,827              1,827
     R2                             0.951               0.952               0.926              0.932               0.954               0.985              0.985
     Table Notes: This table reports results from the regression Log (V A)it = Log (K )it + Log (L)it + Log (IT )it + Log (DC )it + it . VA is value added (output
     minus materials), K is capital, L is labor, IT is IT capital, and DC is digital capital. Column (1) is the baseline regression on the full set of observations for
     which the CITDB IT capital data are available. Column (2) includes the computed digital capital stock measures. Column (3) restricts the sample to the
     years 1997 to 2000 and column (4) uses finer industry controls (two-digit instead of one-digit NAICS industry controls). Column (5) includes measures of
     R&D as well as measures of whether or not R&D is reported. Columns (6) and (7) include firm fixed-effects. Standard errors are shown in parentheses and
     are clustered on firm with *, **, and *** denoting significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
    Table V: Relationship between IT, human capital, and digital capital


                                                            Log(DC/e)
                                 OLS                  OLS                FE                FE
                                  (1)                 (2)                (3)               (4)
                                                            
Log(K/e)                           0.200              0.187              0.255             0.259
                                  (0.034)            (0.034)            (0.171)           (0.172)
Log(IT/e)                          0.703              0.350              0.519             0.194
                                  (0.035)            (0.118)            (0.050)           (0.118)
Log(HK/e)                        -0.103             -0.236              -0.399           -0.397
                                  (0.080)            (0.058)            (0.082)           (0.076)
Log(IT/e)×Log(HK/e)                                   0.048                                0.048
                                                     (0.015)                              (0.016)
Year FE                           Yes                Yes                 Yes              Yes
Industry FE                       Yes                Yes                 No                No
Firm FE                           No                  No                 Yes              Yes
Observations                     1,805              1,805               1,805            1,805
R2                               0.656              0.661               0.852            0.853
Table notes: This table reports results from the regression Log (DC/e)it = Log (K/e)it +
Log (HK/e)it + Log (IT /e)it + (Log (HK/e)it × Log (IT /e)it ) + it . All columns test the per capita
relationships between HK and IT investment and digital capital quantities and include year fixed-
effects. Columns (1) and (2) also include two-digit NAICS industry controls but they do not include
firm-fixed effects. Columns (3) and (4) add firm fixed-effects to the regressions. Standard errors are
clustered on firm and shown in parentheses with *, **, and *** denoting significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% level, respectively.




                                                 47
   Table VI: Productivity regressions with lagged digital capital


                                         DV: Log(Value Added)
                     0 years             1 year         2 years                3 years
                        (1)                (2)                (3)                 (4)
Log(Capital)           0.245                0.248              0.249              0.243
                      (0.055)              (0.056)            (0.057)            (0.060)
Log(Labor)             0.657                0.660              0.661              0.659
                      (0.076)              (0.076)            (0.076)            (0.080)
Log(DC)                 0.019               0.013              0.010              0.010
                      (0.009)              (0.006)            (0.005)            (0.005)
Year FE                Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes
Firm FE                Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes
Observations          4,167               4,166              4,166              3,976
R2                    0.987               0.987              0.987              0.987
Table Notes: This table reports results from the regression Log (V A)it = Log (K )it +
Log (L)it + Log (DC )i,t-n + it where n varies between 0 and 3 years. V A is value added
(output minus materials), K is capital, L is labor, and DC is digital capital lagged by the
number of years specified in the column header. The first column is a regression of value
added on the production factors in that year, the second column is a regression of value
added on contemporaneous capital and labor and the digital capital stocks in the prior
year, the third column is a regression of value added on contemporaneous capital and labor
and digital capital stocks from two years prior, and the last column is a regression of value
added on contemporaneous capital and labor and the digital capital stocks from three years
prior. All four columns include fixed effects for firm and year. Standard errors are shown in
parentheses and are clustered on firm with *, **, and *** denoting significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                             48
Table VII: Long-differenced estimates of digital capital on productivity


            Year diffs       Year controls       Ind+Year controls          Sample size
                  1              0.005                   0.005                   3790
                                (0.004)                 (0.004)
                  2              0.008                   0.008                   3543
                                (0.005)                 (0.005)
                  3              0.013                   0.012                   3312
                                (0.006)                 (0.006)
                  4              0.014                   0.012                   3078
                                (0.007)                 (0.007)
                  5              0.014                   0.013                   2852
                                (0.008)                 (0.008)
                  6              0.017                   0.015                   2727
                                (0.009)                 (0.009)
                  7              0.021                   0.019                   2507
                                (0.012)                 (0.012)
                  8              0.028                   0.026                   2298
                                (0.012)                 (0.012)
                  9              0.024                   0.021                   2083
                                 (0.01)                  (0.01)
                 10              0.026                   0.022                   1869
                                (0.011)                 (0.011)
   Table Notes: This table reports estimates from long-differenced regressions of digi-
   tal capital and other factors on productivity. The estimated equation is (log (V A)i,t -
   log (V A)i,t-n ) = (log (K )i,t - log (K )i,t-n ) + (log (L)i,t - log (L)i,t-n ) + (log (DC )i,t -
   log (DC )i,t-n ) +  + it . V A is value added (output minus materials), K is capital, L
   is labor, and DC is digital capital, n is the difference length, which varies from 1 to 10
   years, and  is a vector of dummy variables. The first column indicates the difference
   length in years. The second column reports the coefficient estimate on the differenced
   log digital capital measure when the regression equation includes dummy variables for
   year. The third column reports results when the regression equation includes both year
   and two-digit NAICS industry variables. The fourth column reports how sample size
   changes as the difference lengths are increased. Standard errors are clustered on firm
   with *, **, and *** denoting significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.




                                                  49
                                    Figure XIV: Sensitivity to assumptions about model parameter values
                                                                                                                4000
                             4000




                                                                                                                3000
                             3000
Digital capital quantities




                                                                                   Digital capital quantities



                                                                                                                2000
                             2000




                             1000                                                                               1000




                               0                                                                                  0

                                     1990        2000                  2010                                                          1990                  2000                 2010
                                                      Year                                                                                                   Year
                                               =1.5      =3.0   =6.0                                               Initial Digital Capital   No init   PPE 20%      PPE 40%   Random, 1990   Random, 1995




                                      (a) Adjustment costs ()                                                          (b) Firms' initial digital capital levels
Figure Notes: These charts perturb two parameters of the model used to compute digital capital quantities. Panel
(a) alters values of , the adjustment cost parameter used in equation 7. In the figure, the  parameter is set to three
different values: 1.5, 3.0, and 6.0. Panel (b) alters firms' starting values of digital capital. The chart plots quantities
with initial digital capital values set to five different levels: i) zero, ii) 20% of PPE, iii) 40% of PPE, iv) a value that
was randomly chosen from between zero and twice the value of the firm mean quantities in 1990, and v) a value
randomly chosen from between zero and twice the value of firms' mean quantities in 1995.




                                                                              50
A         Data Appendix for Digital Capital and Superstar Firms
A.1        Data Descriptions

Three of the datasets used in this paper are 1) online resume data from LinkedIn provided via the
Economic Graph Research (EGR) team, 2) Standard and Poor's Compustat-Capital IQ Database
(Compustat) for publicly traded corporate financial data, and 3) the Bureau of Labor Statistics
Occupational Employment Survey (BLS OES). Access to LinkedIn's internal databases and tax-
onomies was arranged as part of an ongoing research partnership between the authors and the EGR
team. Many of the taxonomies and standardization tools, in addition to the data, are proprietary to
LinkedIn. We are grateful to the LinkedIn EGR team for supporting this work, providing valuable
feedback, and making available the data to make our analyses possible.
Accessing Compustat is possible through Wharton Research Data Services (WRDS). WRDS is
available here: https://wrds-www.wharton.upenn.edu/. To get access to WRDS data, you will need
to register for an account through your institution or otherwise.13
The BLS OES data can be accessed here: https://www.bls.gov/oes/tables.htm. These datasets detail
employment counts and salary estimates by occupation. Estimates are available for the entire U.S.
economy, by industry, and by region.


A.1.1       Standard and Poor's Compustat-Capital IQ Database

Variables Used and Construction The Compustat items used in this analysis include:

      ·   gvkey (firm identifier)
      ·   ticker symbol (firm identifier)
      ·   NAICS (NAICS industry code)
      ·   SIC (SIC industry code - used for years where NAICS was not available in BLS OES)
      ·   fyear (reporting year)
      ·   at (total assets)
      ·   prcc_c (share price)
      ·   csho (common shares outstanding)
      ·   che (cash and equivalents)
      ·   ceq (book value of common equity)
      ·   ppegt (gross property, plant, and equipment)
      ·   intan (book value of intangible assets)
      ·   gdwl (goodwill)
      ·   emp (employee count in thousands)

These financial reporting items are used to construct measures of market value and to inform our
measures of employment in Compustat firms (including by industry and occupation).


A.1.2       Bureau of Labor Statistics Occupational Employment Survey (BLS OES)

 13
      Account registration is available at: https://wrds-web.wharton.upenn.edu/wrds/?register.


                                                         51
Variables Used and Construction First we combine and standardize BLS OES data across
years. The BLS OES data we use for this come from the industry-level estimates of employment
and salary by 2-digit SIC code (1999 and 2000) and by 3-digit NAICS code (2001-2017) for each
of the 6-digit Standard Occupational Classification System (SOC) Codes. These data constitute a
panel of employment (TOT_EMP) and average annual salary (A_MEAN) by detailed occupation
from 2001-2017 for the entire U.S. economy.
Not all occupations are represented in all industries. Further, the sum of employment in "detailed"
categories adds up to less than 100% of the employment in a given 3-digit NAICS group. We estimate
the residual percentage by proportionally allocating workers to detailed employment categories,
applying the employment mixture of the 2-digit NAICS group to which the 3-digit industry belongs.
For example, if 96.36% of the employment in NAICS 237 (heavy and civil engineering construction)
is represented by occupations with a "detailed" designation in the BLS OES, the residual 3.64% of
total employment will be allocated proportionately to detailed occupational groupings from NAICS
23 (construction). We then add these additional counts to our estimates by detailed SOC code in
NAICS 237 such that the total adds to 100%. This gives us an estimate of the U.S. economy's
occupational composition in all major industries.


Adjustment to match Compustat The industrial composition of the entire U.S. economy
differs from that of publicly listed corporations. Estimating employment mixes in a specific company
using the industrial composition data from the BLS OES is somewhat noisy. However, by applying
the employment-weighted Compustat industrial composition (using EMP and NAICS/SIC) to the
BLS OES, we build measures of the employment counts and average salaries of all Compustat firms
in aggregate as a subset of the economy. Note that this assumes the international labor composition
of firms in Compustat is roughly similar to their employment mix in the U.S. We have made this
occupation composition constancy assumption, because detailed international data is difficult to
obtain and link to our other data sources.
This aggregated Compustat employment and salary data by occupation-year serves as our main
benchmark for evaluating the overall coverage and consistency of the LinkedIn profile data. The SOC
Codes are crosswalked directly to a LinkedIn employment group, then we calculate total employment
and weighted average salaries by LinkedIn Occupation type. These total employment and weighted
average salaries by LinkedIn Occupation type represent the entirety of Compustat firms, but not
the entire economy. This is how we build our measure of the expected total employment of a
given LinkedIn Occupation type for a given year in all of Compustat. We compare this measure
by occupation-year to counts of profiles reported on LinkedIn within an occupation-year to build a
picture of LinkedIn's reach for different types of workers.
Note also that some firms do not report EMP or instead there are coding errors in the EMP field.
In the case that EMP is unreported or a firm reports fewer than 100 employees, we replace EMP
with a predicted value from a regression procedure described in a section below.


A.1.3   LinkedIn

Variables Used and Construction LinkedIn's profile database has over 180 million profile
records. Records consist of a job title and employer and time of employment at a minimum, though
many profiles have data on skills, educational achievements, qualifications, and other resume data.
We build a panel of firm-occupation-year tuples using a set of standardized occupations and firms


                                                52
available via our research partners on the LinkedIn Economic Graph Research (EGR) Team.


Standardizing job titles and firms The raw input text job titles for occupations throughout
the global economy vary considerably, even if the work within some groupings of titles is relatively
similar. We apply LinkedIn's internal taxonomy to aggregate profile-level employment classifications
into standardized groups. This taxonomy is hierarchical; some levels have as many as 20,000 types
of occupations, while higher levels (e.g., organizational functional groups) are fewer in number.
We map the level of the taxonomy with the greatest similarity to the 6-Digit SOC Code to a set
of aggregated categories such that each SOC Code can be directly crosswalked to an aggregated
category of LinkedIn occupations (many-to-one). In our final analysis, we have 136 manually con-
structed unique aggregated LinkedIn categories. The many-to-one construction makes adjusting for
LinkedIn's dynamic coverage of the economy over time more straightforward. Prevalence of some of
these aggregated LinkedIn categories is detailed below.
For standardizing firms to link Compustat-Capital IQ to LinkedIn records, we apply the internal
standardization tools created by LinkedIn matching corporate records to ticker symbols. For addi-
tional matches where a standardized linkage was not present, we employed a mixture of fuzzy string
matching on firm names and corporate weburl identifiers combined with a manual checking process.
This combination of techniques, while subject to some matching error, enabled us to capture merg-
ers and acquisitions and increase the relevant sample size. The number of publicly traded firms is
declining over time for our sample, but LinkedIn's coverage of the overall economy is growing faster
than this decline. This growth partially offsets downward trends in overall employment from the
Great Recession in 2008-2009. Our match count somewhat declines from 2015 to 2017, leading to
a modest drop in employee counts. These time-varying macroeconomic changes impacting all firms
are one of the primary reasons we include time-period fixed effects in most specifications.


Occupation counts We have restricted our analysis to firms present in Standard and Poor's
Compustat-Capital IQ database. These firms are well represented on LinkedIn, particularly in the
years from 1999 to the present. While LinkedIn did not exist as early as 1999, many users have
populated their profile data going back into the late 1990s. Position record counts on LinkedIn
within year have climbed steadily over the sample period. Our LinkedIn sample goes until 2017.
Coverage on LinkedIn is not uniform across occupations, firms, or years. Since this variation in
coverage and incentives to report employment poses an empirical challenge for our results, our
analyses deploy calculated "derived" counts of workers in different occupation groupings (especially
IT-related occupations). "Derived" counts refer to coverage-normalized counts given the propensity
for a worker in a particular occupation group at a specific firm in a given year to report their
employment on the LinkedIn platform.


Inferring firm-level employment and coverage LinkedIn's coverage of Compustat firms varies
across a number of factors in ways that might affect our analysis. We therefore undertake a number
of adjustments to build more accurate measures. LinkedIn position records differ markedly in their
presence on the platform conditional on the time they were active, the firm or organization linked
to the worker, and the worker's occupation. We build a firm-occupation-year coverage ratio to build
a mapping from the observed LinkedIn profile record counts at each employer in each year of our
Compustat sample. The first step is on average checking what an additional LinkedIn profile would
suggest about the overall employment in a firm-year. We regress the Compustat EMP variable on


                                                53
                                               Figure A.1: LinkedIn Employment Records for Compustat Firms
                                                                                                Total Employee Count in Compustat Firms



                                            15000
               in Compustat Firms (1000s)
                  Total Employee Count




                                            10000




                                             5000




                                                0

                                                    1999   2000    2001    2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015   2016   2017
                                                                                                                     Year



LinkedIn profile records for a few different simple specifications in the table below.

                            Table A.1: Prediction of Compustat EMP from LinkedIn Profile Records


                                                                          (1)                                 (2)                                  (3)                                     (4)
Total Assets                                                           0.00004                                 0.00004                              0.00004                                 0.00003  
                                                                      (0.0000278)                             (0.0000187)                          (0.0000146)                             (0.0000083)
LinkedIn Worker Count                                                  0.00200                                 0.00192                              0.00190                                 0.00145  
                                                                      (0.0005717)                             (0.0004699)                          (0.0004729)                             (0.0003746)
NAICS2-Year FE
NAICS3-Year FE
NAICS4-Year FE
Firm and Year FE
R2                                                                      .3243493                                .3897643                                .4217879                             .9414679
N                                                                 53,699                               53,607                               52,767                                  53,657
                                                                                                                                                                                             
Note:                                                                                                                                                               p<0.1;      p<0.05;          p<0.01
Table Notes: Results are from regressions of the EMP variable (measured in thousands) in Compustat-CapitalIQ's
North America Annual Firm Financials database on the Total Assets variable and author-constructed aggregate
worker counts from LinkedIn. Specifications (1)-(3) include 2, 3, and 4 digit NAICS code fixed effects by firm interacted
with a set of year fixed effects. Specification (4) has firm and year fixed effects. The estimates are qualitatively similar:
adjusting for total assets and these fixed effects, an additional LinkedIn profile in a Compustat firm predicts an
additional 1.45 to 2.0 employees reported in Compustat-CapitalIQ (coefficients are in thousands of employees). Our
adjustments in the main results use specification (3). Occasionally EMP is not well-populated in Compustat. In the
case that EMP is missing or less than 100 employees, we replace EMP with the predicted EMP from this regression.

Since not all Compustat firms have EMP populated, we can fill in the missing firms' data with a
predictive model. We select specification (3) from the table above because it allows for granular
industry-year variation. On average, each additional LinkedIn position record in a firm over the
entire sample period is correlated with another 1.9 employees recorded in the Compustat EMP
field. This coverage, however, hides considerable heterogeneity across years, firms, and occupations.
LinkedIn's representation in Compustat firms improves considerably from 2000 to 2017. Below are


                                                                                                              54
                               Figure A.2: Comparing LinkedIn and Compustat Employment
                                    Histogram of Firm-Level Ratios for 2002:                                                            Histogram of Firm-Level Ratios for 2007:
                                LinkedIn Total Count / Compustat Employee Count                                                     LinkedIn Total Count / Compustat Employee Count

            150                                                                                                  100




                                                                                                                  75

            100
    Count




                                                                                                         Count
                                                                                                                  50




             50

                                                                                                                  25




             0                                                                                                     0

                   0.0    0.5                        1.0                          1.5         2.0                       0.0   0.5                       1.0                       1.5       2.0
                                 Coverage Ratio Using Compustat EMP                                                                  Coverage Ratio Using Compustat EMP


                                        (a) 2002                                                                                           (b) 2007
                                    Histogram of Firm-Level Ratios for 2012:                                                            Histogram of Firm-Level Ratios for 2017:
                                LinkedIn Total Count / Compustat Employee Count                                                     LinkedIn Total Count / Compustat Employee Count

                                                                                                                 60




            60



                                                                                                                 40
    Count




                                                                                                         Count
            40




                                                                                                                 20

            20




             0                                                                                                    0

                  0.0    0.5                       1.0                      1.5         2.0                            0.0    0.5                        1.0                          1.5    2.0
                                Coverage Ratio Using Compustat EMP                                                                  Coverage Ratio Using Compustat EMP


                                        (c) 2012                                                                                           (d) 2017



histograms of firm-level average coverage (LinkedIn profile counts divided by Compustat EMP where
populated) for 2002, 2007, 2012, and 2017. The mean coverage expands each year.
Some firms have more employees recorded in LinkedIn than reported in Compustat. Part of this
reflects occupational mixes at the firm level. Many Compustat employers hire large quantities of
contractors who will report working at their client firm, especially if the client firm is more prestigious
than the contracting employer. On the other hand, worker composition can affect the overall coverage
of LinkedIn by firm. Some occupations are less likely to populate profile information than subothers.
This mixture of issues poses a challenge that the BLS OES survey can help solve. Following the
adjustment of the BLS OES occupation composition by industry to match Compustat's industry-
level composition, we know the approximate composition of workers by occupation-year in aggregate
across Compustat (maintaining the assumptions described above as well). With the Compustat
EMP variable and regression prediction of firm-level employment for missing EMP entries, we
then have the approximate total employment count in Compustat firms. Applying the BLS OES-
Compustat normalized composition by occupation to the total employment count by year, we derive
an approximate measure of the count of each workers employed in each 6-digit SOC Code across
all of Compustat. We crosswalk these 6-digit SOC employment counts to the LinkedIn internal
taxonomy categories of occupations. Comparing the count on LinkedIn within a category-year to
the overall computed BLS-OES-Compustat count yields an occupation-year coverage rate.
Let this occupation-year coverage rate be jt for occupation category j in year t. The firm-year
coverage rate is calculated simply as the total profile record count within a year on LinkedIn divided
by Compustat EMP or, in the case that there are fewer than 100 employees or data missing for
EMP, the predicted value from specification (3) above. This estimate of EMP for firm i in year
t is F irmEmpit . Let the firm-year coverage rate in firm i for year t be it . To get the LinkedIn

                                                                                                    55
                  Figure A.3: Comparing LinkedIn Counts With Predicted Compustat Employment
                                   Histogram of Firm-Level Ratios for 2002:                                                            Histogram of Firm-Level Ratios for 2007:
                          LinkedIn Total Count / Predicted Compustat Employee Count                                           LinkedIn Total Count / Predicted Compustat Employee Count

                                                                                                                200

            200




                                                                                                                150
            150
    Count




                                                                                                        Count
                                                                                                                100
            100




                                                                                                                 50
             50




             0                                                                                                    0

                  0.0    0.5                        1.0                       1.5            2.0                       0.0   0.5                       1.0                       1.5      2.0
                         Coverage Ratio Using Predicted Compustat EMP                                                        Coverage Ratio Using Predicted Compustat EMP


                                      (a) 2002                                                                                            (b) 2007
                                   Histogram of Firm-Level Ratios for 2012:                                                           Histogram of Firm-Level Ratios for 2017:
                          LinkedIn Total Count / Predicted Compustat Employee Count                                          LinkedIn Total Count / Predicted Compustat Employee Count

                                                                                                                60

            150




                                                                                                                40
            100
    Count




                                                                                                        Count
                                                                                                                20
             50




             0                                                                                                   0

                  0.0    0.5                      1.0                      1.5         2.0                            0.0    0.5                       1.0                       1.5       2.0
                         Coverage Ratio Using Predicted Compustat EMP                                                        Coverage Ratio Using Predicted Compustat EMP


                                      (c) 2012                                                                                            (d) 2017



occupation category coverage rate in firm i, occupation j , and year t, we multiply the firm-level
coverage by the occupation-level coverage and divide out the common factor such that the sum over
all derived occupation counts matches F irmEmpit . Specifically,

                                                                                          LIijt    it jt
                                                                                                 =                                                                                               (9)
                                                                                      F irmEmpit   jt

where jt is the employment weighted-average firm-year coverage rate. The left-hand side of the
equation is the proportion of employment in occupation j for a given firm-year, as the numerator is
the count of profile records in occupation j for a given firm-year. Summing across all occupations
yields 100%, and summing across all occupation employment in that firm-year yields the firm's
approximate employment. The coverage ratio is represented on the right-hand side, and is our
means of calculating the derived occupation counts in the numerator on the left-hand side that
serve as our primary occupation count measure. A similar procedure is followed in Rock (2019).
The EMP prediction measure mostly preserves the firm coverage histograms above, but for the
firms wherein EMP is replaced by predicted EMP, the coverage rates are shifted toward the model
prediction as shown in the figures below. This has little effect on the analysis, but does allow for
the expansion of the sample size. The spike of additional firms near 50% coverage reflects the model
coefficient in our regression specification.


Inferring occupation-level employment and coverage Our focus for the majority of this
work is the IT sector, where the occupation-level coverage rates tend to be close to the calculated
total amounts across Compustat. LinkedIn reporting rates for knowledge workers are favorably high.

                                                                                                   56
We use the LinkedIn taxonomy's hierarchical categorization of occupations belonging to Informa-
tion Technology functions at firms. The following occupations constitute the set of worker types
categorized as IT workers for our analysis:

Actuaries, Audio-Visual Specialists, Business Analysis Professionals, Computer-Aided Designers,
Control Systems Engineers, Data Analysts (includes Data Scientists), Data Entry Clerks, Database
and Network Engineers, Economists, Hardware Engineers, IT Consultants, IT Security and Audit
Specialists, IT Support Specialists, IT System Administrators, Market Research Professionals, Mul-
timedia Specialists, Quality Assurance Testers, Research Fellows, Software Engineers, Surveyors and
GIS Specialists, Telecommunications Specialists, and Web Designers.

Some actuaries, for example, might not belong to the IT function. But we include the actuaries who
are designated as IT workers in our sample. For a few occupations, we also include workers outside
the IT function because they are likely IT workers in other departments. Those occupation groups
are:
Computer Aided Designers, Data Analyst, IT Consultants, IT Security and Audit Specialist, IT
Support Specialists, IT System Administrator, Software Engineers, and Web Designers
Coverage rates for selected occupations in aggregate across Compustat are reported in the plots
below. These coverage rates are calculated using derived count for the denominator according to
the procedure above.




                                                57
                                                                      Figure A.4: LinkedIn Occupational Coverage
                            Ratio of Occ. Counts on LinkedIn to Calculated Compustat Count                                                                        Ratio of Occ. Counts on LinkedIn to Calculated Compustat Count
                                                     (Development)                                                                                                                        (IT Infrastructure)

            1.00                                                                                                                       1.5




            0.75

                                                                                                                                       1.0
    Ratio




                                                                                                                               Ratio
            0.50




                                                                                                                                       0.5

            0.25




            0.00                                                                                                                       0.0

                   2000                      2005                                        2010                      2015                      2000                                  2005                                                 2010                                           2015
                                                                 Year                                                                                                                                         Year

                              Occupation:        Software Engineer      IT Consultants     Hardware Engineer                                        Occupation:      IT Support Specialist         Information Technology System Administrator          Quality Assurance Tester




                          (a) IT Development                                                                                                                (b) IT Infrastructure
                           Ratio of Occ. Counts on LinkedIn to Calculated Compustat Count                                                                         Ratio of Occ. Counts on LinkedIn to Calculated Compustat Count
                                            (Data, Analysis, and Research)                                                                                                         (Selected Other Occupations)


                                                                                                                                       2.0


            1.5



                                                                                                                                       1.5



            1.0
    Ratio




                                                                                                                               Ratio
                                                                                                                                       1.0




            0.5
                                                                                                                                       0.5




            0.0                                                                                                                        0.0

                   2000                     2005                                         2010                      2015                      2000                                  2005                                                 2010                                           2015
                                                                 Year                                                                                                                                         Year

                          Occupation:       Research Fellow      Database and Network Engineers     Data Analyst                                     Occupation:      Executives      Accountant or Auditor    Physicans and Surgeons     Salesperson      Transportation Specialist




                                        (c) Analysis                                                                                                               (d) Selected Other



Software Engineers and IT Consultants, by the end of the sample period, are approaching nearly
the full quantity of records that we expect to be represented. Hardware engineers have lower derived
coverage rates overall, but are still well represented.
Other types of IT support staff are also well covered by the LinkedIn data. IT Support is somewhat
overrepresented, perhaps because these occupations are often found in higher proportions abroad
than they are domestically.
Research and analysis staff are also well covered by the data. Interestingly, the creation of the "Data
Scientist" job title shifts the composition of the data and underscores the importance of time-varying
occupational categories and coverage. Many workers who would have previously been categorized
as Database Engineers (often Data Engineers and Data Scientists as we might refer to them today)
start to reclassify their occupational titles between 2009 and into 2012. Our ratios capture these
changes and adjust accordingly.
The above plot describes a selected group of other occupations. Executives, while found in many
different functions, tend to be somewhat overrepresented on the LinkedIn platform. Many work-
ers use their online resumes to describe themselves as executives. While some of these are from
establishments abroad, it is likely the case that some of these titles are aspirational. A number of
other occupations tend to be less well-represented via profile records. Salespeople, physicians, and
transportation specialists have lower coverage rates than workers in the IT and knowledge functions
of Compustat firms.


Human capital measures In addition to position records, a large number of profiles also contain
education records. LinkedIn creates standardized ids for schools and degree types, allowing us to


                                                                                                                          58
aggregate counts of degrees by type within firms by adding the degrees held by a given company's
employees in a given year. We aggregate these counts for Associate's degrees, Bachelor's degrees,
Master's degrees, research doctorates, medical doctorates, and law degrees. We then create a worker-
level measure of equivalent years of education by assigning 2 years for Associate's and Master's
degrees, 3 years for law degrees (J.D.), 4 years for Bachelor's degrees, and 5 years for research and
medical doctorates. Summing these counts within our occupational classification system allows us
to build a firm-level measure of total equivalent years of education in the workforce. We use this
aggregated equivalent education-year count as a proxy for general human capital in some of our
regression specifications. Equivalent years of education are inflated or deflated by worker category
according to the firm-occupation-year coverage rates that we calculate for the derived counts of
workers by occupation-firm-year.




                                                 59
