                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  WHO SUPPLIES PPP LOANS (AND DOES IT MATTER)?
                   BANKS, RELATIONSHIPS AND THE COVID CRISIS

                                              Lei Li
                                          Philip Strahan

                                       Working Paper 28286
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28286


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




The opinions in the paper do not represent those of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, any
other affiliate of the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. We
thank seminar participants at Boston College, the Federal Reserve Board of Governors,
University of Minnesota and Southern Methodist University, as well as participants and our
discussant Lawrence Schmidt at the TAU Conference on Financial Intermediation during the
COVID-19 Crisis.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Lei Li and Philip Strahan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Who Supplies PPP Loans (And Does it Matter)? Banks, Relationships and the COVID Crisis
Lei Li and Philip Strahan
NBER Working Paper No. 28286
December 2020
JEL No. G2

                                          ABSTRACT

We analyze bank supply of credit under the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP). The literature
emphasizes relationships as a means to improve lender information, which helps banks manage
credit risk. Despite imposing no risk, however, PPP supply reflects traditional measures of
relationship lending: decreasing in bank size; increasing in prior experience, in commitment
lending, and in core deposits. Our results suggest a new benefit of bank relationships, as they help
firms access government-subsidized lending. Consistent with this benefit, we show that bank PPP
supply, based on the structure of the local banking sector, alleviates increases in unemployment.


Lei Li
Federal Reserve Board of Governors
Washington, DC, DC
lei.li@frb.gov

Philip Strahan
Carroll School of Management
324B Fulton Hall
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
philip.strahan@bc.edu
I. INTRODUCTION

           When governments intervene in the financial system and the economy, they often do so

by influencing or bailing out banks. For example, in 1998 the Federal Reserve effected a

private-sector bailout of the hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management through moral suasion

of their main counterparties, banks. In 2008, the housing sector, which lay at the center of the

crisis, did not receive a substantial bailout. Instead, banks – the primary provider of mortgage

credit – were the focus of policy interventions with the Troubled Asset Relief Program and the

first round of Quantitative Easing, as well as the Home Affordable Modification Program

(HAMP) and the Home Affordable Refinance Program (HARP). 1 In 2020, the Federal Reserve

created the Main Street Lending program to help middle-market firms gain access to credit, but

they did so by providing liquidity support to banks not to firms directly. Also in 2020, the

Federal Reserve created the Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, in which it uses

banks to provide liquidity support to money funds. This paper uses micro evidence from the

Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) to provide further evidence that banks act as the main

conduit for access to government subsidies. We argue that our results provide a new (or perhaps

unrecognized) rationale for the benefit to firms of close banking relationships.

           We quantify the importance of banks in general, and relationship banks in particular, in

supplying subsidized credit under the PPP program, created as part of the Coronavirus Aid,

Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act. The PPP aims to help small businesses avoid

laying off their workers during the peak of the COVID-19 economic crisis. We show that

relationship banks supply more of this credit to their borrowers, and that localities with more




1
    For a critique of these actions, see Mian and Sufi (2014).

                                                             2
relationship banking receive PPP credit earlier. As a result, these areas experience smaller

increases in unemployment. Despite this intended effect of the PPP program, we find no

evidence that broader measures of economic output – small business revenues or total spending –

respond to the program.

        We start by asking: who supplies business credit during the COVID crisis? Aggregate

figures provide a partial answer. As shown in Li et al. (2020), before the PPP program began in

April, large banks respond to widespread demand for liquidity by large firms by expanding

lending on an unprecedented scale during the last three weeks of the first quarter of 2020.

During March, liquidity in money markets and bond markets becomes constrained, leading firms

to ‘run’ to their banks and draw funds from pre-existing credit lines. This expansion in bank

lending is evident in Figure 1, which compares cumulative loan growth for large versus small

banks. After March, however, large banks experience contractions in lending as some large

borrowers, with renewed access to liquidity from the markets, pay back their loans. 2

        Lending by small banks, who traditionally focus on relationship lending to small firms,

grows sharply in April, reflecting their participation in the PPP program. Small and medium

sized banks (those with assets under $50 billion) provide about two thirds of the loans under the

PPP program ($310 billion out of $494 billion by all banks, or 63%). This share exceeds their

share of lending to small business before the COVID crisis, which was just 44% at the end of

2019. In contrast to PPP loans, new lending to business outside the PPP program stagnated for

all banks during the second quarter. Figure 2 reports state-level heat maps of the quantity of PPP

credit in the first round (April 3-17) and second round (April 27-August 9) of the program, along


2
 For further evidence on the effects of bond-market disruptions, see Acharya and Steffen (2020), Darmouni and
Siani (2020), Chodorow-Reich et al. (2020), Greenwald et al. (2020), and Hotchkiss et al. (2020).


                                                        3
with a similar one for the state prevalence of small banks. These figures suggest visually – and

we verify in our regressions formally - the importance of relationship-oriented banks in getting

the PPP credit to their borrowers immediately. States with more small banks received more PPP

loans in the first round (correlation = 0.65), whereas this relationship reverses sign in the second

round (correlation = -0.77).

        Press accounts and anecdotal evidence suggest that firms with better access to banks

before the COVID crisis were able to get PPP funding quickly at the outset of the program,

which was overwhelmed with demand and had its first-round funds exhausted in just two weeks

(Figure 3). 3 This suggests that pre-COVID relationships became valuable by allowing firms

close to their banks to gain access to the government subsidized lending, especially early in the

implementation of the program. Because relationship banks have a long-term interest in the

survival of their borrowers, they have an incentive to help those borrowers access the PPP

program. Moreover, because relationship banks know their borrowers from prior interactions,

application and other origination costs are likely lower for them.

        To test this idea comprehensively, we focus on how bank characteristics explain their role

in the PPP program. We estimate regressions based on quarterly Call Report data, which capture

overall business lending as well as lending supplied by banks under the PPP program. We

contrast lending patterns in March – which respond to the crisis in securities markets – with

those in April and subsequent months – which respond to the economic downturn and the advent

of government subsidies. Lending after March expands most at banks typically associated with

close relationships with their borrowers. In particular, lending grows faster at small banks, at


3
 See for example, “PPP Money Abounded – But Some Got It Faster than Others,” Wall Street Journal, October 6,
2020.


                                                      4
banks with high levels of small business loans prior to the crisis, at banks with high levels of

unused business credit commitments before the crisis, and at banks raising more local, retail

deposits. And, these effects are strongest at the smallest banks.

       We then decompose business lending during Q2, 2020 into those made under the PPP

program vs. all other business lending. Essentially all of the growth in lending during the second

quarter comes under the PPP program, and all of the connections between relationship measures

and lending growth reflects PPP lending (as opposed to other bank loans to business).

       We validate the importance of relationships using two distinct empirical strategies. First,

we separate each bank’s PPP lending based on whether or not the borrower resides in one of the

bank’s core markets, defined as a county in which the bank owns at least one branch. As we

show, the measures of relationships explain lending in core markets but only weakly in

peripheral ones. We also show that the relationship variables matter most during the first round

of PPP lending, consistent with the idea that banks advantaged their relationship borrowers over

others by helping them access the PPP program first. Second, we report within-bank tests to

compare lending as a function of bank branch and lending characteristics in their core markets.

These tests show that banks lent more to PPP borrowers in their most important core markets

(those where they made more small business loans prior to COVID). We also show that PPP

lending increases with the average age of branches located in the core markets. The within-bank

tests suggest that relationships from longstanding ties with the local economy affect PPP lending.

That is, even after controlling for all cross-bank variation (with fixed effects), bank relationships

still strongly predict their PPP credit supply.

       In the last part of our analysis, we link PPP credit to local real outcomes. We show that

variation in the quantity of PPP credit across counties reflects both the size and structure of local

                                                  5
banks. Specifically, two pre-COVID measures of banking structure correlate strongly with the

quantity of PPP credit across geographies, after controlling for demographic and economic

covariates. First, and most simply, areas with more branches per eligible establishment (before

COVID) receive more PPP credit. Second, areas with more local, relationship banks (based on

our bank-level predictive model) also receive more PPP credit during the first round of

allocations (the first two weeks of April). We use the relationship variable to capture local PPP

credit supply conditions. Unlike the overall size of the local banking system, this variable

reflects credit supply, not demand, because it correlates negatively with PPP credit from external

banks. We then tie local PPP lending supply to real outcomes. Areas that receive more local

PPP lending supply in the first round (because of the presence of relationship banks), we show,

experience smaller increases in unemployment.

       Several studies have assessed the impact of the PPP program on economic outcomes. For

example, Granja et al. (2020) find that more PPP first-round funds flow into localities less

affected by COVID, and that the effects of the PPP program on employment were small relative

to the scale of the funds allocated. Autor et al. (2020) find evidence that employment falls less at

firms eligible for PPP loans than at otherwise similar firms. Chetty et al. (2020) also find some

evidence that PPP lending increases employment, but the effects are small relative to the cost of

the program. Barraza et al. (2020) find that areas with more offices of banks that issued Small

Business Administration (SBA) backed loans in 2019 experience smaller increases in

unemployment after the initiation of the PPP program. Faulkender et al. (2020) also find a

beneficial effect of PPP lending on unemployment, but one that is much larger than these other

studies. Consistent with most of this literature, we also find that PPP supply helps preserve local

employment. That said, our variation only compares unemployment patterns between counties


                                                 6
based on whether or not they receive PPP loans in the first round. Ultimately, most PPP

applicants did receive funds, as the program closed with over $100 billion in unallocated funds.

As such, we hesitate to use our approach to assess the effectiveness of the program itself.

Instead, we use this last test to provide further evidence of the benefits of relationship lending,

even when the government has removed all risk from credit providers.

           Ours is the first paper we know of to study empirically how bank relationship

characteristics relate to their overall supply of PPP loans. However, several recent papers have

argued that bank relationships have helped firms gain access to PPP loans. Amiram and Rabetti

(2020) focus on publicly traded firms and find that firms with existing banking relationship

received larger PPP loans faster. Cororaton and Rosen (2020) also study publicly traded firms

and find that smaller public firms with more employees, fewer investment opportunities, and

COVID-19 exposure are more likely to borrow from PPP. Erel and Liebersohn (2020) find that

borrowers in areas with fewer bank branches, lower incomes, and more minority population are

more likely to access PPP via FinTech firms rather than banks. A number of studies show that

small, community banks provide an outsized share of PPP loans (Balyuk (2020), Faulkender et

al. (2020), James et al. (2020)). Bartik et al. (2020) use firm survey evidence, finding that firms

with strong bank relationship are more likely to receive PPP loans, while Joaquim and Netto

(2020) provide a theoretical analysis of bank incentives to lend under the program. 4

           Our paper contributes a new dimension to the literature on relationship banking. All of

the extant banking literature emphasizes that relationships reduce information asymmetry about




4
    For evidence on government guaranteed lending outside the U.S., see Core and De Marco (2020).


                                                         7
aspects of borrowers’ ability or willingness to repay. 5 Banks, the story goes, learn about their

customer’s business over time, monitor their cash flows and financial health, and lend based on a

deep understanding of the business and its future prospects. PPP loans, in contrast, have no

credit risk exposure for lending banks, yet relationships strongly predict PPP supply. Banks act

as gatekeepers for the PPP program, shepherding small businesses through the application

process. Banks prioritize their relationship borrowers over others because managing the

application process is less costly for them, and because they have an economic interest in the

long-term survival of their borrowers. 6 Our results suggest that a close bank relationship can

help firms gain access to the program and that such access has a real effect. Hence, our results

point to a new benefit to firms of close relationships with banks: they help their close customers

gain access to government subsidies. So, while existing studies document that relationships are

valuable for conventional reasons (e.g., as shown in Bolton et al. (2016), relationship banks are

more willing to stay with their borrowers during bad times), ours documents a less conventional

but important reason (i.e., relationship banks help their borrowers gain access to government

subsidies).




5
  There is a long literature on bank relationship lending which we will not review here. However, Petersen and
Rajan (1994) is the seminal empirical analysis on the subject; they emphasizes the role of duration in relationship
formation. Berger et al. (2005) and Degryse and Ongena (2005) provide evidence that distance between borrowers
and banks provides another proxy for relationships, although Petersen and Rajan (2002) argue technology has
reduced the importance of physical proximity to banks. Bank size has also been associated with relationship
lending, motivated by Stein (2002), who argues that large complex organizations are less able to manage soft
information embedded in lending relationships. The advent of technology has potentially limited the importance of
these dimensions, as discussed in Berger and Black (2019). For a meta-analysis of the effects of relationships on the
terms of bank loans, see Kysucky and Norden (2016).
6
  Humphries et al. (2020) use survey data to show that the smallest businesses face an information disadvantage in
accessing PPP.

                                                         8
II. BACKGROUND: THE PAYCHECK PROTECTION PROGRAM
         The negative economic impact of the coronavirus pandemic became increasingly evident

in March 2020, as the spread of COVID-19 accelerated across the U.S. and states started to

implement various emergency measures, including “lock-downs”. For the week ending on

March 28, initial claims for unemployment insurance (seasonally adjusted) reached a historical

high of 6.9 million. In response to this sharp and deep economic shock, the Congress quickly

passed the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act, which was signed

into law on March 27th. The CARES Act provides a total of $2.2 trillion in economic assistance

for individuals, healthcare providers, businesses, and state and local governments. The Paycheck

Protection Program (PPP), established under the CARES Act, aimed to help small businesses

“maintain their payroll, hire back employees who may have been laid off, and cover applicable

overhead.” The PPP program began to disburse funds on April 3. Strong initial demand

exhausted the $350 billion allocated within two weeks. An additional $320 billion of funding

was added to the PPP program by Paycheck Protection Program and Health Care Enhancement

Act on April 24. The program closed to new loan applications on August 8, 2020, having

distributed $525 billion (Small Business Administration (2020)), although the majority of funds

had been distributed by the early May (see Figure 3).

         The PPP program provides loans to small businesses that are fully forgivable under

certain conditions. Since the program’s main aim is to reduce job separation, borrowers must

maintain their employee and compensation levels to be eligible for forgiveness. 7 Banks



7
  PPP loan forgiveness occurs under the following conditions: a) at least 75% of the loan proceeds cover payroll
costs and the rest covers other overhead such as mortgage interest, rents, and utilities; and, b) the borrowers maintain
their employee and compensation levels. See https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/cares/assistance-for-small-
businesses for details.


                                                           9
distributed most of the PPP loans. Initially, only existing Small Business Administration (SBA)

lenders or federally insured depository institutions, credit unions, and Farm Credit System

institutions could make PPP loans. The set of PPP lenders gradually expanded to include more

non-bank lenders as the SBA approved their applications to participate. As of August 8, when

the PPP loan application period ended, non-bank lenders account for only 8.3% of PPP loan

count and 3.6% of PPP loan amount (Small Business Administration (2020)). 8

        With a few exceptions, only businesses with fewer than 500 employees may apply for

PPP loans. 9 Potential borrowers submit applications directly to private PPP lenders, who review

the application materials and fund the loans. All PPP loans have the same terms, with an interest

rate of 1% and a maturity of two years for loans made before June 5 or five years for loans made

on or after June 5. The SBA also pays lenders processing fees up to a limit for originating PPP

loans. Once approved, the SBA guarantees repayment at no cost to the borrowers or lenders; this

guarantee ultimately has backing of the full faith and credit of the U.S. Treasury. Hence, PPP

loans carry a zero-percent risk weight under regulatory capital rules. In addition, the federal

banking regulators (OCC, FDIC, and the Federal Reserve) issued a joint interim final rule on

April 13 that effectively neutralizes the regulatory capital effects of PPP loans that are pledged

by banks to the Paycheck Protection Program Lending Facility (PPPLF). Thus, regulated banks

may originate PPP loans without any credit risk or marginal capital requirement.




8
 Those non-bank PPP lenders include small business lending companies, fintechs, non-bank CDFI funds, and other
non-bank lenders.
9
  For example, firms in the accommodation and food services industry (with NAICS codes beginning with 72) are
eligible for PPP loans if they employ less than 500 employees per physical location.

                                                      10
III. WHO SUPPLIES PPP LOANS?

Data

        We construct data on lending at the bank level by combining information from the Call

Reports with information on the PPP program provided publicly by the U.S. Small Business

Administration (SBA). The Call Report data normally capture bank lending to businesses both

on and off the balance sheet (commercial and industrial (C&I) loans and unused loan

commitments to businesses). An additional field added to the 2020, Q2 Call Report also

separates out lending under the PPP program. Thus, we can compare PPP lending with non-PPP,

C&I lending during 2020, Q2. These data capture all loans on bank balance sheets as of June 30,

2020.

        The SBA data contain firm-level records of borrowing under the PPP program, with

information on the location of the borrower, the size of the loan, and the name of the lender. We

merge these data into the Call Report data using the name of the lender. This procedure allows

us to match most of the banks exactly. Of the non-matched banks, about 400 made no PPP loans

based on the Call Report data, so we assign zero PPP loans to these banks. Overall, we identify

PPP lending for 4,333 out of 4,980 banks. Collectively, the matched banks cover 95% of the

total PPP lending in the SBA database, so we are confident that our measures accurately

represent the bulk of the program. Some of the residual PPP lending is made by banks which we

could not match, and some by non-bank financial institutions such as Credit Unions and

Community Development Financial Institutions.

        In order to understand the role of bank relationships and the importance of local banks,

we separate lending from the SBA data into loans made by banks with branches in the


                                                11
borrower’s county (deemed “core markets”), versus loans made by banks without local branches

(deemed “peripheral markets”). To achieve this separation, we use the location of each bank’s

branches as of June 2019 from the Summary of Deposits dataset. 10 Because the branch locations

are set before the onset of COVID, we can safely assume that the definition of core vs. peripheral

markets is exogenous. About 71% of the total lending made by the matched banks comes from

core markets, and the other 29% from peripheral markets. The mean size of loans is slightly

larger in core markets ($112,145) compared to peripheral markets ($100,321).

           Table 1 reports summary statistics for bank-level measures of C&I lending growth, total

C&I credit growth (loans plus unused commitments) and PPP loans. Unlike C&I lending

growth, total credit growth does not reflect variation in credit-line takedown (or repayments).

We scale these and the other bank characteristics by total assets at the end of 2019. We also

include bank characteristics as of Q4, 2019, which we use to explain the 2020 lending. Panel A

reports lending growth during the first and second quarters of 2020; panel B reports summary

statistics for PPP lending by lender size; and, Panel C reports the 2019 pre-COVID bank

characteristics. 11

           As shown in Figure 1, during 2020, Q1 C&I lending grew rapidly at the largest banks,

mainly from large increases in credit-line drawdowns during March (Li et al., 2020 and

Chodorow-Reich, et al., 2020). The average bank, however, experienced a much smaller

increase in C&I lending (about 0.23-0.25 percentage points of assets). Business lending grew



10
     See https://www.fdic.gov/regulations/resources/call/sod.html.

11
  We relate lending in the first and second quarters of 2020 to 2019 bank covariates, but the sample changes slightly
over the two periods. Table 1 reports the summary statistics for the Q2 sample, but the Q1 figures are nearly
identical.


                                                           12
much more rapidly in Q2, but only from the effects of the PPP program. Average PPP lending

was 5.7% of assets. In contrast, non-PPP C&I lending shrank by 0.2% of assets. When we

separate lending into core vs. peripheral markets, we see similar amounts of lending. The

average bank lends 3.4% of assets to borrowers in its core markets, while lending 3.1% to

borrowers in peripheral markets. As we will see, however, the emphasis on PPP lending to core

markets is substantially higher for banks with strong local relationships. 12 As shown in Panel B,

PPP intensity per unit of assets is lower for the largest banks (mean=2.1%), compared to

medium-sized (mean=5.5%) or small banks (mean=5.8%).

           In our second set of tests, we focus on county-level real outcomes. High frequency data

are available online at the Opportunity Insights Economic Tracker website

(https://tracktherecovery.org); Chetty et al. (2020) describe the data in detail. We focus on two

of these outcomes (total revenue among small firms and total spending), as well as monthly

unemployment rates at county level from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. 13 Total revenues for

small firms come from Womply. The series represents the percent change in net revenue,

calculated each weekday as a seven-day moving average (seasonally adjusted), indexed to

January 4-31, 2020. Small firms are defined as those meeting the SBA’s threshold. 14 Total

spending at county level comes from daily aggregation of consumer spending based on debit and

credit card transactions from Affinity Solutions.


12
  The sum of lending to core plus peripheral markets exceeds total PPP lending from the Call Report because the
former measures include lending through early August of 2020, while the Call Report figure only includes PPP
lending through June 30.

13
     See https://www.bls.gov/lau/#tables.

14
   To be specific, according the Chetty et al. (2020), “For each series, we construct daily values in exactly the same
way that we constructed the consumer spending series. We first take a seven-day moving average, then seasonally
adjust by dividing each calendar date's 2020 value by its corresponding value from 2019. Finally, we index relative
to pre-COVID-19 by dividing the series by its average value over January 4-31.”

                                                          13
       Table 2 reports summary statistics for the real outcomes. Both small business revenue

and spending grow during the first months of 2020, before the advent of the COVID crisis, and

then fall sharply thereafter. The declines are sharpest in March and April when most states

initiated lockdowns. Chetty et al. (2020) emphasize that the drop in spending is initially high

across the income distribution. After passage of the CARES Act, however, spending increases

sharply in low-income areas (though still below levels before COVID), but much less so in high-

income areas. (Despite these spending patterns, unemployment has more adverse effects in low-

income areas.) As is clear in Table 2, unemployment increases sharply in April, then declines

over the subsequent months. By the end of our sample, however, unemployment still well

exceeds its level at the beginning of 2020.

Business Lending during the COVID Crisis

       Tables 3-7 report regressions to explain bank lending during the 2020 COVID crisis. We

first report models of overall C&I lending; second, we subdivide the analysis into PPP vs. non-

PPP, C&I lending; third, we compare PPP lending patterns by bank size; fourth, we further

subdivide PPP lending by market type (core vs. peripheral); and fifth, we report regressions at

the bank-county level.

The Cross Section of Bank Lending

       Table 3 reports the first of these tests, comparing the cross section of bank C&I lending

during the first and second quarters of 2020. As outcomes, we use the change in C&I lending on

balance sheet and the change in C&I credit – the sum of lending on balance sheet plus unused

business commitments – both scaled by Q4, 2019 assets.




                                                14
        We measure all bank characteristics from the Q4, 2019 Call Reports and June 2019

Summary of Deposits. As such, they are unaffected by the COVID crisis. We separate bank

characteristics into three tiers. First, we consider measures which the prior literature has

associated with bank-firm relationship lending: Unused commitments (undrawn loan

commitments to businesses/assets), Small business loans (C&I loans under $1 million/assets),

and Core deposits (transaction deposits plus insured time deposits/assets). For example, Petersen

and Rajan (1994) is the first study to document the importance of relationships for bank lending

to small firms. Berger and Udell (1995) show, using similar data, show that credit lines (which

generate undrawn loan commitments to business) are more associated with close bank-borrower

relationships than term lending. Norden and Weber (2010) find that credit lines usage help

banks forecast default. Berlin and Mester (1999) show that core deposits help foster relationship

lending by allowing banks to cross subsidize borrowers over the credit cycle. 15 Second, we

include three additional measures of bank balance sheets: the ratio of total C&I lending to assets

(C&I lending), cash plus securities to assets (Liquid assets), and Tier 1 leverage ratio (Tier 1

Capital). C&I lending captures variation in bank overall emphasis on lending to business,

whereas the other two measures capture variation in the financial strength of the bank. Third, we

include two additional bank characteristics: Bank size (the log of total assets) and Bank age (the

log of the deposit-weighted average age of the bank’s branches). Panel C of Table 1 provides

summary statistics for these explanatory variables. The deposit-weighted COVID death rate is

derived from county-level COVID death rates obtained from the Opportunity Insights Economic




15
 The theoretical idea that bank deposits provide information to lenders goes back further, to Fama (1985). For
more recent empirical evidence, see Yang (2020).

                                                        15
Tracker website within a bank's branch network. All variables, except Bank size, are winsorized

at the 1st and 99th percentiles.

       Table 3 shows sharp differences in lending patterns between the first and second quarters

of 2020, particular for the effect of the three relationship characteristics. In Q1, Unused

commitments strongly correlates with C&I lending growth (Column 1). As Li et al. (2020) show,

the largest banks drive this result; these banks face unexpected increases in credit-line takedowns

from their large borrowers who lose access to short-term funding markets and the bond market.

Credit-line takedowns have no effect on total credit originations, however, which explains why

Unused commitments has no significance in Column (2). In Q2, the effect of Unused

commitments increases relative to Q1 (by a factor of eight). In contrast to Q1, both Small

business loans and Core deposits affect lending strongly in Q2. We know that these effects

represent new credit originations, rather than credit-line takedowns, because both C&I lending

growth and C&I credit growth respond similarly. Economic magnitudes are substantial. A one-

standard deviation increase raises C&I lending by 1.7% of assets (Unused commitment), 0.6% of

assets (Core deposits), and 0.5% of assets (Small business loans). For comparison, C&I lending

grew by 5.4% of assets on average during the period. Beyond the relationship variables, we also

find that banks with higher Liquid assets increased lending less than other banks in Q2, as did

larger banks and older banks.

       Table 4 focuses on the difference between PPP lending patterns with those of other

unsubsidized C&I lending (for Q2, 2020 only). PPP lending, as this comparison shows, drives

the sharp differences in lending patterns between the first and second quarters. As in Q1, most

of the correlations between bank characteristics and non-PPP, C&I lending are weak. The

exception is Unused commitments, which has a negative impact on non-PPP C&I lending (but no

                                                 16
effect on non-PPP total credit). This reflects firms, who had drawn funds during the March

financial-market meltdown, repaying those funds as bond-market access came back online (see

Chodorow-Reich et al. (2020) and Darmouni and Siani (2020)).

        In Q2, the three relationship measures have very strong power to explain PPP lending

(and the sign of the coefficient on Unused commitments becomes positive). This is interesting

because PPP loans do not expose banks to credit risk. The U.S. government bears the downside

risk. As such, this finding points to a benefit of banking relationships not emphasized before in

the existing literature: firms with strong bank relationships receive better access to the PPP

credit, probably because many banks have limited capacity to help firms manage the application

process, and this limited capacity is deployed first in the service of the bank’s relationship

borrowers. 16

        Table 5 reports estimates of these models separately for small (<$10 billion in assets),

medium-sized ($10 to $50 billion in assets) and large (>$50 billion in assets) banks. This split

further supports the relationship-banking interpretation. First, the largest banks, which focus

much less on small relationship borrowers, lend much less in the PPP program per unit of assets

than other bank (recall Table 1, Panel C). Second, the large banks exhibit little effect of the three

relationship measures on PPP lending. Unused commitments and Small business lending are

both insignificant in the regression. In contrast, both Unused commitments and Small business

lending are very strongly tied to PPP lending for medium-sized and small banks. Core deposits

only exhibits a strong connection to PPP for the small banks.


16
  According to press accounts about the PPP, “…the program’s expenses were also high, the big banks said. Bank
of America devoted 10,000 employees to making loans at the program’s peak, Mr. Moynihan said in July, and
expects the next stage of the program — helping companies through the paperwork to have their loans forgiven, if
they qualify — to be complicated and time consuming.” See New York Times, “Despite Billions in Fees, Banks
Predict Meager Profits on P.P.P. Loans,” October 1, 2020.

                                                       17
Pinning down the Role of Relationships: Bank Lending by Market and Branch Characteristics

       We have shown that bank lending during Q2, 2020 exhibits a strong link to pre-COVID

measures of bank relationships. The links shift sharply between the first (pre-PPP) and second

(post-PPP) quarters; the links in the second quarter are only evident in the PPP lending, not in

other C&I lending; and, the links are strongest for smaller banks. All of these point to an

important role of relationships for the supply of PPP credit. But all of these tests are just cross-

bank correlations. To rule out alternative explanations due to unobserved heterogeneity across

banks, we now compare PPP lending by market type (core vs. peripheral), and then by within-

bank measures of the strength of its relationships with local borrowers.

       Table 6 reports regressions of PPP lending in core and peripheral markets separately,

along with the difference between them. The regressions include the same set of explanatory

variables as in Tables 3-5, but we focus only on the effects of the relationship dimensions. We

report each set of regressions first on all banks, and then split based on bank size. Each of the

three measures – Unused commitments, Small business lending, and Core deposits – affects PPP

lending in core markets more than in peripheral ones. In fact, two of the three measures have no

power to explain PPP lending in the peripheral areas. Lending in core markets most likely

reflects bank interactions with their relationship clientele, and measures of the strength of the

relationships only matter in those areas. As in the earlier split by bank size, the effects are

evident in small and medium-sized banks, but not among the largest banks.

       Table 6 also reports the same set of regressions, with the dependent variable split based

on first-round versus second-round lending (Panels B and C). This split shows the same

directional effects: more PPP lending by relationship banks. But it also shows much larger

coefficient magnitudes during the first round. The importance to firms of having a close bank

                                                  18
relationship thus manifests most strongly in the first round as banks put their closest customers to

the front of then line in applying to the SBA. As we discussed earlier, the PPP funds ran out in

just two weeks, leading to additional legislation to fund the second round (Figure 3).

       In Table 7, we change the structure of the data to focus on how banks supply PPP lending

across their core markets. In particular, we estimate regressions with the following structure:

       (PPP Lending/Assets)i,j = αi + γj + β1(%Bank Deposits from County)i,j +
       β2 (Log Branch Age)i,j + β3(%County Deposits from Bank)i,j +
       β4(%Bank CRA Loans in County)i,j + β5(%County CRA Loans from Bank)i,j + ε i,j, (1)


where i represents bank and j represents county. The restructured data disaggregate each bank’s

total PPP lending in its core markets (one outcome in Table 6) into one observation for each

county in which the bank owns at least one branch. As such, summing the outcome in Equation

(1) across all counties for a given bank recovers that bank’s total PPP lending in its core markets.

The lending measures, built from bank-county data collected under the Community

Reinvestment Act (CRA), are only available for banks with more than $1 billion in assets. Thus,

we report the models with and without the two variables representing bank lending.

       We remove all county-level variation in Equation (1) with a county fixed effect (γj), and

all bank-level variation with a bank effect (αi). Including the county fixed effect removes

variation related to local demand for PPP loans such as differences in exposure to COVID or

other sources of variation. Including the bank fixed effect removes variation related to bank

heterogeneity. Equation (1) compares PPP lending for the same bank operating in different

counties. This allows us to test whether banks lend more where they raise more deposits or make

more loans (β1 and β4), whether banks lend more where their branches are older (β2), and



                                                19
whether banks lend more where their market share is higher (β3 and β5). If relationships affect

bank supply of PPP credit, we would expect all of these effects to load positively.

         Table 7 offers strong support that banks supply more PPP credit in areas where they have

stronger relationships with local borrowers. That is, banks increase their supply of PPP loans in

markets where they have more deposit market share; they increase PPP loans in markets where

their branches are older; and, they increase PPP loans in markets where they lend a greater

percentage of those funds. These results suggest that PPP lending increases more in areas that

are more important to the lender, based on banks’ pre-COVID experience. The effect of branch

age provides very strong evidence for the importance of relationships, as the literature

emphasizes the importance of relationship length in fostering close bank-borrower ties (e.g.,

Petersen and Rajan, 1994). 17

IV. RELATIONSHIP LENDING, PPP LOAN SUPPLY AND REAL EFFECTS

         To test how bank supply of PPP loans affects real outcomes, we first estimate the impact

of the size and structure of the local banking sector on the quantity of PPP lending at the county

level. We test how these effects break down between core-market bank lending (banks with

branches in the county) and peripheral-market bank lending, and also how they break down by

time (first v. second rounds of PPP funds). We then report regressions of county-level real

outcomes on PPP credit measures based on the pre-COVID structure of the local banking

system.

County-Level PPP lending



17
  In our bank-level regressions, we find the opposite. That is, younger banks make more PPP loans. This result
represents variation across banks. As such, it suggests that new banks without relationship capital are using the PPP
program to find new customers.

                                                         20
        To document how local bank structure affects overall PPP credit supply, we regress

county-level PPP lending (scaled by the number of establishments with fewer than 500

employees) on two measures of local bank structure (controlling for other county level factors

plausibly related to demand). The regression structure follows:

        PPP Loans/Estab.j = β1Branches/Estab.j + β2Predicted PPP Lendingj
        + Demand Controls + εj .                                                                        (2)
We then sub-divide county PPP lending into four sub-components: based on time (first round

PPP v. second round) and based on core (lenders with branches in the borrower’s county) v.

peripheral providers of credit.

        Equation (2) varies across counties (j). The outcome, PPP Loans/Establishment, which

we measure in thousands of dollars per establishment, averages about $70. Branches

/Establishmentj, equal to the total number of bank branches per establishment in county j,

measures total banking capacity before COVID (June 2019), relative to a proxy for the number

of firms eligible for PPP loans. 18 Predicted PPP Lendingj equals the weighted average of each

bank’s predicted bank-level (PPP Lending/Assetsi) in their core markets, with weights equal to

bank i’s share of total deposits in county j from 2019. Using the model from Panel A of Table 6

(columns 4, 7, and 10), PPP Lending/Assetsj is a linear combination of the characteristics of the

banks operating in county j. Since our bank-level model finds strong explanatory power from

relationship characteristics, this variable will be high in areas where relationship lenders hold a




18
  We do not have a count of eligible firms, so we use the number of establishments with fewer than 500 employees
as a close proxy. These data come from the 2018 County Business Patterns data, provided by the U.S. Census
Bureau.


                                                       21
high percentage of total deposits. Moreover, this variable is predetermined because the

regression in Table 6 includes only bank covariates from the end of 2019 or earlier.

           Equation (2) also includes demographic characteristic of the county (log of county

population; the fraction of the population with a college degree or better; the fraction of the

population aged 20 to 44), as well as measures of the strength of the local economy (the log of

median income in the county from 2018 and the unemployment rate from 2019). These data

come from the U.S. Census and USDA. 19 In addition, we include the COVID death rate. 20 These

variables help remove variation due to demand for PPP loans.

           Equation (2) achieves two objectives. First, it allows us to assess whether or not the size

of the local banking sector affects PPP credit supply (as opposed to PPP funds flowing

frictionlessly across geographies). Second, we can assess the importance of not just the size but

also the structure of local banks. As we have seen, small banks, banks focusing on small

business lending, and banks with high levels of unused business loan commitments originate

more PPP loans; Predicted PPP Lending captures these effects. To summarize, if areas with

more local bank branches receive greater supply of PPP loans, then β1 > 0. If the types of banks

matters, then β2 > 0.

           We use Equation (2) as a first-stage regression to show that variation in predetermined

measures of banking structure affects the quantity of PPP credit. To document that these are

valid measures of supply (rather than demand), we split the outcome based on PPP lending from

banks locating in the county (core-market banks) v. PPP lending by banks not located in the


19
  County level education, unemployment, and median household income data are from
https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/county-level-data-sets/download-data/ and all other demographics data from
https://www.census.gov/data/datasets/time-series/demo/popest/2010s-counties-detail.html.
20
     Data are obtained from the Opportunity Insights Economic Tracker website (https://tracktherecovery.org).

                                                          22
county (peripheral-market banks). Lending from peripheral-market banks will increase with PPP

demand. Hence, if there is no positive effect of Branches/Establishment or Predicted PPP

Lending on lending by peripheral banks, then we can rule out a spurious correlation with PPP

demand.

       Column (1) of Table 8 reports estimates of Equation (2). We find strong evidence that

areas with more local bank branches receive more PPP loans; i.e., β1 > 0 (significant at 1% level).

The magnitude is also substantial. A one-standard deviation increase in Branches/Establishment

(=0.02), for example, is associated with an increase in PPP lending of about $18,000 per

establishment (=0.02 x 888.6 x 1000), or a little less than 30% of the mean (=~$70,000).

Predicted PPP Lending has a positive but insignificant coefficient, however.

       Columns (2)-(5) of Table 8 separate the outcome between the first and second rounds of

PPP lending (recall Figure 3) and between core v. peripheral markets. This four-way split

suggests that both the size of the local banking system (Branches/Establishment) and its structure

(Predicted PPP Lending) increase the quantity of PPP loans in the first round (Column 2).

Columns (3)-(5) help us assess the (identification) claim that the banking structure variables

capture PPP supply. In contrast to Predicted PPP Lending, Branches/Establishment covaries

positively with PPP loans from peripheral lenders in both the first and second rounds. This

suggests a critical identification concern: areas with more bank branches (pre-COVID) contain

more firms reliant on bank credit (i.e., greater demand for PPP loans). Hence, the number of

bank branches cannot be used to assess PPP credit supply. In contrast, Predicted PPP Lending

loads negatively in Columns (3)-(5), meaning that some firms, unable to borrow locally in the

first round (because their market contains too few relationship lenders), were able to get credit

from peripheral banks. Thus, Predicted PPP Lending predicts early access to the PPP program

                                                23
(Column (2). Borrowers in areas with higher Predicted PPP Lending move to the ‘front of the

line’ and receive credit early from their relationship lender.

Small Business Revenues, Local Spending, and Unemployment

       To test whether PPP credit supply from relationship lenders has real effects, we model

three outcomes: daily Small business revenue; daily Local spending; and, monthly

Unemployment rate. We construct panel data at the county-time level, from the beginning of

2020 through July. This sample incorporates a pre-COVID period, a period of transition in

which the effects of COVID pushed financial markets into turmoil (most of March), and a period

in which policy steps from the CARES Act had gone into effect (April and the subsequent

months). Our model tests how measures of local demographics, local pre-COVID economic

variables, and PPP credit supply affect real outcomes across these shifting periods. Specifically,

we estimate the following models:

       Yj,t = αt,s + γj + Σβk (Itk x Predicted PPP Lendingj)
               + Σγk (Itk x Demo. & Econ. controlsj) + εj,t.                                 (3)



In Equation (3), j represents county and t represents time (either day or month). Yj,t represents

each of our three outcomes. We remove aggregate shocks with the state-time effect (αt,s) and all

cross-county heterogeneity with the county effect (γj). All county characteristics, including

Predicted PPP Lending, vary only in the cross section, so the county effect absorbs their direct

impact on outcomes.

       We focus on how Predicted PPP Lending affects outcomes as the COVID crisis emerges,

and then as the policy actions come online. In addition, we control for other county-level



                                                 24
variables to absorb as much variation in demand for PPP credit as well as the effects of the

COVID crisis on outcomes. Hence, we interact each county characteristic with Itk, defined as

five monthly indicators. 21 The first indicator (March) equals one prior to beginning of the PPP

program but after the onset of the COVID crisis. 22 The last four indicators correspond to

calendar months during the period in which the PPP program distributes funds. The coefficients

βk test for systematic shifts in the impact of Predicted PPP Lending (and the other county

characteristics) during these one-month periods, relative to the omitted period (January and

February). If the relationship lenders help firms, then βk ought to be positive for both Small

business revenue and Local spending during April-July, and negative for the Unemployment rate.

The effects measured during the Crisis period represent “placebo” tests because the PPP program

had not yet come online then. This helps us assess the plausibility of the model. 23

           Equation (3) represents a reduced form, which directly links a supply instrument

(Predicted PPP Lending) to the real outcomes. We could have structured this analysis as on

instrumental variables model, with PPP Loans/Establishment modeled as the endogenous

regressor. However, if the structure of the local banking system affects economic outcomes in

ways that go beyond the PPP program, then these instruments might fail the exclusion restriction.

While this may be true, and while additional effects cannot be fully ruled out, lending patterns

suggests otherwise. First, the PPP program dominates new credit originated during the April-

July 2020. For example, non-PPP C&I lending fell during the second quarter of 2020 (Table 1).


21
   The PPP program closed to new applications on August 8, just a few days after the end of our sample, so we end
our analysis in July.
22
     The World Health Organization declared as a global pandemic on March 11, 2020.

23
  We double cluster by time (or state-time in the case of the unemployment rate, due to the small number of time
units) and county to construct standard errors.


                                                        25
Second, as we will see, the time series pattern of the effects of banking line up with the timing of

the PPP program.

         Table 9 reports the estimates of Equation (3). We find little impact of Predicted PPP

lending on either Small business revenues or Total Spending. Sign patterns are positive,

consistent with benefits, but with minimal joint statistical significance (F-statistics around 1 for

the April-July coefficients). In contrast, we find very strong statistical evidence that

Unemployment rate is lower in markets with more relationship lenders (i.e., higher Predicted

PPP lending). Coefficients become strongly negative in May, and they increase in magnitude in

June and July, with high joint statistical significance (F-statistic = 8.13). The time patterns of

our estimates in the reduced form are consistent with our core arguments. That is, there is no

evidence of “pre-trends” in the data. The coefficient on Predicted PPP loans is small and not

statistically significant in March 2020, as they should be because the PPP program had yet to

begin. 24

         While counties with higher Predicted PPP lending do experience less unemployment

after the advent of the PPP program, the economic impact is small. For example, increasing

Predicted PPP lending by one standard deviation (= 0.014) lowers the unemployment rate in

June by just 0.21 percentage points (=-0.014x15.2); this decline is dwarfed by the average

increase in unemployment of 7.6 percentage points between March and April. Moreover, we

find no broader benefits, either to small businesses themselves (in terms of sales or revenues), or

in terms of total spending. The small economic magnitude likely reflects the fact that the second



24
  March 2020 represents a fairly strong placebo period because banks were important during that time in alleviating
the stresses on large firms due to the disruptions in the money markets and the bond market. Thus, if we observe no
effects on local outcomes before April, this supports the claim that the effects observed after April in fact stem from
the PPP program.

                                                          26
round of PPP funding was sufficiently generous that all firms demanding these loans eventually

received them. That said, the evidence does suggest that relationship lending, by giving firms

early access to the PPP program, did help them avoid laying off workers.

V. CONCLUSION
       This paper analyzes the role of banks as the primary conduit of funds for the Paycheck

Protection Program. We find that PPP lending by banks increases with traditional measures of

relationship lending: larger for small banks, increasing in prior experience in the local market,

increasing in commitment lending, and increasing in core deposits. The traditional rationale for

bank relationships – access to soft information, which mitigates asymmetric information

problems – cannot explain our findings because banks face no credit risk in making PPP loans.

Thus, our results suggest a new benefit to firms of close ties to their banks, which are often the

key conduit for access to government subsidies. Using our model of bank-level lending, we build

a local supply measure that reflect the structure of the banking systems. We find that increases

in this predicted PPP lending, which reflects the presence of relationship-oriented banks prior to

COVID, lowers local unemployment.

       Our results point to an inefficiency in the distribution of PPP funds, as firms with banking

relationships receive earlier access to credit, irrespective of merit. Distributing the $525 billion

in funds so quickly – just one month – could only be achieved using the human capital employed

by the banking system. Government interventions or bailouts have often historically worked

through the banking system. We have seen this not only with the PPP program, but in other ways

in which the Federal Reserve intervened during the COVID crisis, in its interventions during the

2008 Global Financial Crisis, and also in its actions to stem bond-market disruptions during

1998. Why do government interventions work though banks, rather than just helping whatever


                                                 27
economic entity is most distressed? The answer may reflect an unpleasant tradeoff between the

short-term benefits of interventions (e.g., ending a financial panic) vs. the longer run moral

hazard costs. Using the banking system as the conduit may be a way to limit the scope of

interventions and thus limit the associated moral hazard costs.




                                                 28
                                          REFERENCES



Acharya, V. V., and S. Steffen. 2020, “The risk of being a fallen angel and the corporate dash for
cash in the midst of COVID,” forthcoming in the Review of Corporate Finance Studies.

Autor, David, David Choz, Leland D. Cranez, Mita Goldarx, Byron Lutzz, Joshua Montesz,
William B. Petermanz, David Ratnerz, Daniel Villarz, and Ahu Yildirmazx, 2020, “An Evaluation
of the Paycheck Protection Program Using Administrative Payroll Microdata,” MIT Working
paper.

Amiram, Dan and Rabetti, Daniel, “The Relevance of Relationship Lending in Times of Crisis,”
(September 2020). Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3701587.
Berger, Allen and Udell, Gregory, 1995 “Relationship lending and lines of credit in small firm
finance,” Journal of Business 68, 351-82.
Berger, Allen, Nathan Miller, Mitchell Petersen, Raghuram Rajan and Jeremy Stein, 2005, “Does
Function follow Form? Evidence from the Lending Practices of Large and Small Banks,”
Journal of Financial Economics 76(2), 237-69.

Berger, Allen N. and Lamont K. Black, 2019, “Small Business Lending: The Roles of
Technology and Regulation from Pre-Crisis to Crisis to Recovery,” in Oxford Handbook of
Banking, Third Edition, Allen N. Berger, Philip Molyneux, and John O.S. Wilson, editors,
Oxford University Press, Oxford, (2019) 431-469.

Balyuk, Tatyana, Nagpurnanand R. Prabhala & Manju Puri, 2020, “Intermediary Supply Effects:
Lessons From the Paycheck Protection Program,” NBER Working Paper no. 28114.

Bartik, Alexander, Cullen, Zoe, Glaeser, Edward L., Luca, Michael, Stanton, Christopher and
Sunderam, Aditya, 2020, “The Targeting and Impact of Paycheck Protection Program Loans to
Small Businesses,” NBER Working Paper No. w27623.
Barraza, Santiago, Rossi, Martin and Yeager, Timothy J., 2020, “The Short-Term Effect of the
Paycheck Protection Program on Unemployment,” Available at SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3667431.
Berlin, Mitchell and Loretta J. Mester, 1999, “Deposits and Relationship Lending,” Review of
Financial Studies 12(3), 579-607.
Bolton, Patrick, Xavier Freixas, Leonardo Gambacorta, Paolo Emilio Mistrulli, 2016,
“Relationship and Transaction Lending in a Crisis,” Review of Financial Studies 29(10), 2643–
2676.
Chodorow-Reich, Gabrial, Olivier Darmouni, Stephan Luck and Matthew Plosser, 2020, “Bank
Liquidity Provision Across the Firm Size Distribution,” Available at SSRN:
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3702725.


                                               29
Core, Fabrizio and Felippo De Marco, 2020, “Public Guarantees for Small Businesses in Italy
during COVID-19,” Available at SSRN:
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3604114.
Cororaton, Anna and Rosen, Samuel, 2020, “Public Firm Borrowers of the US Paycheck
Protection Program,” SMU Cox School of Business Research Paper No. 20-01, Available at
SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3590913.
Darmouni, Olivier and Kerry Siani, 2020, “Crowding Out Bank Loans: Liquidity-Driven Bond
Issuance,” Available at SSRN: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3693282.
Degryse, H., Ongena, S., 2005, “Distance, lending relationships, and competition,” Journal of
Finance, 60 (1), 231-266
Erel, Isil and Liebersohn, Jack, 2020, “Does FinTech Substitute for Banks? Evidence from the
Paycheck Protection Program,” NBER Working Paper no. 27659.
Fama, Eugene, 1985, “What’s Different about Bank?” Journal of Monetary Economics 15(1),
29-39.
Faulkender, Michael, Robert Jackman and Stephen Miran, 2020, “The Job-Preservation Effects
of Paycheck Protection Program Loans,” US Treasury, Office of Economic Policy Working
Paper 2020-01.
Granja, Joao and Makridis, Christos and Yannelis, Constantine and Zwick, Eric, 2020, “Did the
Paycheck Protection Program Hit the Target?” Available at SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3585258.
Greenwald, Daniel, John Krainer, and Pascal Paul, 2020, “The Credit Line Channel,” San
Francisco Fed Working Paper 2020-26.
Hotchkiss, Edith, Greg Nini, and David C. Smith, 2020, “Corporate Capital Raising During the
COVID Crisis,” https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3723001.

James, Christopher M. and Lu, Jing and Sun, Yangfan, 2020, “Time Is Money: Relationship
Lending and the Role of Community Banks in the Paycheck Protection Program.” Available at
SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3633339.

Joaquim, Gustavo and Netto, Felipe, 2020, “Bank Incentives and the Impact of the Paycheck
Protection Program.” Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3704518.
Kysucky, V. and Lars Norden, 2016, “The Benefits of Relationship Lending in a Cross-Country
Context: A Meta-Analysis,” Management Science 62, 90–110.
Humphries, John Eric and Neilson, Christopher and Ulyssea, Gabriel, 2020, “Information
Frictions and Access to the Paycheck Protection Program,” Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper
2247, NYU Stern School of Business, Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3667636.
Li, Lei, Strahan, Philip E. and Zhang, Song, 2020, “Banks as Lenders of First Resort: Evidence
from the COVID-19 Crisis,” forthcoming at the Review of Corporate Finance Studies.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, 2014, House of Debt, University of Chicago Press.

                                               30
Peterson, Mitchell, and Raghuram Rajan, 1994. “The benefits of firm-creditor relationships:
Evidence from small-business data,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 49, 3-37.
Peterson, Mitchell, and Raghuram Rajan, 2002. “Does Distance still Matter,” Journal of
Finance, Vol. 57, 2533-2570.
Stein, Jeremy, 2002, “Information Production and Capital Allocation: Hierarchical vs.
Decentralized Firms,” Journal of Finance 57, 1891-1921.
Yang, Jun, 2020, “Deposit-Lending Synergies: Evidence from Chinese Students at US
Universities,” Available at SSRN: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3281397.




                                               31
                  Figure 1: Cumulative Commercial and Industrial Lending
                                         Growth
    45%
    40%
    35%
    30%
    25%
    20%
    15%
    10%
     5%
     0%
          2020-01-08
          2020-01-15
          2020-01-22
          2020-01-29
          2020-02-05
          2020-02-12
          2020-02-19
          2020-02-26
          2020-03-04
          2020-03-11
          2020-03-18
          2020-03-25
          2020-04-01
          2020-04-08
          2020-04-15
          2020-04-22
          2020-04-29
          2020-05-06
          2020-05-13
          2020-05-20
          2020-05-27
          2020-06-03
          2020-06-10
          2020-06-17
          2020-06-24
          2020-07-01
          2020-07-08
          2020-07-15
          2020-07-22
          2020-07-29
          2020-08-05
          2020-08-12
          2020-08-19
          2020-08-26
          2020-09-02
    -5%




                                             Large Banks        Small Banks



This figure plots the cumulative commercial and industrial loan growth since January 2020 at large and small banks
in the U.S. The data come from the Federal Reserve’s H.8 weekly statistical release. Large banks are the top 25
domestically chartered commercial banks by assets and small banks include the rest of the banks.




                                                        32
Panel A of Figure 2 plots the heat map of state-level total PPP loan amount (in dollars) received during the first
round of PPP (April 3-16) scaled by the number of establishments with less than 500 employees in 2018. Panel B of
Figure 2 plots the heat map of state-level total PPP loan amount (in dollars) received during the second round of PPP
(April 27-August 9) scaled by the number of establishments with less than 500 employees in 2018. Panel C of
Figure 2 plots the heat map of the share of bank branches owned by small banks (with less than $10 billion in assets)
in 2019.

Figure 2, Panel A:




                                                         33
Figure 2, Panel B




                    34
Figure 2, Panel C




                    35
                           Figure 3: Daily approved PPP loan amount
                   60
        Billions



                   50


                   40


                   30


                   20


                   10


                    -




This figure plots the daily approved PPP loan amount. The data come from the Small Business Administration’s
(SBA) PPP loan level dataset.




                                                      36
                                                          Table 1: Summary Statistics for Bank Characteristics

This table reports summary statistics for bank C&I lending and PPP lending, along with other balance sheet characteristics, from Call Reports. The changes in lending are
normalized by Q4, 2019 assets. C&I credit equals the sum of C&I loans on balance sheet plus unused C&I commitments. Core markets are counties in which the bank owns at
least one branch and peripheral markets are the other counties. log(Deposit-weighted average branch age) is derived from the 2019 Summary of Deposits data. Deposit-weighted
COVID death rate is derived from county-level COVID death rates, which are the number of COVID deaths per 100,000 people, within a bank's branch network. All other
variables come from the pre-COVID period (Q4, 2019) Call Reports. All variables, except log(Assets), are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles.

Panel A: 2020 Lending
                    Q1                                  N               mean                  sd                   p25                    p50                   p75
Change C&I loans/Assets                               5,031             0.002               0.012                 -0.002                 0.001                 0.005
Change C&I credit/Assets                              5,031             0.003               0.014                 -0.002                 0.001                 0.006

                    Q2
Change C&I loans/Assets                               4,980             0.054               0.067                  0.012                  0.037                0.070
Change C&I credit/Assets                              4,980             0.058               0.070                  0.014                  0.040                0.076
Change non-PPP C&I loans/Assets                       4,980            -0.002               0.016                 -0.009                 -0.002                0.002
Change non-PPP C&I credit/Assets                      4,980            0.002                0.019                 -0.006                 0.000                 0.007
PPP loans/Assets                                      4,980            0.057                0.069                 0.013                  0.040                 0.076

         Banks Matched to SBL Data
PPP loan in Core Markets/Assets                       4,333             0.034               0.037                 0.006                  0.023                 0.049
PPP loan in Peripheral Markets/Assets                 4,333             0.031               0.058                 0.003                  0.012                 0.030

Panel B: PPP Loans/Assets, by Bank Size
                                                        N               mean                  sd                   p25                    p50                   p75
Large (>$50 billion)                                    43              0.021               0.023                 0.002                  0.014                 0.034
Medium ($10 to $50 billion)                             90              0.055               0.050                 0.025                  0.055                 0.072
Small (Less than $10 billion)                         4,847             0.058               0.069                 0.013                  0.040                 0.076

Panel C: Bank 2019 Characteristics (for the Q2, 2020 sample)
                                                     N                  mean                  sd                   p25                    p50                    p75
Unused C&I Commitments/Assets                      4,980                0.031               0.035                 0.007                  0.021                  0.043
Small C&I Loans/Assets                             4,980                0.047               0.037                 0.021                  0.041                  0.065
Core Deposits/Assets                               4,980                0.780               0.074                 0.741                  0.791                  0.834
C&I loans/Assets                                   4,980                0.083               0.065                 0.040                  0.069                  0.111
Liquid Assets/Assets                               4,980                0.295               0.157                 0.178                  0.256                  0.381
Tier 1 Leverage Ratio                              4,980                0.118               0.035                 0.097                  0.109                  0.128
log(Assets)                                        4,980               12.565               1.468                11.614                 12.377                 13.260
log(Deposit-weighted average branch age)           4,980                3.990               0.676                3.612                  4.152                   4.511
Deposit-weighted COVID death rate                  4,980               23.580              34.052                2.854                  9.400                  27.762




                                                                                              37
                                                       Table 2 Summary Statistics for County-Level Economic Outcomes
This table reports summary statistics for the data used in the county-time panel regressions of real economic outcomes on measures of PPP credit. Small Business Revenue and
Total Spending come from https://tracktherecovery.org; see Chetty et al. (2020). Unemployment Rate is from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Small Business Revenue represents
the percent change in net revenue, calculated each week day as a seven-day moving average (seasonally adjusted), indexed to January 4-31, 2020. Total Spending is the
seasonally adjusted credit/debit card spending relative to January 4-31 2020. Unemployment Rate is by calendar month.
                                                                                                  Small Business Revenue        Total Spending          Unemployment Rate
                                                                                                                 Standard                Standard                   Standard
Time Period                             Description                                                   Mean      Deviation    Mean        Deviation       Mean       Deviation
1/1/2020 - 2/15/2020                    COVID affects Asia                                             0.028      0.162       0.002       0.078          4.635        1.975
Pre-COVID (2/16/2020 - 3/10/2020) COVID affects Western Europe                                         0.054      0.192       0.007       0.105          4.356        1.895
Crisis (3/11/2020 - 4/3/2020)           Global Pandemic declared; Financial Market turmoil            -0.150      0.269      -0.155       0.163          4.811        2.048
April (4/4/2020-4/30/2020)              Beginning of PPP Program                                      -0.229      0.289      -0.241       0.130         12.450        5.238
May                                     Continuation of PPP Program                                   -0.061      0.304      -0.125       0.138         10.348        4.117
June                                    Continuation of PPP Program                                   -0.028      0.294      -0.066       0.137          8.455        3.312
July                                    Continuation of PPP Program                                   -0.061      0.304      -0.050       0.124          7.878        3.082
August                                  PPP Program closed to new applications on August 8, 2020




                                                                                       38
                                  Table 3: Bank Business Lending in the First Two Quarters of 2020
This table reports regressions of bank C&I lending in the first two quarters of 2020 on pre-COVID balance sheet characteristics, from Call
Reports. The changes in lending are normalized by Q4, 2019 assets. C&I credit equals the sum of C&I loans on balance sheet plus unused
C&I commitments. log(Deposit-weighted average branch age) is derived from the 2019 Summary of Deposits data. Deposit-weighted
COVID death rate is derived from county-level COVID death rates within a bank's branch network. All other variables come from the pre-
COVID period (Q4, 2019) Call Reports. Stardard errors are clustered by bank headquarter state. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. '*'
denotes significance at the 10% level, '**' the 5% level, and '***' the 1% level.
                                                                 Q1, 2020                                        Q2, 2020
                                                  Change C&I            Change C&I                Change C&I                Change C&I
                                                  loans/Assets          credit/Assets             loans/Assets              credit/Assets
                                                       (1)                   (2)                       (3)                       (4)
Relationship Measures
Unused C&I comm./Assets                            0.0600***                0.00572                0.423***                  0.507***
                                                    (7.120)                  (0.452)                (7.217)                   (7.956)
Small C&I loans/Assets                              -0.0117                 6.36e-05                0.131**                    0.111*
                                                    (1.019)                (0.00522)                (2.094)                   (1.696)
Core deposits/Assets                                0.00261                 0.00390                0.0763***                 0.0836***
                                                    (1.172)                  (1.521)                (4.310)                   (4.628)
Other Balance Sheet Ratios
C&I loans/Assets                                   0.0179**                0.0230**                 0.0505                     0.0790*
                                                     (2.149)                (2.389)                 (1.116)                    (1.684)
Liquid assets/Assets                               -2.38e-05               -0.00141               -0.0315***                 -0.0331***
                                                    (0.0173)                (0.912)                 (4.388)                    (4.514)
Tier 1 leverage ratio                              0.0256**                0.0296**                 0.0470                     0.0553
                                                     (2.402)                (2.357)                 (0.982)                    (1.070)
Other Control Variables
log(Assets)                                       0.000402**              0.000192                -0.00436***               -0.00409***
                                                     (2.559)                (1.326)                  (3.973)                   (3.695)
log(Deposit-weighted average branch age)           -0.000371              -0.000612                -0.0317***                -0.0324***
                                                     (1.112)                (1.281)                  (10.06)                   (10.20)
Deposit-weighted COVID death rate                  9.73e-05*               2.23e-05                 3.51e-05                  3.42e-05
                                                     (1.684)                (0.462)                  (1.002)                   (0.987)
Constant                                          -0.00917***              -0.00567                 0.154***                  0.148***
                                                     (2.865)                (1.460)                  (7.298)                   (6.900)

Observations                                         5,031                   5,031                   4,980                     4,980
R-squared                                            0.074                   0.020                   0.235                     0.264




                                                                    39
             Table 4: Bank Lending in the Second Quarter of 2020, PPP v. non-PPP C&I Lending
This table reports regressions comparing bank non-PPP C&I lending v. PPP lending in the second quarter of 2020
on pre-COVID balance sheet characteristics, from Call Reports. The changes in lending are normalized by Q4,
2019 assets. C&I credit equals the sum of C&I loans on balance sheet plus unused C&I commitments.
log(Deposit-weighted average branch age) is derived from the 2019 Summary of Deposits data. Deposit-weighted
COVID death rate is derived from county-level COVID death rates within a bank's branch network. All other
variables come from the pre-COVID period (Q4, 2019) Call Reports. Stardard errors are clustered by bank
headquarter state. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. '*' denotes significance at the 10% level, '**' the 5%
level, and '***' the 1% level.
                                                        Change non-PPP Change non-PPP C&I
                                                       C&I loans/Assets           credit/Assets      PPP loans/Assets
                                                                 (1)                    (2)                    (3)
Relationship Measures
Unused C&I comm./Assets                                    -0.0778***               0.000111                0.494***
                                                              (8.225)               (0.00721)                (7.912)
Small C&I loans/Assets                                       0.00303                 -0.0140                0.127**
                                                              (0.219)                 (1.024)                (2.168)
Core deposits/Assets                                         -0.00412                0.00148               0.0809***
                                                              (1.502)                 (0.526)                (4.514)
Other Balance Sheet Ratios
C&I loans/Assets                                           -0.0229***                0.00507                 0.0716
                                                              (3.616)                 (0.700)                (1.573)
Liquid assets/Assets                                        -0.000192               -0.00117              -0.0320***
                                                              (0.132)                 (0.936)                (4.146)
Tier 1 leverage ratio                                        0.00222                 0.00878                 0.0427
                                                              (0.375)                 (1.016)                (0.897)
Other Control Variables
log(Assets)                                               -0.00108***            -0.000728***            -0.00309***
                                                              (5.601)                 (3.516)                (2.685)
log(Deposit-weighted average branch age)                   -0.000574*             -0.00128***             -0.0307***
                                                              (1.851)                 (3.136)                (9.094)
Deposit-weighted COVID death rate                            8.33e-06                6.15e-06               2.36e-05
                                                              (1.594)                 (1.006)                (0.659)
Constant                                                    0.0188***              0.0125***               0.132***
                                                              (4.736)                 (2.699)                (5.782)

Observations                                                4,980                 4,980                  4,980
R-squared                                                   0.123                 0.006                  0.262




                                                               40
                                         Table 5: Bank PPP Lending, by Size
This table reports regressions of bank PPP lending, normalized by Q4, 2019 assets, in the second quarter of 2020 on
pre-COVID balance sheet characteristics, from Call Reports. Large, medium-sized, and small banks are those with
>$50 billion, 10-50 billion, and <$10 billions in assets, respectively. log(Deposit-weighted average branch age) is
derived from the 2019 Summary of Depositsdata. Deposit-weighted COVID death rate is derived from county-level
COVID death rates within a bank's branch network. All other variables come from the pre-COVID period (Q4, 2019)
Call Report. Stardard errors are clustered by bank headquarter state. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. '*'
denotes significance at the 10% level, '**' the 5% level, and '***' the 1% level.
                                                        Large Banks           Medium Sized Banks         Small Banks
Relationship Measures                                         (1)                        (2)                   (3)
Unused C&I comm./Assets                                     0.0466                   0.601***              0.516***
                                                           (0.876)                    (3.914)                (7.965)
Small C&I loans/Assets                                     -0.0549                   0.570***               0.119**
                                                           (1.037)                    (2.722)                (2.077)
Core deposits/Assets                                       0.0437*                    0.0319               0.0815***
                                                           (1.884)                    (0.678)                (4.429)
Other Balance Sheet Ratios
C&I loans/Assets                                           0.104**                  -0.212***               0.0827*
                                                           (2.628)                    (2.919)                (1.761)
Liquid assets/Assets                                      -0.0391**                  -0.0591*             -0.0246***
                                                           (2.488)                    (1.745)                (3.103)
Tier 1 leverage ratio                                      -0.359*                    -0.0998                0.0514
                                                           (2.101)                    (0.495)                (1.023)
Other Control Variables
log(Assets)                                              -0.00736**                 -0.0320**              0.000215
                                                           (2.530)                    (2.254)                (0.163)
log(Deposit-weighted average branch age)                   0.00598                    -0.0204             -0.0293***
                                                           (1.053)                    (1.076)                (8.377)
Deposit-weighted COVID death rate                         -3.88e-05                  0.000163               1.73e-05
                                                           (1.260)                    (0.796)                (0.494)
Constant                                                   0.137**                     0.633*              0.0813***
                                                           (2.820)                    (1.907)                (3.173)

Observations                                               43                        90                 4,847
R-squared                                                0.609                     0.322                0.274




                                                             41
                                                                  Table 6: Bank PPP Lending, Relationship Measures in Core v. Peripheral Markets
This table reports regressions of bank PPP lending on pre-COVID balance sheet characteristics, separated into markets with and without bank branches. PPP lending data are taken from the Small Business
Administration, and bank characteristics are from Call Reports. Core Markets are counties in which the bank owns at least one branch; Peripheral Markets are counties in which the bank owns no branches. Branch
locations are determined from the 2019 Summary of Deposits data. The dependent variables are PPP lending in core and peripheral markets, normalized by Q4, 2019 assets, and their difference. Round 1 PPP
lendings include PPP loans approved before April 17 and Round 2 include loans approved after April 17. Large, medium-sized, and small banks are those with >$50 billion, 10-50 billion, and <$10 billions in assets,
respectively. Regressions include (but don't report) the other control variables from Tables 3-5. Stardard errors are clustered by bank headquarter state. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. '*' denotes significance
at the 10% level, '**' the 5% level, and '***' the 1% level.
                                             (1)             (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)           (8)              (9)              (10)           (11)             (12)
                                                        All banks                                 Large banks                                Mid-sized banks                                    Small banks
                                                         Peripheral                     Core       Peripheral                                   Peripheral                                       Peripheral
Panel A: All PPP                       Core Markets       Markets     Difference      Markets       Markets       Difference Core Markets        Markets        Difference      Core Markets      Markets         Difference
Unused C&I comm./Assets                   0.367***       0.147***      0.221***        0.0227        -0.0145        0.0372         0.390***        0.145           0.245*          0.384***       0.157***        0.227***
                                           (9.696)        (3.494)       (3.935)        (0.337)       (0.835)        (0.607)         (5.753)       (1.463)          (1.789)          (9.665)        (3.495)          (3.877)
Small C&I loans/Assets                    0.143***         0.0289       0.115**       -0.0806        -0.0242        -0.0563        0.699***       0.0122          0.687**          0.149***        0.0163         0.133***
                                           (3.978)        (0.696)       (2.484)        (1.065)       (0.906)        (0.836)         (3.759)      (0.0715)          (2.378)          (4.017)        (0.381)          (2.684)
Core deposits/Assets                     0.0604***        0.00386     0.0566***        0.0626        0.00322         0.0594         0.0222       -0.00653          0.0288         0.0592***       0.00451         0.0547***
                                           (6.351)        (0.259)       (4.127)        (1.644)       (0.494)        (1.744)         (0.732)       (0.316)          (0.836)          (6.360)        (0.291)          (3.810)

Observations                               4,333          4,333         4,333           40             40             40              81             81              81              4,212          4,212          4,212
R-squared                                  0.339          0.076         0.058          0.514          0.584          0.423           0.607          0.161           0.328            0.368          0.074          0.061

                                                   All banks                                      Large banks                                Mid-sized banks                                  Small banks
                                                    Peripheral                         Core        Peripheral                                  Peripheral                                      Peripheral
Panel B: First Round                  Core Markets   Markets         Difference      Markets        Markets       Difference     Core Markets   Markets      Difference          Core Markets   Markets          Difference
Unused C&I comm./Assets                 0.296***    0.121***          0.174***        0.0102         -0.0133        0.0234        0.317***       0.0459      0.271***              0.312***    0.130***          0.181***
                                         (10.47)      (4.735)          (4.959)        (0.191)        (1.001)        (0.488)        (4.801)       (1.532)      (3.597)               (10.45)      (4.717)           (4.892)
Small C&I loans/Assets                  0.114***    0.0495**          0.0642**        -0.0397       -0.0389*      -0.000766       0.428***       0.0853       0.342**              0.118***     0.0423*          0.0758**
                                         (3.864)      (2.084)          (2.082)        (0.571)        (1.984)       (0.0122)        (2.896)       (1.201)      (2.237)               (3.899)      (1.795)           (2.291)
Core deposits/Assets                   0.0459***     -0.00107        0.0469***       0.0493**        0.00195       0.0474**         0.0190      -0.00691      0.0259              0.0449***    -0.000949         0.0459***
                                         (5.617)      (0.107)          (5.464)        (2.204)        (0.486)        (2.276)        (0.796)       (0.593)      (1.212)               (5.622)     (0.0922)           (5.197)

Observations                               4,206          4,206         4,206           40             40             40              80             80              80              4,086          4,086          4,086
R-squared                                  0.334          0.084         0.071          0.461          0.554          0.384           0.544          0.184           0.477            0.370          0.084          0.077

                                                   All banks                                      Large banks                                Mid-sized banks                                  Small banks
                                                    Peripheral                          Core       Peripheral                                  Peripheral                                      Peripheral
Panel C: Second Round                 Core Markets   Markets         Difference       Markets       Markets       Difference     Core Markets   Markets      Difference          Core Markets   Markets          Difference
Unused C&I comm./Assets                0.0608***       0.0201        0.0408**         0.0129        -0.00119       0.0141         0.0693**       0.0557       0.0136              0.0605***       0.0203         0.0402**
                                         (5.214)      (1.329)         (2.245)         (0.417)        (0.175)       (0.509)         (2.055)       (1.243)      (0.217)               (5.017)      (1.262)           (2.149)
Small C&I loans/Assets                 0.0317***     -0.00460        0.0363**         -0.0403        0.0143        -0.0545        0.247***       -0.0197      0.267**             0.0338***     -0.00909         0.0429***
                                         (3.469)      (0.280)         (2.386)         (0.771)        (0.945)       (1.277)         (2.804)       (0.258)      (2.064)               (3.657)      (0.531)           (2.715)
Core deposits/Assets                   0.0162***      0.00271        0.0135**          0.0134        0.00132        0.0121         0.00365     -0.000912      0.00456             0.0160***      0.00315         0.0129**
                                         (6.320)      (0.521)         (2.659)         (0.780)        (0.439)       (0.818)         (0.281)      (0.0942)      (0.298)               (6.349)      (0.578)           (2.423)

Observations                               4,329          4,329         4,329           40             40             40              81             81              81              4,208          4,208          4,208
R-squared                                  0.216          0.061         0.038          0.395          0.536          0.362           0.293          0.164           0.176            0.227          0.059          0.038




                                                                                                                42
                                                                Table 7: PPP Lending, Within-Bank Tests
This table reports bank-county level regressions of PPP lending on bank-county characteristics. The dependent variable is log(1+PPP lending amount) by the bank in the
county. We include all banks merged to the SBA PPP data, plus all banks identified as having zero PPP lending from the bank Call Reports. For each bank, we inlude
all counties in which the bank owns at least one branch. Deposit characteristics are taken from the 2019 Summary of Deposits. CRA characteristics are taken from the
2018 CRA data. Regressions with CRA data include only banks with assets over $1 billion. Large, medium-sized, and small banks are those with >$50 billion, 10-50
billion, and <$10 billions in assets, respectively. Stardard errors are clustered by bank and county. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. '*' denotes significance at the
10% level, '**' the 5% level, and '***' the 1% level.
                                                            All banks                    Large banks                    Mid-sized banks                  Small banks
                                                        (1)           (2)              (3)           (4)               (5)            (6)              (7)           (8)
%Bank Deposits from the county                       0.574***       0.0753           -1.106       -1.534*           -0.0706         -0.314          0.801***       0.0184
                                                      (5.933)       (0.478)         (0.906)       (2.019)           (0.173)        (0.662)           (5.226)      (0.0605)
log(deposit-weighted average branch age)            0.0876***      0.172***        0.245***      0.242***          0.110**        0.0926**          0.0510**      0.152**
                                                      (4.110)       (5.200)         (4.599)       (5.266)           (2.542)        (2.281)           (2.120)       (2.326)
%County Deposits held by the bank                    5.796***      3.888***        5.271***      3.343***          5.762***       3.313***          5.032***      6.394***
                                                      (19.43)       (11.48)         (11.23)       (6.683)           (9.682)        (5.905)           (7.353)       (4.699)
%Bank CRA Loans from the county                                    3.832**                         6.798                          5.385***                        8.864***
                                                                    (2.451)                       (1.236)                          (3.099)                         (3.077)
%County CRA Loans held by the bank                                 3.976***                      4.264***                         3.500***                         1.386*
                                                                    (10.23)                       (8.947)                          (5.952)                         (1.651)

Observations                                          22,830        13,342           4,922            4,922          2,618           2,593           13,423           3,882
R-squared                                              0.966         0.954           0.932            0.935          0.985           0.985            0.972           0.961
Bank FEs                                               YES           YES             YES              YES            YES             YES              YES             YES
County FEs                                             YES           YES             YES              YES            YES             YES              YES             YES




                                                                                       43
                                                 Table 8: County Level PPP Lending
This table reports county level regressions of PPP lending on county-level banking characteristics and demographics. The
dependent variable is county-level PPP lending scaled by the number of establishments with fewer than 500 employees. Total PPP
lending includes all PPP loans in the SBA data; the division into core v. peripheral lenders includes only loans which we were able
to match to Call Reports lenders (about 94.8% of the total). Core lenders are banks that have at least one branch in the county and
peripheral lenders are those witout branch in the county. Round 1 PPP lendings include PPP loans approved before April 17 and
Round 2 include loans approved after April 17. Branches/Establishment is the ratio of total branches / establishments with fewer
than 500 employees as of 2019. Predicted PPP Lending equals the weighted average of each bank’s predicted bank-level PPP
Lending/Assets in their core markets, with weights equal to each bank’s share of total deposits in the county from 2019. Stardard
errors are clustered by state. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. '*' denotes significance at the 10% level, '**' the 5% level, and
'***' the 1% level.
                                                                                          Total PPP per Establishment
                                                                                   Core Lenders               Peripheral Lenders
                                                  Total PPP per                              Second
                                            Establishment (000s of $s)     First Round       Round       First Round Second Round
                                                        (1)                      (2)            (3)           (4)             (5)
Branches/Establishment                               888.6***                192.6***        30.15*        497.2***         136.6**
                                                      (177.7)                 (42.23)        (16.94)        (110.1)         (54.43)
Predicted PPP Lending                                  118.6                 291.2***         -14.01       -113.3**        -45.84**
                                                      (73.51)                 (22.15)        (13.20)        (51.38)         (21.30)
County COVID death rate                              0.118***                 0.0136       0.0183**       0.0539***       0.0297***
                                                     (0.0215)               (0.00862)      (0.00853)       (0.0158)       (0.00718)
Log of County Population                             -3.049**                3.309***       1.496***      -5.523***       -2.011***
                                                      (1.333)                 (0.404)        (0.213)        (0.806)         (0.477)
Percent with College or more                         -25.16**                22.80***       7.357***      -38.29***       -15.00***
                                                      (12.20)                 (4.423)        (1.995)        (6.883)         (3.754)
Percent between ages 20 and 44                        65.15**                  3.574         -4.102        41.36***        18.46**
                                                      (26.35)                 (5.640)        (4.000)        (14.32)         (7.832)
Log of Median County Income                          42.91***                  2.104        5.318***       24.21***        10.22***
                                                      (8.526)                 (1.668)        (1.435)        (5.525)         (2.632)
Unemployment in 2019                                   86.32                   -36.63       68.80***         5.089           49.18
                                                      (138.8)                 (26.19)        (20.88)        (89.99)         (38.40)
Constant                                            -416.3***               -57.28***      -68.70***      -193.8***       -86.87***
                                                      (93.69)                 (18.04)        (16.75)        (60.71)         (28.48)

Observations                                           3,068                  3,068            3,068           3,068           3,068
R-Squared                                              0.074                  0.233            0.275           0.139           0.110




                                                                    44
                   Table 9 County-Level Economic Outcomes and PPP Lending by Local Banks
This table reports county-time panel regressions of real economic outcomes on measures of the size and structure of
local banks. Small Business Revenue and Total Spending come from https://tracktherecovery.org; see Chetty et al.
(2020). Monthly unemployment rates by county are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Predicted PPP Lending
equals the weighted average of each bank’s predicted bank-level PPP Lending/Assets in their core markets, with
weights equal to each bank’s share of total deposits in the county from 2019. Stardard errors are clustered by county
and time in columns (1) and (2) and by count and state-time in column (3). T-statistics are reported in parentheses.
'*' denotes significance at the 10% level, '**' the 5% level, and '***' the 1% level. F-statistic tests that the Predicted
PPP lending, times the four time interactions from April on, equal zero.
                                                      Small Business
                                                         Revenue             Total Spending         Unemployment Rate
                                                            (1)                    (2)                        (3)
March x Predicted PPP Lending                             0.415                  0.267*                     -0.618
                                                         (0.331)                 (0.158)                   (1.147)
April x Predicted PPP Lending                             0.179                   0.258                      1.837
                                                         (0.472)                 (0.230)                   (5.105)
May x Predicted PPP Lending                               0.525                   0.398                   -10.71***
                                                         (0.502)                 (0.264)                   (3.946)
June x Predicted PPP Lending                              0.577                  0.0783                   -15.19***
                                                         (0.522)                 (0.301)                   (3.608)
July x Predicted PPP Lending                              0.223                  0.0578                   -15.04***
                                                         (0.535)                 (0.262)                   (3.537)

F-Test                                                     0.78                   1.08                   8.13
P-value                                                   0.540                  0.370                  0.001
County Fixed Effects                                      YES                    YES                    YES
State x Time effects                                      YES                    YES                    YES
Frequency                                                 Daily                  Daily                Monthly
              Control Variables:                              Calendar Interaction x Branches/Establishment
              Control Variables:                                 Calendar Interaction X Ln of Population
              Control Variables:                                Calendar Interaction X COVID Death rate
              Control Variables:                          Calendar Interaction x County Median Income (2018)
              Control Variables:                                  Calendar Interaction X Share College
              Control Variables:                              Calendar Inteaction x Share 20-44 years of age
              Control Variables:                          Calendar Interaction x Local Unemployment in 2019
Observations                                             430,519               347,730                 21,476
R-squared                                                 0.578                  0.665                  0.918




                                                                 45
