                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               EXPORTING FROM CHINA:
                         THE DETERMINANTS OF TRADE STATUS

                                          Russell Cooper
                                           Guan Gong
                                          Guanliang Hu
                                            Ping Yan

                                       Working Paper 28289
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28289


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Russell Cooper, Guan Gong, Guanliang Hu, and Ping Yan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Exporting from China: The Determinants of Trade Status
Russell Cooper, Guan Gong, Guanliang Hu, and Ping Yan
NBER Working Paper No. 28289
December 2020
JEL No. E24,F14,F16

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper studies the exporting decision of Chinese manufacturing firms. The economic
framework stresses the dynamic decision by both state controlled and private entities to export in
a model with labor adjustment costs. In this complex environment, a simple decision rule
whereby export status depends only on current productivity does not hold. Nor does this rule
match data patterns. The estimated model is used to understand the factors that influence export
status. The analysis highlights the economic significance of labor adjustment costs in shaping
both employment and trade dynamics.

Russell Cooper                                      Guanliang Hu
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
European University Institute                       Penn State University
Villa La Fonte                                      State College, PA 16801
Via delle Fontanelle 18                             guanliang.woo@gmail.com
I-50014 San Domenico di Fiesole (FI)
Italy                                               Ping Yan
and NBER                                            National School of Development
russellcoop@gmail.com                               Peking University
                                                    China
Guan Gong                                           pyan@nsd.pku.edu.cn
School of Economics
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
777 Guoding RD, Shanghai
China
ggong@mail.shufe.edu.cn
           Exporting from China: The Determinants of Trade Status
                  Russell Cooperand Guan Gongand Guanliang Hu and Ping Yan§

                                               December 22, 2020



                                                     Abstract

           This paper studies the exporting decision of Chinese manufacturing firms. The economic framework
       stresses the dynamic decision by both state controlled and private entities to export in a model with
       labor adjustment costs. In this complex environment, a simple decision rule whereby export status
       depends only on current productivity does not hold. Nor does this rule match data patterns. The
       estimated model is used to understand the factors that influence export status. The analysis highlights
       the economic significance of labor adjustment costs in shaping both employment and trade dynamics.


1      Motivation
China is the largest exporting country in the world. In 2019, its exports of goods reached a record
high of almost 2.5 trillion U.S. dollars, accounting for 13% of goods exports in the world and around
20% of China's GDP.1 At the plant level, China's exporters do not fit neatly into the standard patterns
documented in the literature. First, although China's exporters are on average relatively larger, they
are typically not more productive. Second, ownership plays a prominent role in exporting. Privately
controlled firms are more likely to export and those that do sell most of their output in the foreign
market. In contrast, state controlled export less frequently and earn a smaller share abroad.
    This paper asks: what are the determinants of trade status? A simple and forceful answer is produc-
tivity: high productivity firms are exporters, others only sell domestically. But, at least for China, this
simple prediction is inconsistent with the data.
    Figure 1 shows the distributions of the average (revenue) productivity of labor across manufacturing
plants in China, by ownership.2 The left panel displays the distribution for exporters and non-exporters
of state controlled enterprises, hereafter SCE, while the right focuses on privately controlled enterprises,
hereafter PCE.
    
    Department of Economics, European University Institute; Department of Economics, Pennsylvania State University;
Research Associate, NBER, russellcoop@gmail.com
  
    School of Economics, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics
  
    Department of Economics, Pennsylvania State University
  §
    CCER, National School of Development, Peking University
  1
    Data are from China trade statistics released by World Bank: https://wits.worldbank.org/CountryProfile/en/CHN.
  2
    Details of the data underlying this figure are provided in Section 2.




                                                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1                              MOTIVATION


                   30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Non-exporters                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Non-exporters
                   25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Exporters                                                                                  25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Exporters


                   20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
      Percentage




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Percentage
                   15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15



                   10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10



                    5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5



                    0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                        ,-4.6]
                                 [-4.6,-4.2]
                                               [-4.2,-3.8]
                                                             [-3.8,-3.4]
                                                                           [-3.4,-3.0]
                                                                                         [-3.0,-2.6]
                                                                                                       [-2.6,-2.2]
                                                                                                                     [-2.2,-1.8]
                                                                                                                                   [-1.8,-1.4]
                                                                                                                                                 [-1.4,-1.0]
                                                                                                                                                               [-1.0,-0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                             [-0.6,-0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                           [-0.2,+0.2]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,-4.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [-4.6,-4.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [-4.2,-3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [-3.8,-3.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [-3.4,-3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [-3.0,-2.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [-2.6,-2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [-2.2,-1.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [-1.8,-1.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [-1.4,-1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [-1.0,-0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [-0.6,-0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [-0.2,+0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   )




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              )
                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+0.2,+0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+0.6,+1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+1.0,+1.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   [+1.4,+1.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [+1.8,+2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               [+2.2,+2.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [+2.6,+3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [+3.0,+3.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+3.4,+3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+3.8,+4.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+4.2,+4.6]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [+0.2,+0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [+0.6,+1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [+1.0,+1.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [+1.4,+1.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [+1.8,+2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [+2.2,+2.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [+2.6,+3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [+3.0,+3.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [+3.4,+3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [+3.8,+4.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [+4.2,+4.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   [+4.6,+




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [+4.6,+
                        (-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (-
                                                                                                                                                         ln(Labor Productivity)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ln(Labor Productivity)


                                                                                                                                                       (a) SCE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (b) PCE

                                                                                                                                                                             Figure 1: Distributions of Average Labor Productivity
      This figure shows the distributions of productivity, measured as average labor productivity (revenue per worker),
      for state and private controlled enterprises by export status. Year, industry, and location-fixed effects are removed.


    There are three aspects of these figures that motivate our analysis. The first concerns selection into
exporting. In static models of selection into trade the distribution of productivity by exporters would lie
entirely to the right of that for non-exporters. This is clearly not the case for Chinese plants. In fact, for
the PCE the two distributions are nearly indistinct.3
    The traditional trade literature, building on Melitz (2003), stresses the selection of exporters based
upon productivity. The presence of a sunk cost plays a major role. But, for our sample of Chinese
manufacturing plants, the selection process is more complex. That is, the evidence is not consistent with
the presence of a simple decision rule such as: export if and only productivity exceeds some threshold.
    Second, ownership matters. As discussed below in terms of summary statistics, the SCE and PCE
samples differ in many dimensions. In Figure 1, exporters are a larger share of productive plants for the
SCE while for PCE the opposite is true. As developed further below, there are also significant differences
on the intensive margin with many SCE having a low export share while almost 40% of the PCE, who
export, have an export share over 95%.
    Third, looking at average labor productivity, as in these figures and some of the literature, can be
misleading. For many commonly used production functions, in the absence of adjustment frictions, the
distribution of the average revenue product of any factor will be degenerate. That is, factor demand
will offset underlying productivity differences equating marginal products (and in many specifications the
average product) of a factor across producers. This leads us to consider other measures of productivity
that do not reflect labor reallocation and, at the same time, to examine the role of labor adjustment
costs.
    Drawing upon this, the current paper adds two key elements to the standard model. First, there are
explicit costs of labor adjustment which, among other things, create a mapping from the distributions of
productivity (and other shocks) into the distributions of average revenue productivity.4 In the presence
  3
    Looking at distributions of productivity motivated the work of Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (2003) on US
manufacturing plants.
  4
    While a common component in firm level studies, factor adjustment costs are notably absent in trade models. Co¸
                                                                                                                  sar,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                           1   MOTIVATION


of these costs, the sorting of firms into export status by current productivity no longer holds and the
distribution of productivity by export status becomes a much richer object for study. Further, these ad-
justment costs interact with the export decision: firms changing export status will create large variations
in employment size.
    Second, we consider a rich set of firm level shocks, going beyond TFP shocks to all stochastic demand
both in the home market and abroad. This allows us to generate a fraction of relatively small (size)
exporters, a large dispersion of export share, and large firms with a relatively low export share, matching
some features of the data. Because of the presence of both technology and demand shocks, we focus on
plant-specific profitability rather than productivity.5
    Accordingly, the plant-level optimization problem, specified in Section 3, includes both costs of ad-
justing labor as well as costs of entering and remaining in export markets. Further, there are shocks to
productivity and demand. The choice of labor input as well as export status is a key outcome of the
model.
    A main finding of the paper is that labor adjustment costs matter. The estimation, through simu-
lated method of moments as discussed in Section 4, allows us to determine the relative importance of
the adjustment and export costs as well as the shock processes that best match data moments. The
estimation makes clear the role of labor adjustment costs in matching moments, above and beyond the
frictions created by standard trade frictions. This is established both by the statistical significance of the
estimated adjustment costs and also by an alternative estimation exercise in which the adjustment costs
are eliminated. There we see that the fit of the model falls dramatically, both in terms of labor and trade
moments.
    The estimation is enhanced by counterfactuals that eliminate adjustment costs, trading costs and/or
sources of demand variation. In this way, we uncover the effects of adjustment and trade costs on trade
status by ownership.
    In Section 5, the estimated model is used to study our motivating question: what are the determinants
of export status? In simulations, removing adjustment costs reduces considerably the overlap in the
productivity distributions by export status.6 Without these costs, the gap between the size (median
employment) of exporters and non-exporters increases considerably for both SCE and PCE. In this
experiment, the employment weighted fraction of plants who export increases by almost 60 percentage
points for the SCE and by 45 percentage points for the PCE.7 The response of export status to profitability
shock increases for both ownership groups.
    Demand shocks also contribute to the overlapping productivity distributions since the measured prof-
itability of some plants may be driven by strong domestic demand. Though these plants appear productive
and can be large, they are not exporters. As discussed in sub-section 5.2, this seems to be the case with
Guner, and Tybout (2016) is an important exception. The next sub-section contains a literature review and we return to
these differences from the literature as the analysis develops.
   5
     This follows Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006) and Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2018).
   6
     Going further, if we re-estimate the model without labor adjustment costs, the fit worsens by a factor of 10.
   7
     These large changes reflect both the increase in the fraction of plants exporting as well as a change in the size distribution
of plants. And this distribution is not consistent with the data, in support of our estimates of the presence of adjustment
costs.



                                                                3
                                                                                         1   MOTIVATION


the SCE: in the absence of demand shocks the profitability of exporters is almost entirely to the right of
the non-exporters. But this is not the case for the PCE.
    Moreover, removing the demand shock reduces the average export intensity from 0.21 to 0.03 for the
SCE and from 0.66 to 0.16 for the PCE. After removing the demand shock, the whole size distribution
of exporters shifts to the right, which significantly reduces the overlap of the size distributions between
exporters and non-exporters. As a consequence, the gap between median employment between exporters
and non-exporters increases dramatically.8
    To better understand the effects of ownership, the model is estimated for both state and privately
controlled enterprises. A key difference, as in Cooper, Gong, and Yan (2015), is that the SCE are more
patient than their private counterparts. Further, the SCE have a higher average foreign demand (relative
to average domestic demand) than PCE. For the SCE, the firing costs are significantly larger than hiring
costs; for PCE, however, it is the opposite.
    Given these estimates we conduct counterfactual experiments, resolving the SCE optimization problem
using a subset of PCE parameters. From these experiments, a key to understanding the difference in
PCE and SCE outcomes comes from the estimates of the stochastic processes and the curvature of the
revenue functions. In particular, if we give the SCE the PCE shock process, determining both technology
and demand, then the fit of the SCE model deteriorates. This is due to both changes in the employment
adjustment distribution and in the export status choice, reflecting more volatility in the driving processes.
Further, the SCE moments are very sensitive to the curvature of the revenue functions, reflecting market
power. Other parameter differences, such as discounting, matter to a lesser degree.
    Returning to Figure 1, why is there so much overlap in the distribution of average labor productivity
by export status? First, we argue that this overlap also is present with other measures of productivity,
such as the revenue based measure of profitability. Second, these patterns remain if we study a few key
sectors. Third, we find that the presence of labor adjustment costs is instrumental: if these costs are
removed then the distribution of profitability for exporters lies largely to the right of that for the non-
exporting plants. Fourth, the presence of demand shocks also impacts these distributions. For the SCE,
removing the demand shocks also improves sorting. In contrast, removing the sunk cost of exporting is
not a main factor influencing these profitability distributions.

Related Literature
Alessandria, Arkolakis, and Ruhl (2020) provides a recent, comprehensive review of dynamic trade models
and evidence. Sunk costs play a central role in their analysis, following Melitz (2003). They point out
how sorting by productivity may be imperfect in a dynamic setting. The key is that some relative low
productivity firms may remain as exporters to avoid having to repay the sunk cost of entry in the future.
The magnitude of this effect will depend, inter alia, on the magnitude of the fixed cost of production as
an exporter and the persistence of shocks. Their Table 2 indicates the persistence of export status. We
return to these points below in our discussion of the Chinese data and the properties of our estimated
model.
  8
      It increase from 405 to 2526 for SCE and from 45 to 137 for PCE.



                                                            4
                                                                                                              2   FACTS


    Clearly our motivation is similar to that of Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (2003), but our
approach is quite different. They confront the distribution of average labor productivity with a model of
Bertrand competition between firms with heterogeneous productivity. This generates variable markups.
They also stress the important observation of the relatively small role of exports in total revenue for most
exporters. We study that as well.
    The two key elements of our model, the dynamic nature of labor demand and demand as well as
productivity shocks, were not present in their framework. Further, they focus on average labor produc-
tivity while we go beyond this measure to look at overall profitability at the plant level. As the analysis
proceeds, we make clear the role of these model components.
    Co¸sar, Guner, and Tybout (2016) allows for hiring and firing cost and studies the impact of trade
policy in Columbia. In that model, the only shock is to productivity and they focus on export status
rather than intensity. Selection into exporting is not a point of their analysis.
    Ruhl and Willis (2017) study new exporter dynamics. They find that the standard sunk cost models
are unable to explain the pattern of initially exporting relatively small amounts and then, conditional on
survival, expanding export activity. They introduce a richer demand structure and stochastic entry costs
to match these observations. While dynamics are important, that paper does not include adjustment
costs, a focus of our model.
    Firooz (2020) studies the impact of trade on job turnover in a dynamic search model. Thus that
framework too has labor market frictions. The focus of the paper is on the effects of trade liberalization
when markups are endogenous.


2       Facts
This section provides an overview of the data used in our analysis. The point of the section is to lay
out some basic facts about plants in China and to further motivate our evaluation of the determinants
of export status.
    The data are from Annual Surveys of Industrial Production, from (2005-2007), conducted by the
National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) of China.9 The data include observations on all public plants as well
as private plants with revenue exceeding a cut-off.10
    Tables 1 summarizes the characteristics of exporters and non-exporters in the public and private
sector from our unbalanced panel from 2005-2007. Here a plant is deemed an exporter in a year if its
export value is strictly positive in that year. This allows the export status of a plant to vary over time.
    Following Cooper, Gong, and Yan (2015) plants are either state controlled enterprises (SCE) or private
controlled enterprises (PCE). This classification is based upon the structure of ownership in 2005 through
the control of shares variable. Plants whose ownership changed over the sample period are excluded.
    For this sample, there are almost 15 times more private than state controlled plants. On average the
SCE have almost 4 times as many workers and are also more capital intensive than the PCE. Average
    9
     These are plant-level observations as each data entry has a unique physical address. Earlier periods were excluded due
to the exchange rate policy change in 2005.
  10
     The revenue cut-off is 5 million yuan (about $700,000).



                                                            5
                                                                               3   DYNAMIC OPTIMIZATION


                                      Table 1: Data: Summary Statistics

                                    SCE                                                PCE
                      All       Exporters Nonexporters                  all        Exporters      Nonexporters
#plants            14,209         2,586            11,623            206,258        62,047            144,211
va                 89,643        194,368           67,703             15,528        18,845             14,097
revenue            278,818       654,456           200,119            54,335        70,006             47,574
employment           629          1,239              501               167           237                137
va/emp               136           146               131                90            77                100
rev/emp              431           513               389               315           284                338
All monetary terms are in 1,000 RMB Yuan, deflated to 1998 level. The sample is trimmed to exclude the upper and lower
2.5% tails by employment size. Firms whose value-added, employment, capital, or revenue were negative are dropped. Value
added per worker (va/emp) and revenue per worker (rev.emp) are weighted by plant size.


revenue and average value added per worker are higher for the SCE.
    Exporters are a minority: about 18% of the SCE and 30% of the PCE export. For both SCE and PCE,
exporters are on average larger in terms of value added, revenue, and employment. For the SCE, exporters
are more productive (defined as either revenue or value added per worker) than non-exporters. For PCE,
non-exporters are more productive (defined as either revenue or value added per worker) than exporters.
Of course, measures of output per unit of factor input are not strictly exogenous so, as noted above, this
is not direct evidence about the sorting between exporting and non-exporting plants by productivity.
Refinements of these measures and through them an evaluation of the productivity differences by export
status is a topic returned to below.
    The analysis goes beyond Table 1 to include a set of moments that quantify both trade and employment
patterns in more detail. Those moments, presented in Table 4, include the size distribution of exporting
and non-exporting plants as well as the export rates and transitions in export status. These moments
guide the theory model that we construct. As we shall see, there is evidence of both inaction in changes
in employment as well as episodes of large job creation and job destruction, for both ownership groups.
Further, though the distributions shown in Figure 1 are not included in the moments that we match, the
estimated model will exhibit similar overlap and this becomes a focal point for uncovering the roles of
labor adjustment costs and trade frictions. Thus it is essential that the model includes these features.


3    Dynamic Optimization
This section specifies the dynamic optimization problems of producers. It provides the framework for the
estimation.
    The economy is composed of private and state controlled enterprises. Cooper, Gong, and Yan (2015)
argue that SCE decisions are best explained as the solution to a dynamic profit maximization problem.
Thus in our analysis, all plants maximize profits though ownership type will influence the parameters.


                                                         6
                                                                                     3   DYNAMIC OPTIMIZATION


For the following presentation, the ownership type is suppressed.
     At a point in time, the plant is in state   (z, Ad , Af , e-1 , x) where z is productivity at the plant
level, Ad represents a domestic demand shock, Af is a foreign demand shock, e-1 is the stock of workers
employed in the previous period and x  {0, 1} is the (inherited) export status of the plant. If x = 1
then the plant exported in the previous period. The shocks to productivity and demand, (z, Ad , Af ), are
assumed to follow independent AR(1) processes, estimated below.
     At the beginning of a period, the plant chooses between three options: selling in the domestic market,
selling in both the domestic and foreign markets or exit. The value of the plant in state  is given by:

                                               V () = max{V d (), V df (), V exit ()}.                                  (1)

     A continuing plant has two controls: (i) the number of workers to employ in the current period, e,
(ii) whether to sell only domestically or in both domestic and foreign markets. The value of a plant that
sells only domestically is given by:

                         V d () = max Rd (z, Ad , e) - d - e - C (e-1 , e) + E | V ( ).                                 (2)
                                           e

for all . For non-exporters, the revenue function of Rd (z, Ad , e) is from domestic sales only and thus
depends only on productivity z and domestic demand, Ad . There is a fixed cost of production d that
serves to induce exit. Labor costs are given by the e , where  is the wage rate.11 The cost of labor
adjustment is given by C (e-1 , e) and is described in detail below.
    The value of a plant that sells in domestic and foreign markets is given by:


       V df () = max                     Rj (z, Aj , sj e) - d - f - e - C (e-1 , e) - 1(x = 0) + E | V ( )             (3)
                   e,sd ,sf
                              j {d,f }


for all , where j = d, f denotes the domestic and foreign markets respectively. Here sj is the fraction
of the workforce e involved in production for market j = d, f , with sd + sf = 1. We do not observe this
share in the data.
    In (3),  is a sunk cost associated with entry into export. This is a traditional model component and
implies that not all plants will choose to export. There is also an additional fixed operating cost that
depends on export status. If, for example, f > 0, a plant may elect to exit from exporting but remain
active in the domestic market.12
    In this optimization problem, revenue is the sum of the revenues earned in the two markets. The
revenue functions do not have the same curvature: d = f . As explained further below, one of the
empirical challenges is that we do not directly observe employment by use but rather total employment
for each plant.
  11
     This is a point where the analysis of private and state controlled plants will differ.
  12
     The literature contains models with fixed and/or sunk exporting costs. For example, Ghironi and Melits (2005) introduce
a fixed adjustment cost as a type of export cost while Alessandria and Choi (2007) include both a fixed and a sunk cost.
Melitz (2003) is a static model so that this distinction does not appear.



                                                                 7
                                                                                 3   DYNAMIC OPTIMIZATION


       The cost of labor adjustment is represented by C (e-1 , e).13 The cost of adjustment function is:

                                                                                     2
                                                                    +     e - e-1
                             C (e-1 , e) = F + +  + (e - e-1 ) +                         e-1                        (4)
                                                                    2       e-1
if there is job creation, e > e-1 . Similarly

                                                                                     2
                                                                    -     e - e-1
                             C (e-1 , e) = F - +  - (e-1 - e) +                          e-1                        (5)
                                                                    2       e-1
if there is job destruction, e < e-1 . If e = e-1 , so there are no net changes in employment, then
C (e-1 , e)  0.
    There are three types of adjustment costs, with differences allowed for the job creation and job
destruction margins. There are quadratic adjustment cost, parameterized by ( + ,  - ), a fixed cost of
adjustment is parameterized by (F + , F - ) and linear adjustment costs, ( + ,  - ). In all cases, these costs
can differ between job creation and destruction. As in Cooper, Gong, and Yan (2015), there may be a
threshold for the non-convex adjustment costs.
    These adjustment costs are introduced to match key features of the data. It is common to use
adjustment costs to match plant-level observations on job creation and destruction. In this study, we
highlight the importance of these costs for trade decisions, on both the extensive and intensive margins.
    As we shall see, there is an interesting interaction between the discrete decisions regarding export
status and employment adjustment. Changes in export status are highly correlated with periods of labor
adjustment. Among other things, this makes clear that the cost of labor adjustment itself has an impact
on export status and that the cost of exporting (beginning to export) also influences labor demand.
    The revenue function depends explicitly on the labor input as other factors of production are assumed
to be flexible and are optimally chosen.14 It is common to assume constant returns to scale and constant
elasticity of demand, so the revenue function takes the form:15

                                                                          j
                                            Rj (z, Aj , sj e) = Aj (zsj e) .                                        (6)

The coefficient j reflects the factor shares from the production function along with the elasticity of
demand. The variable Aj represents the demand for that plant's output. Total factor productivity is
represented by z and is common to both revenue functions.
    It might appear that the choice problem of an exporter can be solved as if there were two independent
divisions within the plant. That is, looking at (3), total revenue and total wage bill is just the sum over
the two activities. But the problems are interrelated because of the adjustment costs. This will generate
a type of substitution across domestic and foreign sales in response to a demand shock in one market
because a cheaper source of workers might be through variations in the share, sj , rather than through
adjusting the total number of workers.
  13
     See Cooper, Gong, and Yan (2015) for a full discussion of labor adjustment costs for Chinese manufacturings.
  14
     Cooper, Gong, and Yan (2015) contains an extensive analysis of the interaction between capital and labor adjustment
at these Chinese plants.
  15
     Appendix section 7.1 provides details.



                                                           8
                                                                                       4   QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS


    There is also the prospect of entry and exit by private plants. A private entrant pays a cost ,
denominated in units of labor and multiplied by the wage,  . By assumption, the entrant begins operation
at a low level of employment and a profitability shock determined after entry. The free entry condition is

                                               Ez,Ad ,Af V (z, Ad , Af , e- , 0) = .                         (7)

The value of entry is sensitive to labor costs.
    As for exit, the third option in (1), private plants have an option to discontinue operations. There
is no capital owned by the firm and no further claims on the firm upon exit. Hence the value of exit
satisfies V exit () = 0 for all .16
    There is no entry/exit for the public sector plants. We treat this extensive margin as a policy option
rather than the outcome of profit maximizing behavior.


4         Quantitative Analysis
The underlying parameters associated with the revenue function, the shock processes and adjustment
costs are estimated using a simulated method of moments approach. That approach solves:

                                         £  min (M d - M s ())W (M d - M s ()) .                             (8)

The vector  includes the parameters governing the revenue, labor adjustment costs, exporting costs and
the stochastic processes. These were introduced in the model discussion and are summarized below in
Table 2.
    We first discuss the moments chosen for the estimation and then report results. Keep in mind that
there is a sample of state controlled plants as well as a sample of private plants. The parameters are
estimated separately allowing, as in Cooper, Gong, and Yan (2015), for differences in adjustment costs,
exporting costs and discount factors by ownership.

4.1         Moments
The moments were selected in part for their inherent relevance for the discussion of the interaction
between labor dynamics and export status and for their ability to identify key parameters. The parameter
estimates are useful as inputs into subsequent policy analysis.17
    The moments, described in Table 3 and given as the rows labeled "Data" in Table 4, are split into three
groups. The first set are those that characterize labor dynamics at the plant-level. These includes the
serial correlation in log employment (sc ), job destruction and creation rates in excess of 30% (JD30,JC30 )
and the rate of hiring inaction (Inact ). These moments are critical for determining the labor adjustment
costs. In particular, the serial correlation in employment is influenced by the quadratic adjustment costs,
while the inaction and large adjustments reflect the fixed and piecewise linear costs. These moments are
    16
         In a model including exit costs, the fit did not improve.
    17
         This is discussed in the conclusion.




                                                                     9
4.1     Moments                                                                      4    QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS


                                                   Table 2: Parameters

                    Parameter                                           Description
             Estimated: Common
                     +,  -                       Quadratic adjustment costs of hiring and firing
                   F +, F -                               Fixed costs of hiring and firing
                    +, -                                  Linear costs of hiring and firing
                                                                   Discount factor
                                                                        Wage
                      z                              Serial correlation of productivity shock
                      z                        Standard deviation of productivity shock innovation
                      d                             Curvature of revenue from domestic sales
                      d                            Serial correlation of domestic demand shock
                      d                      Standard deviation of domestic demand shock Innovation
                      d                               Overhead cost of domestic production
            Estimated: Exporters
                                                          Cost of becoming an exporter
                    SC f                                       Mean foreign demand
                     f                               Curvature of revenue from foreign sales
                     f                                 Serial correlation of foreign demand
                     f                        Standard Deviation of foreign demand shock innovation
                     f                                 Overhead cost of foreign production


size weighted. The average and median size of both exporting and non-exporting plans, labeled "emp
(mean)" and "emp p(50)" are included as well.
    For the private plants, we include endogenous exit in the model and thus a moment to capture the
exit rate. This moment helps to pin down the overhead cost, d .
    The second set of moments relate to the revenue functions. These include the curvature of the
domestic and foreign revenue functions as well as the stochastic processes for the profitability shock, that
combines demand and productivity shocks.18 To compute these moments, OLS estimates of the curvature
of the revenue function are obtained, for both exporting and non-exporting plants. Note that the data
reports total employment for each plant, not employment to produce goods for domestic sales and exports
separately. So we are estimating the curvature of the revenue for the exporting and non-exporting plants,
not from the two sources of sales. These coefficients are denoted  ~ d and ~ df respectively.
    From these OLS estimates, the parameters for the stochastic process of the residuals from the rev-
enue functions are obtained. These residuals are termed profitability shocks throughout the rest of
this analysis. They include all sources of variation, both productivity and demand. From an AR(1)
representation of these shocks we obtain the serial correlation and standard deviation of the innovation,
 18
      See the discussion in Appendix 7.1.2 on the revenue function of an exporter and the calculation of profitability shocks.



                                                              10
4.1   Moments                                                                4   QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS


                                             Table 3: Moments

             Moment                                         Description
           Common
                sc                                     Serial correlation
              JC30                               Job Creation in excess of 30%
              Inact                                      Inaction rate
              JD30                              Job Destruction in excess of 30%
              xrate                                  Exit Rate (PCE only)
           emp (p50)                                  Median employment
          emp (mean)                                  Mean employment
           Exporters
               ~ df
                                               Curvature of revenue function
               ~df
                                          Serial correlation of profitability shock
               ~ df
                                       Standard deviation of profitability innovation
             ep2nep                        Export to non-export (plant fraction)
               fox                           Size-weighted fraction of exporters
              ex int                Average share of revenue from exporting (size weighted)
            small ex         Size-weighted fraction of small-exporters (less than 5% revenue from exports)
         Non-Exporters
                ~d                             Curvature of revenue function
                ~d
                                           Serial correlation of profitability shock
                ~d
                                        Standard deviation of profitability innovation
             nep2ep                         Non-export to export (plant fraction)


 j , 
(~   ~ j ) for j  {d, df }. These are treated as moments in the estimation of the underlying curvature of
the revenue functions and stochastic processes.
    To be clear, these curvature estimates are not estimates of the curvature parameters in (6) for two
distinct reasons. First, the revenue functions in (6) pertain to sources of revenue, domestic and foreign
sales, and not the type of plant, exporter vs non-exporter. Second, these are OLS estimates without any
controls for bias due to omitted variables. The structural estimation resolves both of these issues and
allows us to estimate the curvature parameters for the two revenue functions in (6).
    The final set of moments relate to trade patterns and pertain mostly to exporting firms. First, there is
the size weighted fraction of exporters, "foe". Conditional on exporting, there is a moment that captures
the share of revenue from exporting, "ex int" as well as one that studies the size weighted fraction of
small exporters, i.e. those with less than 5% of total revenue from exporting, "small ex". This returns to
a point made in Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (2003). Finally, there are two moments to capture
transitions between the states of exporting and non-exporting. The moment "ex2nex" is the fraction of
(size weighted) plants that were exporters in the previous period that stopped exporting in the current


                                                       11
4.2    Parameters                                                                    4   QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS


period. The flows from non-export to export, "nex2ex" is included as well.
    Though it is convenient to summarize the moments by these blocks, they are completely interdepen-
dent. The parameters that underlie the revenue function will impact trade decisions. The adjustment
costs that underlie the labor dynamics will impact the trade decisions as well as the OLS estimates of
the revenue function. This latter effect is interesting as the adjustment costs influence the responsive of
labor to profitability shocks and thus the omitted variable bias in the OLS estimates.
    Table 4 provides plant-level moments by export status and ownership type. There are numerous
notable differences across these plants.
    First, looking at the SCE, exporters have less inaction in employment adjustment than non-exporters.
Second, the exporters have slightly less action in the upper tail of job destruction. Most importantly, the
median employment of exporters is about 2.7 times the median employment of non-exporters. Transition
rates out of exporting are quite high: about 10% of employment in plants that trade are lost each year.
Almost 34% of the workers are in plants that earn revenue from sales abroad. Revenue from exporting
is about 19% though 35% of the exporters are small, earning less than 5% of their revenue from exports.
Also, the OLS estimate of the curvature of the revenue function is higher for exporters.
    For the PCE, again exporters are less likely to be inactive. They are again larger than non-exporters.
The transition rate out of exporting is also nearly 10%. The fraction of workers at plants that export is
higher than the SCE at nearly 43%. For those that export, revenues from abroad are nearly 65%. Less
than 8% of the plants are small exporters. The OLS estimated revenue curvature is again larger for the
exporters.
    Comparing the SCE and PCE plants, a couple of differences are apparent. First, the SCE are
larger overall and the size difference between exporters and non-exporters is much larger. Second, the
employment inaction is actually larger for PCE compared to SCE. On the trade side, the PCE are more
likely to export, rely more on export revenue and there are relatively few small exporters among the PCE.
    As noted, the data sample is trimmed. Thus in the calculation of the simulated moments in (8), the
simulated data is trimmed as well. In particular, we simulate the real survey's selection process to drop
firms whose sales below a threshold.19

4.2     Parameters
There are a total of 20 parameters. Some are estimated independent of export status. These include the
discount factor,  , the labor adjustment costs ( + ,  - , F + , F - ,  + ,  - ) and the costs of labor,  . These
adjustment costs allow for differences between hiring, denoted with a +, and firing, denoted with a -.20
There is also a fixed cost of operating, d .
  19
     This entails the following steps: (i) first calculate the ratio of 5 million RMB (the cutoff) to the median sales (around
20 million RMB), (ii) in the model simulation, we search for the threshold to set the ratio of the threshold to the median
sales of the above-the-threshold sample be equal to the data counterpart, and (iii) we drop the firms whose sales below the
threshold.
  20
     As discussed in Cooper, Gong, and Yan (2015), the fixed cost of labor adjustment did not apply until job creation and
destruction rates exceeded 5%, 10% for SCE job destruction. This allows another non-linearity to the problem and captures
some institutional features. The inaction is then partly created by the piece-wise linear adjustment costs.



                                                             12
4.3   Estimation Results                                                                                  4     QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS


    For all plants, there are productivity shocks, z , as well as domestic and foreign demand shocks, Ad
and Af respectively. Each of the three shocks follows an AR(1) process parameterized by the standard
deviation of the innovation,  j and a serial correlation, j for j = d, f, z . As it is not possible to distinguish
the means of domestic demand and productivity, the product of these means is normalized to one. The
parameters include SC f which is the mean of the foreign demand process, relative to the product of mean
productivity and mean domestic demand.
    For exporters, there is a cost, , of switching to export status. There is also an additional fixed
cost of selling in foreign markets, f . These costs are introduced to generate sorting into and exit from
exporting, respectively.

4.3     Estimation Results
The moments and parameter estimates are given in Tables 4 and 5. The discussion of these results is
broken into state controlled and privately controlled enterprises. In addition, we present results by sector.

4.3.1     Estimates for Manufacturing

These estimates are used in the subsequent section exploring the determinants of export status. In
particular, that discussion will return to the motivating evidence on productivity distributions.

                                                                    Table 4: Moments


                                                                             SCE
  Exporters     Moments      sc     JC30    Inact   JD30    xrate     ~ df
                                                                               ~df    ~ df
                                                                                              emp (p50)   emp (mean)     ep2nep    fox    ex int   small ex
                 DATA       0.871   0.086   0.154   0.032     -      0.955    0.937   0.964    690.993        1237.994   0.101    0.338   0.190     0.351
                 Model      0.985   0.084   0.183   0.032     -      1.060    0.769   0.774    605.360        1465.009   0.094    0.341   0.210     0.386
Non-Exporters   Moments      sc     JC30    Inact   JD30    xrate     ~d
                                                                               ~d
                                                                                       ~d     emp (p50)   emp (mean)     nep2ep
                 DATA       0.873   0.085   0.228   0.043     -      0.793    0.916   1.063    255.052        499.606    0.033
                 Model      0.989   0.065   0.183   0.043     -      1.250    0.795   0.893    200.427        475.962    0.035
 Stat. Value:   4319.754

                                                                             PCE
  Exporters     Moments      sc     JC30    Inact   JD30    xrate     ~ df
                                                                               ~df    ~ df
                                                                                              emp (p50)   emp (mean)     ep2nep    fox    ex int   small ex
                 DATA       0.886   0.172   0.295   0.055   0.042    0.748    0.900   0.885    157.863        237.361    0.095    0.428   0.647     0.079
                 Model      0.975   0.105   0.364   0.066   0.057    0.730    0.694   0.762    130.290        225.190    0.098    0.394   0.660     0.085
Non-Exporters   Moments      sc     JC30    Inact   JD30    xrate     ~d
                                                                               ~d
                                                                                       ~d     emp (p50)   emp (mean)     nep2ep
                 DATA       0.862   0.171   0.353   0.060   0.062    0.683    0.845   0.901    85.969         136.571    0.060
                 Model      0.973   0.121   0.354   0.071   0.078    0.669    0.715   0.819    85.333         146.368    0.061
 Stat. Value:   32755.941


      Table 3 defines these moments.


Adjustment and Trade Costs As noted earlier, one of the key ingredients of the model are labor
adjustment and export costs. These are reported in Table 5 and are summarized in Table 6 relative to
the mean of (simulated) revenue to facilitate interpretation and comparison across plant types.
   In models of dynamic factor demand, there is naturally a dependence of the distribution of, say,
job creation (destruction) rates on the underlying costs of labor adjustment. But, once exporting is


                                                                             13
4.3    Estimation Results                                                        4   QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS


introducing there is an additional non-convexity stemming from the export decision that also impacts job
creation and destruction. Even in the absence of labor adjustment costs, a new exporter might choose to
expand operation leading to a burst in job creation.21
     The fixed costs of hiring and firing are substantial for the SCE, reaching almost 25%. The costs
are both lower for the PCE and asymmetric, with firing costs larger than hiring costs. The linear labor
adjustment costs, reported in Table 5, indicate substantial firing costs for SCE and larger hiring costs
for the PCE. With a low discount factor and correlated shocks, such as that for the PCE, the effects of
firing costs on hiring decisions are relatively small.




  21
    That said, from the evidence presented in Ruhl and Willis (2017), understanding new exporter dynamics in China is of
independent interest.


                                                          14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4.3
                                                                                            Table 5: Parameter Estimates


             f                  SC f       +         -        F+         F-         +          -                   w         z         z         d         d         d         f         f         f         d




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Estimation Results
     SCE
           5.118     25.189    0.634     0.854     2.179     41.364    43.207     0.093       0.238    0.948     0.177     0.838     1.424     0.724     0.935     0.319     0.652     0.882     0.769        -
           (0.700)   (3.540)   (0.044)   (0.139)   (0.080)   (9.990)   (12.630)   (0.031)    (0.053)   (0.010)   (0.001)   (0.003)   (0.019)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.014)   (0.005)   (0.016)   (0.034)      -

     PCE
           2.893     13.872    0.412     3.418     0.012     3.798      7.123     0.458       0.005    0.905     0.228     0.931     0.907     0.639     0.815     1.181     0.688     0.815     1.411     31.991
           (0.088)   (0.422)   (0.013)   (0.055)   (0.007)   (0.284)   (0.677)    (0.014)    (0.001)   (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.035)   (0.007)   (0.004)   (0.008)   (0.003)   (0.008)   (0.013)   (0.654)


           Standard errors are shown below the parameter estimates.
15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS
4.3    Estimation Results                                                          4   QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS


   For both types of plants, the sunk cost of exporting is about 15% of revenue. The fixed cost of
continuing to export is about 3% and this contributes to the serial correlation in export status.22
   Over 6% of the PCE exit each period. This is driven, in part, by the overhead production cost of nearly
12%. Of course, the exit decision is also impacted by the persistence of both demand and productivity
shocks as well as the discount rate.

                                  Table 6: Costs relative to the average revenue

                                           f                     F+       F-           d
                                SCE      0.0275    0.1356     0.2227    0.2326       -
                                PCE      0.0335    0.1604     0.0439    0.0824    0.1189

                                 Average revenue is calculated from simulation.


    Note that the relatively larger fixed adjustment costs for SCE do not directly translate into more
inaction and more episodes of large adjustment in the moments reported in Table 4.23 This reflects the
fact that employment adjustment depends on more than just the direct cost of adjusting the number of
workers. Among other things, employment adjustment is heavily influenced by the discount factor: a
higher  , as with the SCE, implies that the investment dimension of employment adjustment matters
more and thus, all else the same, there is less inaction. Further, as discussed below, the change of trade
status has a large impact on employment growth. So, for example, a plant that chooses to become an
exporter will pay a cost to do so and at the same time engage in large employment growth. In this case,
the frequency of this will depend on the size of the entry cost into exporting.
    At various stages of the discussion that follows, the role of labor adjustment costs on export status will
be emphasized. In addition to that discussion and the point estimates (with standard errors) reported in
Table 5, there is an alternative way to see the significance of adjustment costs: set them all to zero.
    Appendix sub-section 7.4.1 presents simulation results, eliminating first the sunk cost and then the
labor adjustment costs. Setting the sunk cost to zero leads to a deterioration of the fit by about 11.5%.
Removing the sunk cost has a large effect on the size of exporters and on the flows between exporting
and non-exporting states, but relatively little impact on the employment moments.
    Removing labor adjustment costs, in contrast, leads to a dramatic worsening of the fit. Not only
are the labor moments no longer matched but the trade moments are also very far off. In particular,
eliminating the labor adjustment costs increases the fraction of exporters from 34% to 93% for the SCE
and from 39% to nearly 86% for the PCE. Further the size of exporters is considerably larger for both
ownership groups.
  22
     Using Colombian data, Ruhl and Willis (2017) estimate the sunk cost at one year's median sales in a standard sunk cost
model and 59% of one year's median sales in the extended model (including the new exporter dynamics). If we use median
sales as reference, the sunk cost is 84% for SCE and 50% for PCE. In Ruhl and Willis (2017), the estimated fixed cost is
around 4.7% (for the sunk cost model) and 5.7% (for the extended model) of one year's median sales. In our estimation,
using median sales as reference, the estimated fixed cost is 17% for SCE and 10% for PCE.
  23
     See Cooper, Gong, and Yan (2015) for a related discussion for the model estimated without an export choice.



                                                            16
4.3   Estimation Results                                                  4   QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS


    Of course, the large effect of removing the labor adjustment costs might reflect the fact that the
sunk costs were not re-estimated. The results from re-estimation of the model under that restriction is
reported in Appendix sub-section 7.4.2. A key finding there is that the model fit deteriorates by a factor
of 10 for both SCE and PCE. The model without labor adjustment costs surely is unable to match key
features of the employment distribution, such as the inaction and bursts of job creation and destruction.
But importantly, the re-estimated model also fails to capture the flows between export status.

Shocks The estimation uncovers the underlying stochastic processes for domestic and foreign demand
and productivity. All of the shocks are estimated to be quite persistent, with serial correlations in excess
of 0.8 for both demand and productivity shocks. The persistence influences adjustment and export
decisions: the more persistent are the shocks, the more responsive will be export and labor demand
choices.
     Further, there is volatility in all dimensions. That is, it is not the case that most of the fluctuations
are driven, for example, by productivity shocks or one source of demand variation alone. For the SCE,
the largest sources of variation is productivity. For the PCE, domestic demand is much more volatile
than it is for the SCE and, for the SCE who export, foreign demand is most volatile. As we explore the
factors that determine the distributions of profitability, the relative importance of technology compared
to demand shocks, both domestic and foreign, will be key.
     Note that by construction the productivity and two demand shocks are independent. But, as discussed
earlier, the analysis uncovers profitability shocks to exporters and non-exporters. The productivity shock,
z , is common to both of these profitability shocks, thus inducing correlation between them.

Curvature The estimated curvatures for demand, (d , f ) in Table 5, are all less than 1, indicative of
market power.24 Interestingly, the estimated curvature for the PCE is much lower in domestic markets,
reflecting more intense competition in export markets. The opposite is true for the SCE.
    Again, these are the curvatures of revenues from domestic sales and exports, while the moments, such
as  ~ df , come from OLS estimates of the total revenue from a plant selling in both domestic and foreign
markets. Though these are not directly comparable, the OLS estimates certainly play a role in identifying
the structural parameters, (d , f ).

Ownership The parameter estimates are reported by ownership type. As in Cooper, Gong, and Yan
(2015), there are two key differences. First, the discount factor for the SCE is higher than that for
the PCE, perhaps indicative of frictions in capital markets. Second, as documented in Table 6, labor
adjustment costs, particularly the fixed costs and the linear firing costs, are larger for public than private
plants.25




                                                     17
4.3    Estimation Results                                                                                                                                                                                       4         QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS


                                       30                                                                                                                                     30
            Percentage of Industries




                                                                                                                                                   Percentage of Industries
                                       20                                                                                                                                     20




                                       10                                                                                                                                     10




                                        0                                                                                                                                      0
                                            [0,10]   [10,20]   [20,30]   [30,40]   [40,50]   [50,60]   [60,70]   [70,80]   [80,90] [90,100]                                        [0,10]   [10,20]   [20,30]   [30,40]   [40,50]   [50,60]   [60,70]   [70,80]   [80,90] [90,100]
                                                      Percentage of empolyment in the industry that work in exporters                                                                        Percentage of empolyment in the industry that work in exporters



                                                                             (a) SCE                                                                                                                                (b) PCE

                                                                                                       Figure 2: Export Intensity by Industry
       This figure shows the distribution of the fraction of workers employed in plants that export across industries by
       ownership.


4.3.2      Sectoral Results

The results presented thus far are for all of manufacturing. There are composition effects that could drive
the findings on export and adjustment costs that arise along a couple of dimensions. First, sectors may
differ by the extent of SCE presence. Second, sectors may differ by the fraction of firms, independent of
ownership type, who export. These differences may also lead to sector-specific parameter estimates.

Sectoral Distributions Figure 2 presents evidence on exporting across sectors by ownership. Specifi-
cally, it looks at the fraction of workers employed at exporting plants across industries by ownership. For
the SCE, in nearly 40% of the sectors more than half the workers are employed in plants that export. This
is almost the same magnitude,(about 35%), for the PCE. For the SCE, but not the PCE, there are almost
10% of the industries with over 80% of the workers employed in exporting plants. This is indicative of
the relatively large size of these exporting plants. That is, while there are only a small fraction of sectors
with a large number of exporting plants, these plants account for a much larger fraction of workers.
    It is important to note that these tables remove industries with fewer than 5 plants. Also, the figure
includes sectors in which both the PCE and the SCE operate.26

Sectoral Estimation Tables 23 and 24 in Appendix 7.5 present parameter estimates and moments for
three leading sectors: apparel, electronics and steel. The industry estimation results are consistent with
the baseline estimation.
    First, the estimate of  is larger for the SCE.27 Second, adjustment costs are present in both industries
and for both ownership groups. Again the fixed costs are large for the SCE. The linear firing costs are
relatively large for the SCE while hiring costs dominate for the PCE. One interesting difference with the
  24
     This holds under the assumption of CRS production.
  25
     See Tables 11 and 12, and the surrounding discussion, in Cooper, Gong, and Yan (2015).
  26
     There are 318 industries with overlapping operation. The figures are quite similar if we include sectors with overlap in
operation.
  27
     The standard errors are larger due to smaller sample sizes.



                                                                                                                                              18
4.4     Mismatch                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4                        QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS


baseline, highlighted in Table 25 is that the PCE also face large fixed hiring costs in these 3 industries.
     Table 25 shows the costs of adjustment, relative to mean revenue, for these industries by ownership.
It is noteworthy that the fixed cost of firing is very large for the SCE compared to the PCE. This is offset
a little by the larger fixed costs of hiring for the PCE.

Productivity Distributions Figure 14, in the Appendix, shows the distributions of average labor
productivity across export status by sector for the two ownership groups. Clearly, as in Figure 1, there
is considerable overlap in these productivity distributions. The overlap though is sector specific. In the
SCE producing steel, the exporters are clearly more productive while there is an exception in the PCE
apparel. In short, the overlap in these distributions in Figure 1 is not reflecting composition effects.

4.4      Mismatch
This sub-section looks at export status from the perspective of mismatch. This approach provides a
quantitative method for evaluating mismatch and thus complements the visual impressions of overlapping
distributions. It is traditional in the education literature, for example, to look at predictions of education
relative to attainment as a basis for classifying individuals as either under- or overmatched in education.28
Here that tool is extended to evaluate the dynamics of export status, rather than a one time choice about
education.

                        100                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Non-exporters                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Non-exporters
                         90                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Exporters                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Exporters
                         80                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              80

                         70                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              70

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Percentage




                         60
           Percentage




                         50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              50

                         40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              40

                         30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              30

                         20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20

                         10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10

                          0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (0.00,0.05]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [0.05,0.10]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [0.10,0.15]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [0.15,0.20]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [0.20,0.25]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [0.25,0.30]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   [0.30,0.35]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [0.35,0.40]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               [0.40,0.45]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [0.45,0.50]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [0.50,0.55]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [0.55,0.60]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [0.60,0.66]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [0.65,0.70]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   [0.70,0.75]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [0.75,0.80]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               [0.80,0.85]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [0.85,0.90]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [0.90,0.95]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [0.95,1.00]
                              [0.00,0.05]

                                            [0.05,0.10]

                                                          [0.10,0.15]

                                                                        [0.15,0.20]

                                                                                      [0.20,0.25]

                                                                                                    [0.25,0.30]

                                                                                                                  [0.30,0.35]

                                                                                                                                [0.35,0.40]

                                                                                                                                              [0.40,0.45]

                                                                                                                                                            [0.45,0.50]

                                                                                                                                                                          [0.50,0.55]

                                                                                                                                                                                        [0.55,0.60]

                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0.60,0.66]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [0.65,0.70]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [0.70,0.75]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [0.75,0.80]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [0.80,0.85]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [0.85,0.90]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [0.90,0.95]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [0.95,1.00]




                                                                                                    Predicted probability that a firm is an exporter                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Predicted probability that a firm is an exporter


                                                                                                                 ~)
                                                                                                    (a) DATA: ln(A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ~)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (b) Model: ln(A
                        100                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Non-exporters                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Non-exporters
                         90                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Exporters                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Exporters
                         80                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              80

                         70                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              70

                         60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              60
           Percentage




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Percentage




                         50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              50

                         40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              40

                         30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              30

                         20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20

                         10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10

                          0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                              [0.00,0.05]

                                            [0.05,0.10]

                                                          [0.10,0.15]

                                                                        [0.15,0.20]

                                                                                      [0.20,0.25]

                                                                                                    [0.25,0.30]

                                                                                                                  [0.30,0.35]

                                                                                                                                [0.35,0.40]

                                                                                                                                              [0.40,0.45]

                                                                                                                                                            [0.45,0.50]

                                                                                                                                                                          [0.50,0.55]

                                                                                                                                                                                        [0.55,0.60]

                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0.60,0.66]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [0.65,0.70]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [0.70,0.75]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [0.75,0.80]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [0.80,0.85]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [0.85,0.90]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [0.90,0.95]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [0.95,1.00]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [0.00,0.05]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [0.05,0.10]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [0.10,0.15]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [0.15,0.20]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [0.20,0.25]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [0.25,0.30]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   [0.30,0.35]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [0.35,0.40]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               [0.40,0.45]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [0.45,0.50]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [0.50,0.55]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [0.55,0.60]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [0.60,0.66]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [0.65,0.70]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   [0.70,0.75]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [0.75,0.80]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               [0.80,0.85]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [0.85,0.90]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [0.90,0.95]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [0.95,1.00]




                                                                                                    Predicted probability that a firm is an exporter                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Predicted probability that a firm is an exporter


                                                         ~), ln(emp-1 ), ex-1
                                            (c) DATA: ln(A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ~), ln(emp-1 ), ex-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (d) Model: ln(A

         Figure 3: SCE: distribution of predicted probability of exporting, by realized export status
 28
      See Cooper and Liu (2019) and references therein for applications of this approach to educational choice.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      19
4.4   Mismatch                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4                        QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS


    For this exercise we estimate, by ownership type, a probit model of the probability of being an exporter
                                                                    ~), as a key regressor. The second adds
in two specifications. The first contains profitability, denoted ln(A
the lag of log employment to capture size, ln(emp-1 ), and previous export status, ex-1 . In both cases,
time, location, and industry are included.
    Figures 3 and 4 show the distributions of these predicted probabilities for these specifications, from
the data and the model, by ownership status. For both SCEs and PCEs, the sorting is much better once
the specification conditions on size and lagged export status as well as current profitability. That is,
conditioning on profitability alone does not discriminate across plants by export status. Though in the
SCE case, there is clearly a large fraction of non-exporting plants in the data who were predicted not to
export
    For the SCE, the model prediction is quite close to that of the data. This is not the case for the PCE:
only in the case with all the regressors does the model match the data. Conditioning on profitability
alone, there is not much distinction across plants in the estimated model.

                     100                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Non-exporters                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Non-exporters
                      90                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Exporters                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Exporters
                      80                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              80

                      70                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              70

                      60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              60
        Percentage




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Percentage




                      50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              50

                      40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              40

                      30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              30

                      20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20

                      10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10

                       0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                           [0.00,0.05]

                                         [0.05,0.10]

                                                       [0.10,0.15]

                                                                     [0.15,0.20]

                                                                                   [0.20,0.25]

                                                                                                 [0.25,0.30]

                                                                                                               [0.30,0.35]

                                                                                                                             [0.35,0.40]

                                                                                                                                           [0.40,0.45]

                                                                                                                                                         [0.45,0.50]

                                                                                                                                                                       [0.50,0.55]

                                                                                                                                                                                     [0.55,0.60]

                                                                                                                                                                                                   [0.60,0.66]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [0.65,0.70]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               [0.70,0.75]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [0.75,0.80]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [0.80,0.85]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [0.85,0.90]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [0.90,0.95]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [0.95,1.00]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [0.00,0.05]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [0.05,0.10]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [0.10,0.15]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0.15,0.20]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [0.20,0.25]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [0.25,0.30]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [0.30,0.35]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [0.35,0.40]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [0.40,0.45]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [0.45,0.50]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [0.50,0.55]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0.55,0.60]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [0.60,0.66]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [0.65,0.70]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [0.70,0.75]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [0.75,0.80]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [0.80,0.85]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [0.85,0.90]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [0.90,0.95]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0.95,1.00]
                                                                                                 Predicted probability that a firm is an exporter                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Predicted probability that a firm is an exporter


                                                                                                              ~)
                                                                                                 (a) DATA: ln(A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ~)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (b) Model:ln(A
                     100                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Non-exporters                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Non-exporters
                      90                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Exporters                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Exporters
                      80                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              80

                      70                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              70

                      60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              60
        Percentage




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Percentage




                      50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              50

                      40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              40

                      30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              30

                      20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20

                      10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10

                       0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                           [0.00,0.05]

                                         [0.05,0.10]

                                                       [0.10,0.15]

                                                                     [0.15,0.20]

                                                                                   [0.20,0.25]

                                                                                                 [0.25,0.30]

                                                                                                               [0.30,0.35]

                                                                                                                             [0.35,0.40]

                                                                                                                                           [0.40,0.45]

                                                                                                                                                         [0.45,0.50]

                                                                                                                                                                       [0.50,0.55]

                                                                                                                                                                                     [0.55,0.60]

                                                                                                                                                                                                   [0.60,0.66]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [0.65,0.70]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               [0.70,0.75]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [0.75,0.80]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [0.80,0.85]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [0.85,0.90]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [0.90,0.95]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [0.95,1.00]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [0.00,0.05]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [0.05,0.10]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [0.10,0.15]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0.15,0.20]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [0.20,0.25]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [0.25,0.30]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [0.30,0.35]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [0.35,0.40]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [0.40,0.45]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [0.45,0.50]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [0.50,0.55]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0.55,0.60]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [0.60,0.66]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [0.65,0.70]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [0.70,0.75]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [0.75,0.80]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [0.80,0.85]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [0.85,0.90]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [0.90,0.95]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0.95,1.00]




                                                                                                 Predicted probability that a firm is an exporter                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Predicted probability that a firm is an exporter


                                                      ~), ln(emp-1 ), ex-1
                                         (c) Data: ln(A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ~), ln(emp-1 ), ex-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (d) Model: ln(A

      Figure 4: PCE: distribution of predicted probability of exporting, by realized export status

     Using these predicted probabilities, a plant is categorized as: (i) undermatched, (ii) overmatched or
(iii) well matched. An undermatched plant is a non-exporter with a predicted probability of exporting
that exceeds the 80th percentile of exporting plants. Similarly, an overmatched plant is an exporter
with a predicted probability of exporting that is below the 20th percentile of non-exporting plants. The
remaining plants are well matched.
     The cut-offs at the 20th and 80 percentiles are somewhat arbitrary and similar calculations can be

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20
4.4     Mismatch                                                                  4   QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS


made with other critical values. The point though it to isolate exporters (non-exporters) with a relatively
low probability of being in that status, given the reference group. This measure has an important
property: if there is perfect sorting, then there is no mismatch.
     Table 7 summarizes the findings. The top block reports two sets of estimates from the data, both
with and then without industry and time controls. The bottom block come from the model. For each,
there are results by ownership.
     Comparing the data results, in the case without controls there is considerably more mismatch, par-
ticularly for the PCE. Evidently this reflects differences across industries that impact export status and
thus create mismatch. The discussion that follows focuses on the first data panel which are the estimates
with controls.29
     To understand the entries, consider the column labeled. "undermatch" for the SCE block. These are
all plants that had a sufficiently high probability of exporting but were non-exporters. The probability
of their exporting depends, of course, on the empirical model used to make that prediction. The rows
correspond to the set of regressors using in the probit estimation described above. So, for example, in the
data with the estimation using only profitability as a control about 3.4% of the SCE were undermatched:
i.e. they were predicted to be exporters but were not. This figure drops to nearly zero once the full set of
controls is used. Thus given profitability, lagged employment and lagged export status, in the data there
is almost no SCE export mismatch. For the SCE, the model picks up the pattern and the magnitudes.
     Note the difference in the SCE and PCE panels. There is considerably more mismatch for the PCE,
particularly in the model, but also in the data. For the PCE, there are a lot of plants exporting that
based on profitability alone, are predicted to be non-exporters.30 The model predicts more mismatch
than in the data, but this is resolved once the full set of regressors is used.
 29
      Figures 3 and 4 were produced from the regressions with controls as well.
 30
      This can be traced to the large positive adjustment costs for the PCE.




                                                             21
4.5    Identification                                                               4   QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS


                                              Table 7: Exporter Mismatch

                                            SCE                                                           PCE
                                 undermatch      overmatch                                    undermatch       overmatch
                                                                   Data: with controls
             ~)
          ln(A                       3.9%            2.0%                                          4.4%            3.8%
    ~), ln(emp-1 ), ex-1
 ln(A                                0.2%            0.4%                                          0.4%            0.9%
                                                                  Data: without controls
             ~)
          ln(A                       7.2%            5.0%                                         18.3%           18.6%
    ~), ln(emp-1 ), ex-1
 ln(A                                0.2%            0.5%                                         0.6%            1.3%
                                                                          Model
             ~)
          ln(A                       3.4%            1.3%                                         21.1%           25.2%
    ~), ln(emp-1 ), ex-1
 ln(A                                0.1%            0.0%                                         0.5%            0.6%
       This table shows exporter mismatch, both in the data and in the model, by ownership status. The rows correspond
                                                ~) is the log of current profitability, ln(emp-1 ) is the log of lagged
       to different sets of regressors. Here ln(A
       employment and ex-1 is lagged export status. The data results are presented with and without controls for
       industry and time effects.


4.5      Identification
There are 19 (20) parameters characterizing the SCE (PCE) plants and 23 moments for each type of plant.
The large number of parameters and moments is needed to capture the production choices of plants. Yet
this coupled with the highly nonlinear model makes a direct discussion of identification impossible: there
is surely no one-to-one mapping between moments and parameters.
    There are a couple of ways to think through identification. First, Tables 17 and 18 in Appendix
7.3 shows the elasticities of the moments with respect to the parameters at the baseline estimates by
ownership. The response of moments to parameters are a key ingredient in the calculation of the standard
errors.
    Looking at key parameters, we see:

      · an increase in fixed trade cost, f will decrease the fraction of plants transition from non-exporting
        to exporting, nex2ex, and increase the flow out of exporting, ex2nex;

      · an increase in the sunk cost, , decreases both nex2ex and ex2nex;

      · an increase the mean of foreign demand, SC f will increase the frequency of exporting,f ox, and the
        flows into and out of export status;

      · an increase the quadratic adjustment costs,  + ,  - impacts the frequency of large employment
        adjustment;

      · an increase in the linear adjustment costs,  + ,  - will increase the inaction rate and impact the
        large job creation and destruction rates, JC 30, JD30.


                                                             22
                                                                       5   DETERMINANTS OF EXPORT STATUS


         · almost all the moments are sensitive the changes in  .

Second, the estimation exercise itself uses multiple starting values. In this way, local minima of the
objective are avoided.
    Finally, and perhaps more importantly for the economics of the estimation, large changes in a couple
of key parameters are studied to make clear how moments and the fit change in response. Appendix
sub-section 7.4.1 shows these exercises with regards to adjustment and trade costs. Related findings are
highlighted below in our discussion of the factors determining export status.


5         Determinants of Export Status
This section returns to a main question of the paper to study some of the key implications of the estimated
model for the determination of export status. The focus is on the relevance of size, productivity and
ownership for the decision to become an exporter.
    The analysis, such as the regressions and distributions that follow, contain additional moments that
could have been included formally in the moment matching exercise. Instead, our approach is to take the
structural parameter estimates as given and explore the implications of the model off of its domain.
    Throughout this discussion, the dependence of choices on profitability are highlighted. For this,
profitability must be measured in both the actual and simulated data. Profitability in period is calculated
in a model consistent fashion. Given the estimated curvatures for the revenue function, from Table 5,
for non-exporters, the profitability measure is the difference between log(revenue) and the product of the
estimated curvature and log(employment). For exporters, this residual takes into account the share of
employment in domestic and foreign production.31
    The presentation highlights the interaction between: (i) productivity, (ii) size and the (iii) distribution
of export share. Though the focus on these outcomes is not unique to this paper, the framework is quite
different with its emphasis on dynamics and the role of adjustment costs.

5.1        Who are the exporters?
We initially address this question through a (linear) regression on both the actual and simulated data to
provide an overview of the determinants of export status. We then take these findings apart by focusing
on the distributions of plant size and productivity.
    Table 8 presents regression results explaining export status for both SCE and PCE.32 Throughout
the dependent variable is export status of plant i in period t.33 The independent variables include lagged
export status as well as measures of size (lagged log of employment) and the period t innovation to
revenue based profitability, described above, as well as industry, time and location controls.34
    31
     This is reviewed in Appendix 7.1.
    32
     Appendix 7.6 contains more results using alternative specifications and measures of productivity.
  33
     The regression structure is similar to that used in the literature on responsiveness, as in Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin,
and Miranda (2018).
  34
     The innovation for plant i in period t, i,t comes from: ln(A  ~i,t ) = µ + ln(A
                                                                                   ~i,t-1 ) + i,t , where A
                                                                                                          ~i,t is (revenue-based)
profitability. The parameters µ,  are part of the structural estimation.


                                                               23
5.1    Who are the exporters?                                        5    DETERMINANTS OF EXPORT STATUS


                                       Table 8: Determinants of Export Status

                                                     SCE                         PCE
                                              DATA MODEL                  DATA MODEL
                                 ex-1          0.791    0.854              0.788    0.836
                                              (0.004) (0.001)             (0.001) (0.001)
                              ln(emp-1 )       0.032    0.010              0.032    0.006
                                              (0.002) (0.000)             (0.001) (0.000)
                                               0.018    0.061              0.006    0.038
                                              (0.004) (0.000)             (0.001) (0.001)
                                   N           24915     NA               360076     NA
            For each plant, ex-1 is lagged export status, ln(emp-1 ) is the log of lagged employment and  is
            the innovation to the log of current profitability. Other regressors were year, industry and location.
            The dependent variable is export status of a plant in the current period.


    For all the specifications, being an exporter in the previous period makes it more likely a plant will
be an exporter in the current period. The magnitude of these effects is about the same regardless of
ownership status. It is larger in the model than in the data.35 The dynamic reflects both the labor
adjustment and the trade costs.
    Size, as measured by lagged (log) employment, matters. Regardless of ownership type, larger plants
are more likely to be exporters. These effects are larger in the data than in the model.
    Finally, plants with higher levels of productivity, measured by current innovation, are more likely
to be exporters. The innovations are presumably orthogonal to lagged employment and thus provide
more direct evidence of the effects of profitability on export status. The response of export status to
the profitability innovation differs by ownership, with the SCE export status being more responsive to
profitability shocks than the PCE.36
  35
     Alessandria, Arkolakis, and Ruhl (2020) report similar regressions with coefficients on the lagged status of about 0.6 for
Columbia.
  36
     Here this is the innovation to profitability, not its level. As shown in Appendix 7.6, the response of export status to
current profitability is about the same as the response to the innovation.




                                                              24
5.1    Who are the exporters?                                         5   DETERMINANTS OF EXPORT STATUS


                                        Table 9: Export Status: Experiments

                                                  SCE                                 PCE
                                       No AC      No Sunk Costs            No AC      No Sunk Costs
                          ex-1          0.753         0.708                0.715          0.681
                       ln(emp-1 )       0.008         0.020                 0.004         0.014
                                        0.110         0.123                0.089          0.068
            These estimates are based upon simulations for both PCE and SCE, eliminating adjustment and
            sunk trading costs. For each plant, ex-1 is lagged export status, ln(emp-1 ) is the log of lagged
            employment and  is the innovation to the log of current profitability. For the PCE, the results of
            the experiment are not trimmed by size.


    Both the larger coefficient from the simulated compared to actual data, on lagged export and inno-
vation can be traced to the estimates of the adjustment as well as the fixed and sunk costs of exporting.
In the experiments shown in Table 9, we study how the coefficients of these responsiveness regressions
depend on trade and adjustment costs. In the case of "No AC", we set all adjustment costs to zero. In
the case of "No Sunk Costs", we set  = 0.37
    Here we see that for the SCE eliminating the labor adjustment costs reduces the serial correlation
in export status and increases the responsiveness to a profitability innovation. The same changes in
coefficients arise when the sunk costs are set to zero.
    For the PCE, the main effect of eliminating the adjustment costs is the increased responsiveness to
the profitability innovation. The correlation in export status is actually a bit lower in this case. But,
eliminating the sunk cost has no effect on the responsiveness of export status to the innovation.
    As a final experiment, in the model we can decompose the innovation to profitability into three
innovations: (i) productivity, (ii) domestic demand and (iii) foreign demand. The estimates for a linear
regression with export status as the dependent variable are shown in Table 10. The response of export
status to lagged status and size remains unchanged. But clearly the response of export status depends on
the innovations in a different way depending on their source. Clearly a shock to domestic demand reduces
the likelihood of exporting since a seller can substitute away from exporting to domestic operations and
thus avoid labor adjustment costs.38 The opposite is true when there is a shock to foreign demand. In
this case the SCE response is a bit larger than the PCE response. The response to domestic demand
shocks is about the same. The response to a productivity shock is positive for both ownership types but
smaller than the response to demand shocks since the productivity impacts all markets. These responses
reflect both the persistent effects of these shocks as well as the adjustment and trade costs.
  37
     As noted earlier, the sample of PCE is trimmed to match the criteria for inclusion in the data. But, for these experiments,
we do not impose that trimming in the comparative statics exercise in order to see the full effect of these changes.
  38
     This reflects the non-separability in the domestic and foreign operations noted earlier.




                                                              25
5.2     Profitability                                            5   DETERMINANTS OF EXPORT STATUS


                         Table 10: Decomposing Effects of Innovations on Export Status

                                                               SCE       PCE
                                                  ex-1          0.853    0.818
                                               ln(emp-1 )       0.010    0.005
                                              productivity      0.032    0.047
                                           domestic demand     -0.061   -0.060
                                            foreign demand      0.138    0.119
              NOTE: These estimates are based upon simulations for both PCE and SCE, decomposing the
              innovation to profitability into three sources. The PCE results are for the untrimmed panel.


5.2      Profitability
This sub-section returns to one of the main themes of the trade literature: sorting into exporting by some
measure of productivity. Clearly, profitability, reflecting both productivity and product demand, matters
in the export decision. More profitable plants, either measured as the current level of profitability or as
an innovation, are more likely to export. Yet, as indicated by the figures that motivate our analysis, a
simple cut-off rule linking export status to profitability does not hold in the data. This sub-section looks
into more detail about the distribution of productivity by export and ownership status.
    Figure 1 uses average labor productivity as a measure of productivity. While easy to measure, the
distribution of average labor productivity reflects both the underlying shocks to demand and technology
as well as adjustment costs.
    In this sub-section, following our model, the focus is on a measure of profitability, containing both
technology and demand shocks, as this summarizes the return to employment and exporting. This
measure is obtained from direct analysis of the revenue function using our parameter estimates.39
    With this alternative measure of profitability, the evidence is again not supportive of the simple theory
of sorting. In particular, the distributions of productivity by trade status overlap considerably. For the
PCE, the distributions of productivity for exporters and non-exporters are almost indistinguishable in
the data. The model's predictions are consistent with these findings.
    Our results are presented initially for all firms and then by isolating new exporters. The latter exercise
allows us to see whether the lack of sorting by productivity is associated with the dynamics of being an
exporter or is also present for new exporters.

5.2.1      All Plants

To substantiate this finding, Table 11 provides summary statistics and Figure 5 presents the profitability
distributions from actual and simulated data by ownership type. Within each figure, the distribution by
export status is provided.
    From Table 11, the mean and median profitability of exporters exceeds that of non-exporters in the
data. This is true for both ownership classes, but the difference is more pronounced for the SCE.
 39
      See the discussion in Appendix sub-section 7.1.3.


                                                          26
5.2   Profitability                                           5    DETERMINANTS OF EXPORT STATUS


                                 Table 11: Summary Statistics: Profitability

                                                            SCE
                                 Non-exporters                                Exporters
                      Mean     Median   SD     Skewness           Mean    Median   SD       Skewness
           DATA       -0.080   -0.146 1.012      0.341            0.353    0.342  1.018       0.172
           BASE       -0.154   -0.142 1.054      0.010            0.915    0.967  0.869      -0.118
                                                    PCE (Trimmed)
                                 Non-exporters                                Exporters
                      Mean     Median   SD     Skewness           Mean    Median   SD       Skewness
           DATA       -0.012   -0.065 0.871      0.289            0.031   -0.028 0.877        0.331
           BASE       -0.022   -0.104 0.821      0.186            0.053   -0.066 0.769        0.285


    The model certainly captures these patterns. Actually, these differences are exaggerated in the model
compared to the data. Further, the model understates the dispersion in profitability by exporters.
    The summary table misses a key point about selection: is there complete (or nearly complete) sorting
by profitability? From the figures, this is not the case as there is a noticeable overlap in the distributions of
profitability. The figures do indicate some selection as the distribution of exporters is shifted to the right
for the SCE. For the PCE there is almost no evidence of selection at all as the profitability distributions
essentially coincide. The difference in the mean levels of profitability (exporters minus non-exporters) is
only 0.0683.
    It should be understood that, though not targeted, the model reproduces these features of the data.
It generates selection for the SCE. The difference in the mean profitability of exporters and non-exporters
is almost twice that in the data. But the PCE distributions are very close.




                                                       27
5.2     Profitability                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5                    DETERMINANTS OF EXPORT STATUS


                         30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Non-exporters                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Non-exporters
                         25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Exporters                                                                                   25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Exporters


                         20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
            Percentage




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Percentage
                         15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15



                         10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10



                          5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5



                          0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                              ,-4.6]
                                       [-4.6,-4.2]
                                                     [-4.2,-3.8]
                                                                   [-3.8,-3.4]
                                                                                 [-3.4,-3.0]
                                                                                               [-3.0,-2.6]
                                                                                                             [-2.6,-2.2]
                                                                                                                           [-2.2,-1.8]
                                                                                                                                         [-1.8,-1.4]
                                                                                                                                                       [-1.4,-1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                     [-1.0,-0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                   [-0.6,-0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                 [-0.2,+0.2]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,-4.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   [-4.6,-4.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [-4.2,-3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               [-3.8,-3.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [-3.4,-3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [-3.0,-2.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [-2.6,-2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [-2.2,-1.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [-1.8,-1.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   [-1.4,-1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [-1.0,-0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               [-0.6,-0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [-0.2,+0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         )




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     )
                                                                                                                                                                                                               [+0.2,+0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [+0.6,+1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [+1.0,+1.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+1.4,+1.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+1.8,+2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+2.2,+2.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   [+2.6,+3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [+3.0,+3.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               [+3.4,+3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [+3.8,+4.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [+4.2,+4.6]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [+0.2,+0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+0.6,+1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+1.0,+1.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+1.4,+1.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   [+1.8,+2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [+2.2,+2.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               [+2.6,+3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [+3.0,+3.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [+3.4,+3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+3.8,+4.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+4.2,+4.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+4.6,+




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+4.6,+
                              (-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (-
                                                                                                                                                                           ln(Profitability)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ln(Profitability)



                                                                                                                  (a) SCE (DATA)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (b) PCE (DATA)
                         30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Non-exporters                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Non-exporters
                         25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Exporters                                                                                   25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Exporters


                         20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
            Percentage




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Percentage
                         15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15



                         10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10



                          5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5



                          0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                              ,-4.6]
                                       [-4.6,-4.2]
                                                     [-4.2,-3.8]
                                                                   [-3.8,-3.4]
                                                                                 [-3.4,-3.0]
                                                                                               [-3.0,-2.6]
                                                                                                             [-2.6,-2.2]
                                                                                                                           [-2.2,-1.8]
                                                                                                                                         [-1.8,-1.4]
                                                                                                                                                       [-1.4,-1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                     [-1.0,-0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                   [-0.6,-0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                 [-0.2,+0.2]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,-4.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   [-4.6,-4.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [-4.2,-3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               [-3.8,-3.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [-3.4,-3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [-3.0,-2.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [-2.6,-2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [-2.2,-1.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [-1.8,-1.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   [-1.4,-1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [-1.0,-0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               [-0.6,-0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [-0.2,+0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         )




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     )
                                                                                                                                                                                                               [+0.2,+0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [+0.6,+1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [+1.0,+1.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+1.4,+1.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+1.8,+2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+2.2,+2.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   [+2.6,+3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [+3.0,+3.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               [+3.4,+3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [+3.8,+4.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [+4.2,+4.6]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [+0.2,+0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+0.6,+1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+1.0,+1.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+1.4,+1.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   [+1.8,+2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [+2.2,+2.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               [+2.6,+3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [+3.0,+3.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [+3.4,+3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+3.8,+4.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+4.2,+4.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+4.6,+




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+4.6,+
                              (-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (-




                                                                                                                                                                           ln(Profitability)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ln(Profitability)



                                                                                                                   (c) SCE (Model)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (d) PCE (Model)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Figure 5: Revenue Based Profitability
                                                                                                                                         This figure shows the distributions of a revenue based measure of prof-
                                                                                                                                         itability, by ownership and export status, in the model and the data.


    It is interesting to explore a more common measure of productivity, the average revenue product of
labor, both in the data and from the model. Note that this measure reflects exogenous variability in
productivity as well as the power of adjustment frictions.
    As shown in Figure 1, if profitability is measured as the log of revenue per worker, the data distribu-
tions are actually very similar to those shown in Figure 5. These distributions are not degenerate and
there is more selection for the SCE. This is indicative of adjustment costs: if labor was flexible ex post,
then the distribution of the average revenue product of labor would be degenerate given our specification.
    These two measures of plant-level profitability are highly correlated: the correlation is 0.937 in the
data and 0.890 in the model. This statistic is revealing: more productive plants ought to be larger to
order to drive their average revenue product down and smaller plants are too large. This reallocation
does not take place instantly.
    This misallocation has been the topic of numerous studies since Hsieh and Klenow (2009). Here it
is noteworthy that the misallocation is present regardless of trade status. From Table 15, the standard
deviation of the average revenue product of labor is about the same for exporters and for non-exporters.
    The following figures reflect counterfactual exercises intended to illustrate the importance of adjust-
ment costs and demand shocks on the profitability distributions. The left side of the figures assumes no
adjustment costs and the right side eliminates demand shocks.40
 40
      To be clear, the experiment without adjustment costs are produced by model simulation setting all adjustment costs to


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   28
5.2   Profitability                                              5   DETERMINANTS OF EXPORT STATUS


    For the SCE, eliminating labor adjustment costs or the demand shocks, improves the sorting by
revenue-based productivity. This is seen in the left column of Figure 6. The adjustment costs impact
selection since a plant with high productivity but few workers, cannot quickly expand and start to export.
And, a plant with high profitability due to high domestic demand will not necessarily choose to export.
    For the PCE as well, without adjustment costs, sorting is much closer to the basic theory with little
overlap in the productivity distribution by export status.41 The sorting is not as clear in the absence of
demand shocks though again the exporters are surely among the highest plants in terms of profitability.
    Another perspective in that Figure 6 makes clear the importance of labor adjustment costs for the
sorting of plants by profitability. For the results without adjustment costs, the sorting is much closer to
the static prediction than alternatives, even though here there are both sunk and fixed costs associated
with exporting.
zero. In all experiments, the other parameters remain at their estimated values.
   41
      This figure is for the untrimmed sample, where firms with sales below the threshold are not dropped to more fully
illustrate the effects of the comparative static exercise.




                                                          29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5.2




                                                                                                                 5.2.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Percentage                                                                                                      Percentage                                                                                                        Percentage




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (-   ,-4.6]                                                                                                     (-   ,-4.6]                                                                                                       (-   ,-4.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Profitability




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [-4.6,-4.2]                                                                                                     [-4.6,-4.2]                                                                                                       [-4.6,-4.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [-4.2,-3.8]                                                                                                     [-4.2,-3.8]                                                                                                       [-4.2,-3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [-3.8,-3.4]                                                                                                     [-3.8,-3.4]                                                                                                       [-3.8,-3.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [-3.4,-3.0]                                                                                                     [-3.4,-3.0]                                                                                                       [-3.4,-3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [-3.0,-2.6]                                                                                                     [-3.0,-2.6]                                                                                                       [-3.0,-2.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [-2.6,-2.2]                                                                                                     [-2.6,-2.2]                                                                                                       [-2.6,-2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [-2.2,-1.8]                                                                                                     [-2.2,-1.8]                                                                                                       [-2.2,-1.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [-1.8,-1.4]                                                                                                     [-1.8,-1.4]                                                                                                       [-1.8,-1.4]




                                                                                                                 Young Exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [-1.4,-1.0]                                                                                                     [-1.4,-1.0]                                                                                                       [-1.4,-1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [-1.0,-0.6]                                                                                                     [-1.0,-0.6]                                                                                                       [-1.0,-0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [-0.6,-0.2]                                                                                                     [-0.6,-0.2]                                                                                                       [-0.6,-0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [-0.2,+0.2]                                                                                                     [-0.2,+0.2]                                                                                                       [-0.2,+0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [+0.2,+0.6]                                                                                                     [+0.2,+0.6]                                                                                                       [+0.2,+0.6]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ln(Profitability)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ln(Profitability)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ln(Profitability)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [+0.6,+1.0]                                                                                                     [+0.6,+1.0]                                                                                                       [+0.6,+1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [+1.0,+1.4]                                                                                                     [+1.0,+1.4]                                                                                                       [+1.0,+1.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [+1.4,+1.8]                                                                                                     [+1.4,+1.8]                                                                                                       [+1.4,+1.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [+1.8,+2.2]                                                                                                     [+1.8,+2.2]                                                                                                       [+1.8,+2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [+2.2,+2.6]                                                                                                     [+2.2,+2.6]                                                                                                       [+2.2,+2.6]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (e) SCE: no sunk cost
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [+2.6,+3.0]                                                                                                     [+2.6,+3.0]                                                                                                       [+2.6,+3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [+3.0,+3.4]                                                                                                     [+3.0,+3.4]                                                                                                       [+3.0,+3.4]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (c) SCE: no demand shocks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [+3.4,+3.8]                                                                                                     [+3.4,+3.8]                                                                                                       [+3.4,+3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (a) SCE: no adjustment costs




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [+3.8,+4.2]                                                                                                     [+3.8,+4.2]                                                                                                       [+3.8,+4.2]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Exporters




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [+4.2,+4.6]                                                                                                     [+4.2,+4.6]                                                                                                       [+4.2,+4.6]




     productivity but chose to remain as exporters.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Non-exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Non-exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Non-exporters




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [+4.6,+    )                                                                                                    [+4.6,+    )                                                                                                      [+4.6,+    )




30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Percentage                                                                                                      Percentage                                                                                                        Percentage




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (-   ,-4.6]                                                                                                     (-   ,-4.6]                                                                                                       (-   ,-4.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [-4.6,-4.2]                                                                                                     [-4.6,-4.2]                                                                                                       [-4.6,-4.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [-4.2,-3.8]                                                                                                     [-4.2,-3.8]                                                                                                       [-4.2,-3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [-3.8,-3.4]                                                                                                     [-3.8,-3.4]                                                                                                       [-3.8,-3.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [-3.4,-3.0]                                                                                                     [-3.4,-3.0]                                                                                                       [-3.4,-3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [-3.0,-2.6]                                                                                                     [-3.0,-2.6]                                                                                                       [-3.0,-2.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [-2.6,-2.2]                                                                                                     [-2.6,-2.2]                                                                                                       [-2.6,-2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [-2.2,-1.8]                                                                                                     [-2.2,-1.8]                                                                                                       [-2.2,-1.8]




                                                                                                                                   the overlap in the profitability distributions is even larger for PCEs.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                labor adjustment costs and the other removes demand shocks.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [-1.8,-1.4]                                                                                                     [-1.8,-1.4]                                                                                                       [-1.8,-1.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [-1.4,-1.0]                                                                                                     [-1.4,-1.0]                                                                                                       [-1.4,-1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [-1.0,-0.6]                                                                                                     [-1.0,-0.6]                                                                                                       [-1.0,-0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [-0.6,-0.2]                                                                                                     [-0.6,-0.2]                                                                                                       [-0.6,-0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [-0.2,+0.2]                                                                                                     [-0.2,+0.2]                                                                                                       [-0.2,+0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [+0.2,+0.6]                                                                                                     [+0.2,+0.6]                                                                                                       [+0.2,+0.6]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ln(Profitability)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ln(Profitability)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ln(Profitability)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [+0.6,+1.0]                                                                                                     [+0.6,+1.0]                                                                                                       [+0.6,+1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [+1.0,+1.4]                                                                                                     [+1.0,+1.4]                                                                                                       [+1.0,+1.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [+1.4,+1.8]                                                                                                     [+1.4,+1.8]                                                                                                       [+1.4,+1.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [+1.8,+2.2]                                                                                                     [+1.8,+2.2]                                                                                                       [+1.8,+2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [+2.2,+2.6]                                                                                                     [+2.2,+2.6]                                                                                                       [+2.2,+2.6]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (f) PCE: no sunk cost
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [+2.6,+3.0]                                                                                                     [+2.6,+3.0]                                                                                                       [+2.6,+3.0]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure 6: Revenue-Based Profitability Distribution: Experiments
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [+3.0,+3.4]                                                                                                     [+3.0,+3.4]                                                                                                       [+3.0,+3.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [+3.4,+3.8]                                                                                                     [+3.4,+3.8]                                                                                                       [+3.4,+3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (d) PCE: no demand shocks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (b) PCE: no adjustment costs




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [+3.8,+4.2]                                                                                                     [+3.8,+4.2]                                                                                                       [+3.8,+4.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Exporters




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ownership and export status, in the model under two experiments. One removes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                This figure shows the distributions of a revenue based measure of profitability, by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [+4.2,+4.6]                                                                                                     [+4.2,+4.6]                                                                                                       [+4.2,+4.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Non-exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Non-exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Non-exporters




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [+4.6,+    )                                                                                                    [+4.6,+    )                                                                                                      [+4.6,+    )




     entrants into exporting are sorted by productivity. Some existing exporters may have relatively low
     existing plants. This is the case in dynamic models with sunk costs and only productivity shocks: the
     exporter dynamics, here the objective is to see if sorting by profitability differ for new exporters than
     The analysis now focuses on new exporters. Unlike Ruhl and Willis (2017) where the attention was on
                                                                                                                                   distributions. Removing the sunk costs results in almost no change the overlap in both cases. If anything,
                                                                                                                                       From the bottom row of Figure 6, we see the effects of removing the sunk costs on these profitability
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DETERMINANTS OF EXPORT STATUS
5.3   Size                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5                     DETERMINANTS OF EXPORT STATUS


     To study this, we isolate plants that currently export but were not exporters in the previous two
years. We term these "young exporters". Figure 7 shows the distributions of profitability by ownership.
It is indeed the case that there is more sorting on profitability for the young exporters. But this effect is
quite small, regardless of ownership type.

                      30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Non-exporters                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Non-exporters
                      25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Other Exporters                                                                                        25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Other Exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Young Exporters                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Young Exporters
                      20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
         Percentage




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Percentage
                      15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15



                      10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10



                       5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5



                       0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                           ,-4.6]
                                    [-4.6,-4.2]
                                                  [-4.2,-3.8]
                                                                [-3.8,-3.4]
                                                                              [-3.4,-3.0]
                                                                                            [-3.0,-2.6]
                                                                                                          [-2.6,-2.2]
                                                                                                                        [-2.2,-1.8]
                                                                                                                                      [-1.8,-1.4]
                                                                                                                                                    [-1.4,-1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                  [-1.0,-0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                [-0.6,-0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                              [-0.2,+0.2]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ,-4.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [-4.6,-4.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [-4.2,-3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [-3.8,-3.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [-3.4,-3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [-3.0,-2.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [-2.6,-2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [-2.2,-1.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [-1.8,-1.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [-1.4,-1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [-1.0,-0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [-0.6,-0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [-0.2,+0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      )




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  )
                                                                                                                                                                                                            [+0.2,+0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [+0.6,+1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [+1.0,+1.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [+1.4,+1.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [+1.8,+2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [+2.2,+2.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [+2.6,+3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [+3.0,+3.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [+3.4,+3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [+3.8,+4.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [+4.2,+4.6]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [+0.2,+0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [+0.6,+1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [+1.0,+1.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [+1.4,+1.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [+1.8,+2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [+2.2,+2.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [+2.6,+3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [+3.0,+3.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [+3.4,+3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [+3.8,+4.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [+4.2,+4.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [+4.6,+




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [+4.6,+
                           (-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (-
                                                                                                                                                                        ln(Profitability)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ln(Profitability)



                                                                (a) SCE DATA: Profitability                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (b) PCE DATA: Profitability

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure 7: Distribution of Profitability


5.3    Size
The profit regressions, both in the actual and simulated data made clear that lagged employment impacts
export status. Here we study the size distribution of plants by export status. Of course, size is not
exogenous but instead reflects the interaction of the shocks to profitability and adjustment costs.
    Table 12 shows the mean and median of plant size by export status and ownership. From the data,
exporters are larger, both in terms of mean and median employment. This is true for both SCE and
PCE. Further, in the data the mean is about twice the size of the median.
    The model produces a non-degenerate size distribution because of the interaction between shocks to
productivity and demand(s) as well as adjustment costs. The employment distribution, of course, reflects
the endogenous response, governed by the estimated parameters for adjustment and exporting costs in
the model, to the profitability shocks.
    The model reproduces many of the data patterns. In particular, the mean and median employment
levels are well matched as these moments were targeted in the estimation. But the standard deviation
and skewness, which were not targeted are also well matched.
    Figure 8 presents the distributions of employment in both the data and model by ownership and
export status. For both ownership types, the smaller firms tend to be non-exporters and the larger ones
are exporters. Yet, for SCE there are large non-exporters in the data, and this feature is reproduced by
the model. As in the profitability distributions, there is no sorting by size: there are large non-exporting
plants and relatively small exporters.
    To better understand the lack of selection by size, the model can be used to produce two counterfac-
tuals, shown in Figure 9. The first assumes there are no adjustment costs and the second assumes there
are only productivity shocks driving variations in profitability.
    The top left panel of Figure 9 illustrates the predicted distribution of employment for the SCE if


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                31
5.3   Size                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5                            DETERMINANTS OF EXPORT STATUS


                          60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Non-exporters                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Non-exporters
                          50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Exporters                                                                                     50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Exporters


                          40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            40
             Percentage




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Percentage
                          30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            30



                          20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20



                          10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10



                           0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1900+




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1900+
                                    [0000,0100]

                                                       [0100,0200]

                                                                          [0200,0300]

                                                                                             [0300,0400]

                                                                                                                [0400,0500]

                                                                                                                                   [0500,0600]

                                                                                                                                                      [0600,0700]

                                                                                                                                                                         [0700,0800]

                                                                                                                                                                                            [0800,0900]

                                                                                                                                                                                                               [0900,1000]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [1000,1100]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [1100,1200]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [1200,1300]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [1300,1400]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [1400,1500]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [1500,1600]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [1600,1700]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [1700,1800]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [1800,1900]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [0000,0100]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [0100,0200]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [0200,0300]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [0300,0400]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [0400,0500]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [0500,0600]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [0600,0700]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [0700,0800]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [0800,0900]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [0900,1000]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [1000,1100]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   [1100,1200]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [1200,1300]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [1300,1400]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [1400,1500]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               [1500,1600]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [1600,1700]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [1700,1800]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [1800,1900]
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Employment                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Employment



                                                                                                                                            (a) SCE (Data)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (b) PCE (Data)
                      60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Non-exporters                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Non-exporters
                      50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Exporters                                                                                      50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Exporters


                      40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            40
         Percentage




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Percentage
                      30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            30



                      20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20



                      10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10



                          0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1900+




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1900+
                               [0000,0100]

                                                  [0100,0200]

                                                                     [0200,0300]

                                                                                        [0300,0400]

                                                                                                           [0400,0500]

                                                                                                                              [0500,0600]

                                                                                                                                                 [0600,0700]

                                                                                                                                                                    [0700,0800]

                                                                                                                                                                                       [0800,0900]

                                                                                                                                                                                                          [0900,1000]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [1000,1100]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [1100,1200]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   [1200,1300]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [1300,1400]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [1400,1500]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [1500,1600]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               [1600,1700]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [1700,1800]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [1800,1900]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [0000,0100]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [0100,0200]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   [0200,0300]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0300,0400]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [0400,0500]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [0500,0600]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               [0600,0700]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [0700,0800]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [0800,0900]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [0900,1000]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [1000,1100]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [1100,1200]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [1200,1300]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [1300,1400]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [1400,1500]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [1500,1600]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [1600,1700]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [1700,1800]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   [1800,1900]
                                                                                                                                                                                               Employment                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Employment



                                                                                                                              (c) SCE (Model)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (d) PCE (Model)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure 8: Employment Distributions
                                                                                                                                                    This figures shows employment distributions by ownership and export
                                                                                                                                                    status, both in the data and in the model.


there are no labor adjustment costs. Here we see selection at work. Almost all of the small firms are
non-exporters and also all of the large firms export. There are some exceptions though. In some cases,
firm size can reflect a large domestic demand and a relatively small foreign demand.
    The mapping from size to trade is clearest when firms differ only in productivity. The top right panel
shows the size distribution of exporters and non-exporters when only productivity shocks are present.
Here the selection fits the simple static theory quite well as the sorting is nearly perfect.
    The bottom panels of Figure 9 reproduces the experiments for the PCE. The sorting is again quite
clear where there are only productivity shocks. Removing adjustment costs alone does not eliminate the
overlap in the size distribution.
    Note that from the parameter estimates, the measure of dispersion in domestic demand,  d , is almost
four times larger for PCE compared to SCE. This, in part, explains why eliminating adjustment costs is
not enough to create the degree of sorting for the PCE group as in the SCE sample.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5.4




                                                                                                          5.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Percentage                                                                                                       Percentage




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          90




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0000,0100]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [0000,0100]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0100,0200]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BASE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BASE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DATA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DATA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0200,0300]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [0100,0200]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0300,0400]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0400,0500]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ownership




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [0200,0300]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0500,0600]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0600,0700]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [0300,0400]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0700,0800]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0800,0900]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [0400,0500]




                                                                                                          Ownership
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0900,1000]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [1000,1100]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [0500,0600]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [1100,1200]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mean




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               146.37
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               136.57
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          475.96
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          499.61
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [1200,1300]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [0600,0700]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [1300,1400]




                                                                                                                      demand shocks.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [1400,1500]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [0700,0800]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [1500,1600]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [1600,1700]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [0800,0900]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [1700,1800]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [1800,1900]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [0900,1000]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [1900,2000]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [2000,2100]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [1000,1100]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [2100,2200]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                85.33
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                85.97




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Employment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [2200,2300]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [1100,1200]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Median
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Median




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Employment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [2300,2400]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [2400,2500]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [1200,1300]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [2500,2600]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [2600,2700]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [1300,1400]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [2700,2800]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [2800,2900]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [1400,1500]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (a) SCE: no adj costs




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (c) PCE: no adj costs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [2900,3000]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [3000,3100]                                                                        SD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [1500,1600]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [3100,3200]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [3200,3300]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       187.61
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       154.14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          200.43 649.37
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          255.05 696.17




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [1600,1700]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Non-exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Non-exporters




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [3300,3400]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [3400,3500]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [1700,1800]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [3500,3600]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [3600,3700]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [1800,1900]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [3700,3800]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [3800,3900]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1900+




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Non-exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Non-exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3900+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4.26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4.76
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4.41
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3.48




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Skewness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Skewness




33
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Percentage                                                                                                       Percentage




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          90




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SCE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0000,0100]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [0000,0100]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0100,0200]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0200,0300]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [0100,0200]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0300,0400]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0400,0500]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [0200,0300]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0500,0600]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Mean



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PCE (Trimmed)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               225.19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               237.36




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0600,0700]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1465.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1237.99




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [0300,0400]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0700,0800]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0800,0900]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [0400,0500]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0900,1000]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Table 12: Export Status by Size




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [1000,1100]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [0500,0600]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [1100,1200]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [1200,1300]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [0600,0700]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [1300,1400]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [1400,1500]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [0700,0800]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [1500,1600]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [1600,1700]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [0800,0900]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               130.29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               157.86




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [1700,1800]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Median
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Median




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [1800,1900]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [0900,1000]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [1900,2000]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [2000,2100]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [1000,1100]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [2100,2200]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Employment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Employment

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [2200,2300]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [1100,1200]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [2300,2400]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [2400,2500]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [1200,1300]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [2500,2600]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Exporters




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [2600,2700]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [1300,1400]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [2700,2800]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        260.62
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        238.46




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [2800,2900]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure 9: Effects on Plant Size of Adjustment Costs and Demand
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          605.36 1170.33
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          690.99 1324.81




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [1400,1500]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [2900,3000]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [3000,3100]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [1500,1600]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [3100,3200]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (b) SCE: no demand shock




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (d) PCE: no demand shock
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [3200,3300]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [1600,1700]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [3300,3400]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [3400,3500]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [1700,1800]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [3500,3600]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Exporters




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [3600,3700]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [1800,1900]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [3700,3800]




                                                                                                                      in the model under two experiments. One removes labor adjustment costs and the other removes
                                                                                                                      This figure shows the distributions of plant size (employment), by ownership and export status,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [3800,3900]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1900+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3.22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3.81
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2.24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1.70




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Non-exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Non-exporters




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3900+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Skewness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Skewness




     1 and continuing throughout the presentation, differences in the behavior of PCE and SCE have been
     Ownership matters: the exporting status of PCE and SCE differ. Starting with our motivating Figure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             DETERMINANTS OF EXPORT STATUS
5.4    Ownership                                                   5   DETERMINANTS OF EXPORT STATUS


noted. This sub-section focuses specifically on the effects of ownership.
    From the estimates, there are a few key differences in parameters by ownership: (i) discounting, (ii)
curvature, (iii) adjustment costs, (iv) the stochastic processes for the shocks and (v) trade costs. These
differences appear in the estimates and are then reflected in their choices.
    We look at those in turn through a series of counterfactual exercises. Specifically, key parameters
estimated for the PCE are substituted for the estimated SCE values.42 The SCE choice problem is
resolved using these parameters and the differences with the baseline highlight the significance of the
economic effects of that (those) parameter(s). For ( , d , f ,  + ,  - ,  + ,  - , SC f ), we directly use the
corresponding values from the estimation of PCE in the SCE optimization problem.43 The parameters
(f , , F + , F - ), were adjusted so that their value relative to average SCE revenue (in the baseline model)
matched the corresponding value from the PCE estimation. In this way, the SCE problem was solved
using the fraction of revenue of these costs using the PCE estimates. Finally, for the shock processes, we
took the corresponding values from the estimation of PCE, adjusting the mean of domestic and foreign
profitability to equal the baseline case.




  42
     As the SCE model does not have exit, substituting the PCE parameters for the comparable SCE values was the exercise
chosen.
  43
     Importantly, variations in these parameters, such as (d , f ) influence revenue. Thus it is important that the various
adjustment costs are kept fixed at their absolute levels, not fixed relative to revenue, throughout these experiments.


                                                            34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ownership
                                                                                                    Table 13: Moments: Counterfactuals

                                                        Non-exporters                                                                                      Exporters                                                                 stat
                 sc     JC30    Inact   JD30     ~d       ~d      ~d     emp (p50)   emp (mean)   nex2ex     sc    JC30    Inact   JD30    ~ df     ~df
                                                                                                                                                            ~ df
                                                                                                                                                                   emp (p50)     emp (mean)   ex2nex    fox    ex int   small ex
     Baseline   0.989   0.065   0.183   0.043   1.250    0.795   0.893    200.427     475.962     0.035    0.985   0.084   0.183   0.032   1.060   0.769   0.774       605.360    1465.009    0.094    0.341   0.210     0.386      4319.75
       shocks   0.983   0.092   0.211   0.040   1.359    0.765   1.031    706.678     2889.450    0.069    0.985   0.057   0.192   0.044   1.081   0.744   0.878   1283.666       3813.973    0.109    0.315   0.319     0.392     194976.55
35




                0.994   0.006   0.213   0.008   1.093    0.822   0.865    40.000       65.182     0.031    0.978   0.088   0.178   0.051   0.902   0.765   0.807       191.758    388.709     0.051    0.583   0.742     0.010     24731.94
         d      0.992   0.011   0.268   0.003   1.195    0.820   0.866    30.000       48.388     0.019    0.972   0.076   0.190   0.026   0.914   0.750   0.762       151.484    247.772     0.077    0.345   0.668     0.008     21732.95
         f      0.989   0.052   0.180   0.042   1.250    0.797   0.898    215.767     470.787     0.043    0.984   0.091   0.190   0.030   1.105   0.756   0.790       691.226    1612.600    0.072    0.483   0.309     0.292      5356.85
        AC      0.987   0.047   0.409   0.07    1.464    0.754   0.782    88.000      206.204     0.028    0.984   0.059   0.390   0.074   1.066   0.722   0.687       325.973    675.032     0.106    0.268   0.269     0.275     14526.15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5
        TC      0.989   0.066   0.179   0.043   1.251    0.796   0.896    200.427     486.372     0.031    0.985   0.084   0.190   0.030   1.050   0.761   0.765       661.330    1592.079    0.097    0.301   0.222     0.366      5040.87




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DETERMINANTS OF EXPORT STATUS
     Notes:
5.4   Ownership                                             5   DETERMINANTS OF EXPORT STATUS


    For each of the experiments, three types of evidence are presented. First, Table 13 reproduces the full
set of moments indicating how they change with the reparameterization of the SCE model. Second, Figure
10 shows the distributions of profitability for each experiment. Finally, the responsiveness regressions,
building on Table 8, are run for each experiment. The reference point is the baseline SCE model,
included in each of these pieces of evidence. In addition to these experiments, we also present evidence
on differences in (size weighted) export shares by ownership.

5.4.1   Moment Implications

The last column of Table 13 reports the model fit for these experiments and thus makes clear which
variations matter for matching moments. Clearly, for the row labeled "shocks", the moments changed
dramatically and the fit was made worse by an order of magnitude compared to the the experiments.
For this exercise, we jointly change the SC f and AR(1) processes of the two demand as well as the
productivity shock, allowing the means of domestic and foreign profitability to change. From Table 5,
both the domestic and foreign demand shocks for the PCE were considerably more volatile and less
persistent than those impacting the SCE plants. The opposite was the case in foreign markets where the
volatility was almost twice that of the SCE plants. The relative mean of foreign demand, SC f , is about
35% lower for the PCE. As for productivity, this process is less volatile for the PCE compared to the
SCE estimates but considerably more persistent.
    The moments that change the most are the employment means of both exporters and non-exporters.
Interestingly, the distribution of employment adjustments does not change much despite these differences
in volatility and persistence. There is considerably more variation in export status in light of the increased
volatility of the demand processes now faced by the SCE.
    A second big factor distinguishing the PCE and SCE is the curvature in the revenue functions. The
row labeled "" is an experiment in which both of the PCE curvatures are used in the SCE problem.
From Table 5, the PCE curvature for domestic revenue was over 10% lower than the SCE estimate, while
the PCE curvature in foreign markets was about 5% higher than the SCE estimate. To be clear, by
construction, in this experiment the substitution of the PCE for the SCE curvature measures did not
influence the adjustment costs even though these are stated in terms of average revenue.
    Solving the SCE problem with these parameters reduces the mean and median sizes of the both
non-exporting and exporting SCE plants. The fraction of plants exporting rises considerably.
    The rows labeled d and f change the curvature parameters on domestic and foreign demand sepa-
rately. Here it is clear that changing the curvature of domestic revenue from the SCE to the PCE lower
estimate is key. Once the SCE optimize with the reduced curvature, employment in production for the
domestic market falls considerably. There is actually substitution in this case in that the size of exporters
increases, as does the export share.
    A third important factor are the adjustment costs, denoted "AC" in the table. Recall from Table 6,
that relative to revenue the fixed costs of hiring and firing were much larger for the SCE compared to
the PCE. Further both the quadratic and linear hiring costs were much higher for the PCE though the
quadratic and linear firing cost were lower for those plants.


                                                     36
5.4     Ownership                                                     5    DETERMINANTS OF EXPORT STATUS


    Using these adjustment costs in the SCE problem led to changes in the distributions of job creation
and destruction for both exporters and non-exporting plants.44 The inaction rate is higher for both types
of plants, as is the job destruction rate (JD30). Reflecting the higher adjustment costs, plant sizes are
smaller. The export share falls by about 25% and the fraction of small exporters falls too.
    Interestingly, there are two factors that matter much less: (i) discounting and (ii) export costs.
Reducing  from the SCE to the PCE level, a reduction of about 5 percentage points. This leads to a
small deterioration of the fit, mainly from the increase in plant size. There is also a modest increase in
inaction.
    Further, from Table 6, both the cost of becoming an exporter, , as well as the overhead cost of
exporting, f , are a larger fraction of average revenue for PCE. Putting these increased costs in the SCE
optimization problem worsens the model fit, as indicated by the "TC" row. The fraction of exporters is
lower, as is the fraction of small exporters. Both the mean and median export size is higher as there is
greater selection into exporting.
 44
      A large part of the effect here is through the piecewise quadratic adjustment costs and the positive linear cost.




                                                               37
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5.4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Percentage                                                                                                 Percentage                                                                                             Percentage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5.4.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (-   ,-4.6]                                                                                                (-   ,-4.6]                                                                                            (-   ,-4.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [-4.6,-4.2]                                                                                                [-4.6,-4.2]                                                                                            [-4.6,-4.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [-4.2,-3.8]                                                                                                [-4.2,-3.8]                                                                                            [-4.2,-3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ownership




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [-3.8,-3.4]                                                                                                [-3.8,-3.4]                                                                                            [-3.8,-3.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [-3.4,-3.0]                                                                                                [-3.4,-3.0]                                                                                            [-3.4,-3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [-3.0,-2.6]                                                                                                [-3.0,-2.6]                                                                                            [-3.0,-2.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [-2.6,-2.2]                                                                                                [-2.6,-2.2]                                                                                            [-2.6,-2.2]




     is much more overlap.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [-2.2,-1.8]                                                                                                [-2.2,-1.8]                                                                                            [-2.2,-1.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [-1.8,-1.4]                                                                                                [-1.8,-1.4]                                                                                            [-1.8,-1.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [-1.4,-1.0]                                                                                                [-1.4,-1.0]                                                                                            [-1.4,-1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [-1.0,-0.6]                                                                                                [-1.0,-0.6]                                                                                            [-1.0,-0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [-0.6,-0.2]                                                                                                [-0.6,-0.2]                                                                                            [-0.6,-0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [-0.2,+0.2]                                                                                                [-0.2,+0.2]                                                                                            [-0.2,+0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+0.2,+0.6]                                                                                                [+0.2,+0.6]                                                                                            [+0.2,+0.6]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ln(Profitability)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ln(Profitability)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ln(Profitability)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+0.6,+1.0]                                                                                                [+0.6,+1.0]                                                                                            [+0.6,+1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+1.0,+1.4]                                                                                                [+1.0,+1.4]                                                                                            [+1.0,+1.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+1.4,+1.8]                                                                                                [+1.4,+1.8]                                                                                            [+1.4,+1.8]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (a) SCE Baseline




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (e) Shocks (SCf )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+1.8,+2.2]                                                                                                [+1.8,+2.2]                                                                                            [+1.8,+2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Profitability Distributions




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (c) Adjustment Costs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+2.2,+2.6]                                                                                                [+2.2,+2.6]                                                                                            [+2.2,+2.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+2.6,+3.0]                                                                                                [+2.6,+3.0]                                                                                            [+2.6,+3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+3.0,+3.4]                                                                                                [+3.0,+3.4]                                                                                            [+3.0,+3.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+3.4,+3.8]                                                                                                [+3.4,+3.8]                                                                                            [+3.4,+3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+3.8,+4.2]                                                                                                [+3.8,+4.2]                                                                                            [+3.8,+4.2]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Exporters




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+4.2,+4.6]                                                                                                [+4.2,+4.6]                                                                                            [+4.2,+4.6]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Non-exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Non-exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Non-exporters




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+4.6,+    )                                                                                               [+4.6,+    )                                                                                           [+4.6,+    )




38
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Percentage                                                                                                 Percentage                                                                                             Percentage




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (-   ,-4.6]                                                                                                (-   ,-4.6]                                                                                            (-   ,-4.6]




     shows the distributions of profitability for these experiments.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [-4.6,-4.2]                                                                                                [-4.6,-4.2]                                                                                            [-4.6,-4.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [-4.2,-3.8]                                                                                                [-4.2,-3.8]                                                                                            [-4.2,-3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [-3.8,-3.4]                                                                                                [-3.8,-3.4]                                                                                            [-3.8,-3.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [-3.4,-3.0]                                                                                                [-3.4,-3.0]                                                                                            [-3.4,-3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [-3.0,-2.6]                                                                                                [-3.0,-2.6]                                                                                            [-3.0,-2.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [-2.6,-2.2]                                                                                                [-2.6,-2.2]                                                                                            [-2.6,-2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [-2.2,-1.8]                                                                                                [-2.2,-1.8]                                                                                            [-2.2,-1.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [-1.8,-1.4]                                                                                                [-1.8,-1.4]                                                                                            [-1.8,-1.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [-1.4,-1.0]                                                                                                [-1.4,-1.0]                                                                                            [-1.4,-1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [-1.0,-0.6]                                                                                                [-1.0,-0.6]                                                                                            [-1.0,-0.6]




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure 10: Distributions of SCE Profitability
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [-0.6,-0.2]                                                                                                [-0.6,-0.2]                                                                                            [-0.6,-0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [-0.2,+0.2]                                                                                                [-0.2,+0.2]                                                                                            [-0.2,+0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+0.2,+0.6]                                                                                                [+0.2,+0.6]                                                                                            [+0.2,+0.6]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ln(Profitability)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ln(Profitability)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ln(Profitability)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (d) all 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+0.6,+1.0]                                                                                                [+0.6,+1.0]                                                                                            [+0.6,+1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+1.0,+1.4]                                                                                                [+1.0,+1.4]                                                                                            [+1.0,+1.4]




                                                                                                                  These figures show the profitability distributions for the SCE using PCE parameters.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+1.4,+1.8]                                                                                                [+1.4,+1.8]                                                                                            [+1.4,+1.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (b) PCE Baseline




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+1.8,+2.2]                                                                                                [+1.8,+2.2]                                                                                            [+1.8,+2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+2.2,+2.6]                                                                                                [+2.2,+2.6]                                                                                            [+2.2,+2.6]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (f) shocks (fixed SCf )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+2.6,+3.0]                                                                                                [+2.6,+3.0]                                                                                            [+2.6,+3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+3.0,+3.4]                                                                                                [+3.0,+3.4]                                                                                            [+3.0,+3.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+3.4,+3.8]                                                                                                [+3.4,+3.8]                                                                                            [+3.4,+3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+3.8,+4.2]                                                                                                [+3.8,+4.2]                                                                                            [+3.8,+4.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Exporters




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+4.2,+4.6]                                                                                                [+4.2,+4.6]                                                                                            [+4.2,+4.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Non-exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Non-exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Non-exporters




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [+4.6,+    )                                                                                               [+4.6,+    )                                                                                           [+4.6,+    )




         The cases in which the SCE operate with either the PCE estimated  or adjustment costs values, have
     shows some overlap but also a shift to the right in the distribution for exporters while for the PCE there
         The top row shows the distribution from the SCE and PCE baselines. As noted above, the SCE case
     curvature in revenue and the adjustment costs were the most important. Focusing on these, Figure 10
     As indicated in the table, other experiments surely impact the model fit but the shock processes, the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DETERMINANTS OF EXPORT STATUS
5.4    Ownership                                                    5   DETERMINANTS OF EXPORT STATUS


a big impact on these distributions. For these two cases, there is much more sorting as the distribution
of profitability for the exporters is shifted to the right.
    The final row shows the distributions using the PCE shocks, with and without a change in mean
foreign demand. In these cases, the distributions look more like the PCE baseline with considerable
overlap in the profitability of exporters and non-exporters. As noted earlier, this is a consequence of the
relative importance of demand shocks for the PCE.

5.4.3      Dynamic Responsiveness

A final basis for evaluating parameter differences returns to the determinants of export status regression
reported in Table 8. This regression has plant-level export status as a dependent variable, explained by
lagged export status, the (log) of lagged employment and the current innovation. This regression was run
on actual data and simulated data by ownership, as reported in Table 8. The coefficients were all smaller
for the PCE compared to the SCE in simulated data. Here the point is to link these in responsiveness to
the differences in structural parameter estimates.

                                  Table 14: SCE: Determinants of Export Status

                        Variable      SCE Baseline      PCE Baseline       shocks              AC
                          ex-1           0.854             0.836            0.801    0.859    0.845
                       ln(emp-1 )        0.010             0.006            0.011    0.018    0.010
                                         0.061             0.038            0.026    0.115    0.053

                      Notes: The dependent variable is SCE export status at period t. The table
                     shows the baseline and three treatments.

    Of these changes in the parameterization, both the shocks and  have large effects on these regression
results. Giving the SCE the PCE shock processes, reduces the dependence of current export status on
lagged export status and also dramatically reduces the response to profitability innovations. This can
be linked to the lower persistence in the shocks for the PCE compared to the SCE plants. For the 
experiment, the response to the profitability shock is almost twice that of the baseline. This reflects that
there is less curvature in the PCE domestic demand compared to the SCE estimate of d .
    It appears that the change in adjustment costs pushes the SCE baseline in the direction of the PCE
baseline. With these alternative costs both the response to lagged export status and to the innovation
are muted.

5.4.4      Export Shares

Thus far the analysis focuses on the extensive margin: to export or not. Conditional on exporting, there
is the intensive margin of the share of plant activity devoted to exporting that is of interest.45 This seems
particularly instructive when looking across ownership types.
 45
      The focus on the distribution of export shares follows Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (2003).



                                                            39
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6                           CONCLUSION


   From the top row of Figure 11, the SCE and PCE distribution of (size weighted) export shares differs
dramatically. For the SCE, about 50% of workers are in plants with an export share less than 10%. In
contrast, for the PCE there are many more large exporters: almost 40% of the workers are in plants with
an export share in excess of 95%.

                      60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      60



                      50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      50



                      40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      40
         Percentage




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Percentage
                      30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      30



                      20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20



                      10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10



                       0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [0.95,1]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [0.95,1]
                           (0,0.05]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [0.70,.75]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (0,0.05]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [0.70,.75]
                                      [0.05,0.10]

                                                    [0.10,0.15]

                                                                  [0.15,0.20]

                                                                                [0.20,0.25]

                                                                                              [0.25,0.30]

                                                                                                            [0.30,0.35]

                                                                                                                          [0.35,0.40]

                                                                                                                                        [0.40,0.45]

                                                                                                                                                      [0.45,0.50]

                                                                                                                                                                    [0.50,0.55]

                                                                                                                                                                                  [0.55,0.60]

                                                                                                                                                                                                [0.60,0.66]

                                                                                                                                                                                                              [0.65,0.70]



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [0.75,0.80]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [0.80,0.85]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [0.85,0.90]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   [0.90,0.95]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [0.05,0.10]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [0.10,0.15]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [0.15,0.20]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [0.20,0.25]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0.25,0.30]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [0.30,0.35]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [0.35,0.40]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [0.40,0.45]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [0.45,0.50]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [0.50,0.55]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [0.55,0.60]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [0.60,0.66]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0.65,0.70]



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [0.75,0.80]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               [0.80,0.85]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [0.85,0.90]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [0.90,0.95]
                                                                                                                                            Export Share                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Export Share



                                                                                      (a) SCEs (DATA)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (b) PCEs (DATA)
                      60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      60



                      50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      50



                      40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      40
         Percentage




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Percentage




                      30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      30



                      20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20



                      10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10



                       0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [0.95,1]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [0.95,1]
                           (0,0.05]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [0.70,.75]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (0,0.05]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [0.70,.75]
                                      [0.05,0.10]

                                                    [0.10,0.15]

                                                                  [0.15,0.20]

                                                                                [0.20,0.25]

                                                                                              [0.25,0.30]

                                                                                                            [0.30,0.35]

                                                                                                                          [0.35,0.40]

                                                                                                                                        [0.40,0.45]

                                                                                                                                                      [0.45,0.50]

                                                                                                                                                                    [0.50,0.55]

                                                                                                                                                                                  [0.55,0.60]

                                                                                                                                                                                                [0.60,0.66]

                                                                                                                                                                                                              [0.65,0.70]



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [0.75,0.80]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [0.80,0.85]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [0.85,0.90]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   [0.90,0.95]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [0.05,0.10]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [0.10,0.15]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [0.15,0.20]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [0.20,0.25]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0.25,0.30]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [0.30,0.35]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [0.35,0.40]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [0.40,0.45]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [0.45,0.50]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [0.50,0.55]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [0.55,0.60]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [0.60,0.66]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0.65,0.70]



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [0.75,0.80]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               [0.80,0.85]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [0.85,0.90]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [0.90,0.95]
                                                                                                                                            Export Share                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Export Share



                                                                                        (c) SCEs (Model)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (d) PCEs (Model)

                                                                                                                 Figure 11: Distributions of Export Share (Size Weighted)

    As indicated by the bottom row of the figure, our model captures this distinction between export
shares by ownership. Again, in the spirit of the above counterfactual exercises, what is the source of this
difference in the distribution of export shares?
    Figure 12 shows the results of two experiments. In the first, the revenue curvatures from the PCE
estimation are used in the SCE problem. In this case, the distribution shifts dramatically, putting much
more weight on plants with very high export shares. This mimics the PCS distribution. If instead the
PCE shocks are used as inputs into the SCE problem, then there is some shift of the distribution to the
right but not nearly as much as in the first exercise.


6    Conclusion
The paper started with a graphical representation of the productivity distribution across plants in China,
by export status and ownership. The distributions exhibit considerable overlap, in contrast to the pre-
dictions of a (too) naive model that export status is determined by productivity alone.
    The analysis goes beyond the traditional model of trade costs to include labor adjustment costs as

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            40
REFERENCES                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              REFERENCES


                      60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             60



                      50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             50



                      40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             40
         Percentage




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Percentage
                      30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             30



                      20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20



                      10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             10



                       0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                           (0.00,0.05]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (0.00,0.05]
                                         [0.05,0.10]

                                                       [0.10,0.15]

                                                                     [0.15,0.20]

                                                                                   [0.20,0.25]

                                                                                                 [0.25,0.30]

                                                                                                               [0.30,0.35]

                                                                                                                             [0.35,0.40]

                                                                                                                                           [0.40,0.45]

                                                                                                                                                         [0.45,0.50]

                                                                                                                                                                       [0.50,0.55]

                                                                                                                                                                                     [0.55,0.60]

                                                                                                                                                                                                   [0.60,0.66]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [0.65,0.70]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               [0.70,0.75]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [0.75,0.80]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [0.80,0.85]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [0.85,0.90]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [0.90,0.95]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [0.95,1.00]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [0.05,0.10]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0.10,0.15]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [0.15,0.20]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [0.20,0.25]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [0.25,0.30]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [0.30,0.35]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [0.35,0.40]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [0.40,0.45]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [0.45,0.50]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0.50,0.55]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [0.55,0.60]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [0.60,0.66]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                [0.65,0.70]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [0.70,0.75]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [0.75,0.80]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [0.80,0.85]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        [0.85,0.90]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [0.90,0.95]

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [0.95,1.00]
                                                                                                                                               Export Share                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Export Share



                                                                                                                     (a) PCE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (b) PCE shocks

                                                                                                               Figure 12: Experiments: Export share of SCEs (weighted)


well. Further, the profits of an enterprise are impacted by three shocks: (i) productivity, (ii) domestic
demand and (iii) foreign demand (for exporters). The enhanced model is estimated through a simulated
method of moments approach, where the moments come from Chinese manufacturing plants.
    The estimated model is used, in part through a series of counterfactuals, to study the factors that
impact export status. The emphasis is on the role of adjustment and trade costs in determining export
status and the distribution of productivity by export status and ownership. Though the parameters of
both types of frictions are, in the estimation, statistically significant, the adjustment costs overall seem
to have a much larger impact on export status and the associated distributions.
    One value of the Chinese data is the opportunity to distinguish plants by ownership. The estimation
allows parameters to differ between SCE and PCE. And indeed the estimates do differ in a way that
allows the model to explain the different patterns of ownership. Among the differences, the stochastic
process for demands as well as adjustment costs were key.
    There are two projects that naturally grow from these results. Though not emphasized here, in the
Chinese data, the employment levels of plants that enter export status, i.e. the new exporters, do not
follow the pattern of US plants detailed in Ruhl and Willis (2017). An open issue worth pursuing is
understanding the differences in these dynamics.
    A second exercise is to conduct an analysis of a trade war, on at least two dimensions. The first
dimension concerns the effects of subsidizes for SCE. These subsidies might take multiple forms, including
cheaper credit (reflected here as a higher  ) and/or lower costs of exporting. The estimated model can
be used as a tool to determine the effects of these interventions on trade outcomes. Second, the model
is useful for determining the effects on Chinese plants of trade measures, such as recent tariff increases
imposed by the US.


References
Alessandria, G., and H. Choi (2007): "Do sunk costs of exporting matter for net export dynamics?,"
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1), 289­336.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   41
                                                                                          7   APPENDIX


Alessandria, G. A., C. Arkolakis, and K. J. Ruhl (2020): "Firm dynamics and trade," Discussion
 paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bernard, A. B., J. Eaton, J. B. Jensen, and S. Kortum (2003): "Plants and productivity in
  international trade," American economic review, 93(4), 1268­1290.

Cooper, R., G. Gong, and P. Yan (2015): "Dynamic Labor Demand in China: public and private
 objectives," Rand Journal of Economics, 46(3), 577­610.

Cooper, R., and J. Haltiwanger (2006): "On the Nature of the Capital Adjustment Costs," Review
 of Economic Studies, 73, 611­34.

Cooper, R., and H. Liu (2019): "MisMatch in human capital accumulation," International Economic
 Review, 60(3), 1291­1328.

  ¸ar, A. K., N. Guner, and J. Tybout (2016): "Firm dynamics, job turnover, and wage distribu-
Cos
 tions in an open economy," American Economic Review, 106(3), 625­63.

Decker, R. A., J. C. Haltiwanger, R. S. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2018): "Changing business dy-
 namism and productivity: Shocks vs. responsiveness," Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

Firooz, H. (2020): "Trade-Induced Job Turnover and Unemployment: The Role of Variable Demand
  Elasticity," Discussion paper, University of Rochester.

Ghironi, F., and M. J. Melits (2005): "International trade and macroeconomic dynamics with het-
 erogeneous firms," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3), 865­915.

Hsieh, C.-T., and P. Klenow (2009): "Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXXIV(4), 1403­1448.

Melitz, M. J. (2003): "The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate industry
 productivity," econometrica, 71(6), 1695­1725.

Ruhl, K. J., and J. L. Willis (2017): "New exporter dynamics," International Economic Review,
 58(3), 703­726.


7     Appendix
7.1   Revenue Functions
This section presents our analysis of revenue functions and the construction of profitability shocks.




                                                   42
7.1    Revenue Functions                                                                                                  7     APPENDIX


7.1.1     Environment

Assume:

                                     ~k 1- e
      · C-D Production Function: y = z

      · Demand Functions
                                                                                   1/d
          - Domestic demand : yd = Bd p-
                                       d
                                         d
                                            pd =                       Bd
                                                                       yd

                                                  -f               Bf          1/f
          - Foreign demand : yf = Bf pf                 pf =       yf

      · We denote other variable input by k whose cost is price r

7.1.2     Exporters

This is the optimization problem for exporters. Given sj e, the share of employment to market j , the
revenue (net of variable costs) for market j :
                                               1/j                         j
                                                                1-
               Rj (z, Aj , sj e) = max Bj             z (sj e) kj              - rkj
                                       kj
                                                                                (1-) j
                                                                                                                         1
                                                 (1 - )                j       1-(1-) j
                                                                                              1/j                    1-(1-) j
                               = [1 - (1 - ) j ]                                          Bj        z j (sj e)   j
                                                     r

where j = 1 - 1/j .
   Given a level of employment, e, the producer optimally allocates labor between production for the
domestic and foreign markets. From this, the revenue of exporters can be written:

           R(z, Ad , Af ) = max                Rj (z, Aj , sj e) = max Ad (z × sd × e)d + Af (z × sf × e)f
                           sd ,sf                                 sd ,sf
                                    j {d,f }

subject to sd + sf = 1, and where
                                                                                    (1-) d
                                                                                                 1/d
                                   d              (1 - )                       d   1-(1-) d
                                                                                               1-(1-) d
                              A = [1 - (1 - ) d ]                                             Bd           ,
                                                      r

                                                                                    (1-) f       1/f
                                                  (1 - )                       f   1-(1-) f    1-(1-) f
                             Af = [1 - (1 - ) f ]                                             Bf           ,
                                                      r
                         d                               f
        ~1/ , d =
      z=z            1-(1-)    d
                                    , and f =        1-(1-)   f




                                                                  43
7.2   Productivity and Profitability Distributions                                            7   APPENDIX


7.1.3    Measuring Profitability Shocks

According to the definition of revenue function, for non-exporters, the revenue-based profitability is z d Ad .
For exporters, the revenue-based profitability is
                                         d              f
                                   Ad z  sd + Af z  (1 - s )f e(f -d )
                                              d 1 - s
                                    =   1+                   sd z d Ad
                                              f s                                                          (9)
                                             z d Ad
                                    =                   d
                                               1-s^ f
                                        s
                                        ^ 1+    s
                                                ^ d

where s is the optimal share of output sold in the domestic market, and s   ^ is the share of revenue earned
                                                                                                    d    d
from the domestic market. We get the first equation by using the first order condition d z d Ad s -1 e =
                 f    f                                        d 1-s
f z f Af (1 - s ) -1 e . The second equation is from 1-  s
                                                           s
                                                           ^
                                                          ^ = f s .
   If d = f , export share s is independent on e, i.e.

                                                             1
                                             s =                  1     .
                                                        d A d    d -1
                                                   1+   f A f

If we assume there is no heterogeneity in demand, then the distribution of s degenerates.

7.2     Productivity and Profitability Distributions
This sub-section presents statistics and distributions for the two productivity measures.




                                                        44
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7.2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Percentage                                                                                                Percentage




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (-   ,-4.6]                                                                                               (-   ,-4.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [-4.6,-4.2]                                                                                               [-4.6,-4.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [-4.2,-3.8]                                                                                               [-4.2,-3.8]




                                                                     BASE
                                                                                                                BASE




                                                                     DATA
                                                                                                                DATA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [-3.8,-3.4]                                                                                               [-3.8,-3.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [-3.4,-3.0]                                                                                               [-3.4,-3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [-3.0,-2.6]                                                                                               [-3.0,-2.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [-2.6,-2.2]                                                                                               [-2.6,-2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [-2.2,-1.8]                                                                                               [-2.2,-1.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [-1.8,-1.4]                                                                                               [-1.8,-1.4]




                                                                     0.025
                                                                     0.035
                                                                     Mean
                                                                                                                Mean

                                                                                                                -0.111
                                                                                                                -0.042
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [-1.4,-1.0]                                                                                               [-1.4,-1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [-1.0,-0.6]                                                                                               [-1.0,-0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [-0.6,-0.2]                                                                                               [-0.6,-0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [-0.2,+0.2]                                                                                               [-0.2,+0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+0.2,+0.6]                                                                                               [+0.2,+0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+0.6,+1.0]                                                                                               [+0.6,+1.0]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ln(Labor Productivity)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ln(Labor Productivity)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+1.0,+1.4]                                                                                               [+1.0,+1.4]




                                                                     Median
                                                                                                                Median
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+1.4,+1.8]                                                                                               [+1.4,+1.8]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (c) SCE (Model)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+1.8,+2.2]                                                     (a) SCE (DATA)                            [+1.8,+2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+2.2,+2.6]                                                                                               [+2.2,+2.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+2.6,+3.0]                                                                                               [+2.6,+3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+3.0,+3.4]                                                                                               [+3.0,+3.4]




                                                                              SD
                                                                                                                         SD




                                                                     -0.002 0.900
                                                                     -0.011 0.908
                                                                                                                -0.074 0.935
                                                                                                                -0.099 1.013
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+3.4,+3.8]                                                                                               [+3.4,+3.8]




                                                                       Non-exporters
                                                                                                                  Non-exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+3.8,+4.2]                                                                                               [+3.8,+4.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Exporters




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+4.2,+4.6]                                                                                               [+4.2,+4.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Non-exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Non-exporters




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+4.6,+    )                                                                                              [+4.6,+    )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Productivity and Profitability Distributions




                                                                                       0.207
                                                                                       0.217
                                                                                                                                  0.388
                                                                                                                                 -0.168




45
                                                                                     Skewness
                                                                                                                                Skewness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Percentage                                                                                                Percentage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5




                                                                                                                                           SCE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (-   ,-4.6]                                                                                               (-   ,-4.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [-4.6,-4.2]                                                                                               [-4.6,-4.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [-4.2,-3.8]                                                                                               [-4.2,-3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [-3.8,-3.4]                                                                                               [-3.8,-3.4]




                                                                                                                0.663
                                                                                                                0.158


                                                                                                PCE (Trimmed)


                                                                     Mean
                                                                                                                Mean




                                                                     -0.059
                                                                     -0.081
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [-3.4,-3.0]                                                                                               [-3.4,-3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [-3.0,-2.6]                                                                                               [-3.0,-2.6]




     Notes: We remove industry, year and location effect from DATA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [-2.6,-2.2]                                                                                               [-2.6,-2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [-2.2,-1.8]                                                                                               [-2.2,-1.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [-1.8,-1.4]                                                                                               [-1.8,-1.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [-1.4,-1.0]                                                                                               [-1.4,-1.0]




                                                                                                                                                 Table 15: Profitability: Labor Productivity




                                                                                                                 0.726
                                                                                                                 0.112
                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 13: Profitability: Labor Productivity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [-1.0,-0.6]                                                                                               [-1.0,-0.6]




                                                                     Median
                                                                                                                Median
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [-0.6,-0.2]                                                                                               [-0.6,-0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [-0.2,+0.2]                                                                                               [-0.2,+0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+0.2,+0.6]                                                                                               [+0.2,+0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+0.6,+1.0]                                                                                               [+0.6,+1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ln(Labor Productivity)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ln(Labor Productivity)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+1.0,+1.4]                                                                                               [+1.0,+1.4]




                                                                               SD
                                                                                                                          SD




                                                                         Exporters
                                                                                                                    Exporters




                                                                     -0.096 0.820
                                                                     -0.133 0.891
                                                                                                                        0.781
                                                                                                                        0.949
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+1.4,+1.8]                                                                                               [+1.4,+1.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (d) PCE (Model)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (b) PCE (DATA)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+1.8,+2.2]                                                                                               [+1.8,+2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+2.2,+2.6]                                                                                               [+2.2,+2.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+2.6,+3.0]                                                                                               [+2.6,+3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+3.0,+3.4]                                                                                               [+3.0,+3.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+3.4,+3.8]                                                                                               [+3.4,+3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+3.8,+4.2]                                                                                               [+3.8,+4.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Exporters




                                                                       0.330
                                                                       0.269
                                                                                                                  0.237
                                                                                                                 -0.423
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+4.2,+4.6]                                                                                               [+4.2,+4.6]




                                                                     Skewness
                                                                                                                Skewness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Non-exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Non-exporters




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [+4.6,+    )                                                                                              [+4.6,+    )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   APPENDIX
7.3       Identification                                                                                      7   APPENDIX


                                      Table 16: Profitability: Revenue-Based Profitability

                                                                       SCE
                                         Non-exporters                                    Exporters
                            Mean       Median   SD     Skewness              Mean     Median   SD           Skewness
               DATA         -0.080     -0.146 1.012      0.341               0.353     0.342  1.018           0.172
               BASE         -0.154     -0.142 1.054      0.010               0.915     0.967  0.869          -0.118
                                                             PCE (Trimmed)
                                         Non-exporters                                    Exporters
                            Mean       Median   SD     Skewness              Mean     Median   SD           Skewness
               DATA         -0.012     -0.065 0.871      0.289               0.031    -0.028 0.877            0.331
               BASE         -0.022     -0.104 0.821      0.186               0.053    -0.066 0.769            0.285

              Notes: We remove industry, year and location effect from DATA


7.3        Identification

                                               Table 17: SCE: Elasticity of Moments

                           non-exporters                                                 exporters

             sc     JC30      Inact    JD30     nex2ex      sc     JC30      Inact   JD30    ex2nex   fox     ex int   small ex
      f
            0.00    0.08      -0.14     0.23     -0.24     0.00    0.11      0.31    -0.18    0.51    -0.51    0.26     -0.27
            0.00    0.11      -0.02    -0.14     -0.29     0.00    -0.06     -0.05   0.18    -0.28    -0.06   -0.01      0.00
 SC f       0.00    -1.23     0.36     -0.27     1.46      0.00    0.06      -0.48   -0.23   -0.87    1.59     0.95     -0.62
 +          0.01    -0.11     0.23     -0.53     -0.28     0.01    -0.10     0.23    -0.53    0.05    -0.21    0.22     -0.24
      -
            0.01    -0.30     -0.26    -3.12     -0.11     0.01    -0.23     -0.24   -4.21   -0.01    -0.11    0.14     -0.15
      +
 F          0.00    -0.06     0.04     -0.04     -0.01     0.00    0.01      0.01    -0.04    0.00    -0.01    0.00      0.01
      -
 F          0.00    -0.06     -0.07     0.13     -0.02     0.00    -0.02     -0.05   0.27     0.00    -0.02    0.02     -0.02
      +
            0.00    -0.06     0.21     -0.13     -0.01     0.00    -0.07     0.25    -0.07    0.01    -0.06    0.06     -0.06
      -
            0.00    -0.14     0.57     -0.79     -0.02     0.00    -0.26     0.59    -0.75    0.02    -0.08    0.10     -0.10
            -0.03   1.82      -2.01    15.06     -0.23    -0.04    2.22      -2.62   17.44    0.23    -0.22    0.33     -0.22




                                                                  46
7.4          Experiments without Adjustment and Trade Frictions                                                                                                                                                                                7        APPENDIX


                                                                                                Table 18: PCE: Elasticity of Moments

          PCE                                                     non-exporters                                                                                                                     non-exporters

 Parameters:                     sc             JC30             Inact             JD30            xrate         nex2ex               sc         JC30          Inact             JD30                 xrate         ex2nex               fox         ex int         small ex
              f
                               0.00             0.10             -0.01             -0.07            0.07           -0.25             -0.01        0.13          0.10              0.20                 0.00           0.60           -0.30            0.18                -1.14
                               0.00             0.10             0.01              -0.08            0.18           -0.56             -0.01        0.14          0.05             -0.06                -0.04           -0.52          0.07            -0.09                0.76
          SC f                 -0.01            -0.41            0.20              0.53            -0.61           1.28              0.02         0.12          -0.02            -0.36                -1.48           -1.13          1.46             0.27                1.32
              +
                               0.03             -0.40            -0.10             -1.09            0.42           -0.12             0.03        -0.50          -0.10            -1.04                 0.63           0.05           -0.08            0.03                -0.55
          -                    0.01             0.04             -0.01             -0.35            0.20           0.05              0.01        -0.02          -0.02            -0.08                 0.18           -0.06          0.01             0.00                0.00
              +
          F                    0.00             0.02             -0.01             -0.04            0.01           -0.04             0.00         0.06          0.00              0.02                 0.03           0.02           -0.01           -0.01                -0.03
          F-                   0.00             0.01             -0.01             -0.12            0.06           -0.01             0.00         0.02          -0.01            -0.11                 0.09           -0.01          0.00             0.00                -0.01
              +
                               0.00             -0.01            0.65              -0.68            0.22           -0.14             0.00        -0.03          0.66             -0.45                 0.36           0.07           -0.12           -0.01                -0.19
          -                    0.00             0.03             0.09              -0.47            0.22           0.05              0.00        -0.03          0.07             -0.20                 0.20           -0.07          0.01            -0.01                0.00
                               0.02             -1.82            -0.29             3.17            -5.28           0.95              0.01        -2.04          -0.29             1.06                -8.43           -0.67          0.58             0.05                0.82



7.4                Experiments without Adjustment and Trade Frictions
The first tables are the experiments, Tables 19 and 20. The second presents the re-estimation of the
model without labor adjustment costs. These are discussed in the text.

7.4.1                Simulations

                                                                                                                     Table 19: Moments: SCE Experiments

                                                           Non-exporters                                                                                                                      Exporters                                                                       stat
               sc     JC30      Inact     JD30      ~d           ~d           ~d   emp (p50)        emp (mean)     nex2ex     sc      JC30    Inact   JD30      ~ df      ~df
                                                                                                                                                                                       ~ df
                                                                                                                                                                                                 emp (p50)        emp (mean)     ex2nex     fox      ex int    small ex
 BASE        0.989    0.065     0.183     0.043    1.250    0.795         0.893        200.427       475.962       0.035     0.985    0.084   0.183   0.032    1.060     0.769     0.774            605.360        1465.009      0.094     0.341     0.210      0.386        4319
no sunk      0.990    0.050     0.171     0.047    1.247    0.800         0.894        204.907       484.581       0.073     0.984    0.108   0.205   0.020    1.066     0.748     0.714            507.229        1291.161      0.182     0.352     0.217      0.364        4812
 no adj      0.757    0.154     0.000     0.769    1.000    0.827         0.000        11.890        2396.069      0.147     0.784    0.132   0.000   0.806    0.992     0.762     0.028            2201.176      210363.150     0.040     0.932     0.017      0.948      175309362

Notes: This table shows simulation results from eliminating the sunk cost of exporting and labor adjustment costs.




                                                                                                                      Table 20: Moments: PCEs Experiments

                                                           Non-exporter                                                                                                                         Exporter                                                                      stat
              sc     JC30     Inact     JD30    xrate    alpha        rho      sigma    emp (p50)     emp (mean)    nep2ep     sc     JC30    Inact   JD30    xrate     ¯d
                                                                                                                                                                                  ¯d           ¯d
                                                                                                                                                                                                       emp (p50)    emp (mean)    ep2nep       foe    ex int   small ex
 BASE      0.973     0.121    0.354     0.071   0.078    0.669        0.715    0.819      85.333       146.368      0.061    0.975    0.105   0.364   0.066   0.057    0.730     0.694        0.762     130.290       225.190      0.098    0.394     0.660     0.085        32755
no sunk    0.975     0.120    0.361     0.067   0.070    0.671        0.715    0.806      80.000       140.159      0.108    0.977    0.107   0.374   0.060   0.063    0.745     0.694        0.768     109.776       196.917      0.165    0.391     0.701     0.036        46116
 no adj    0.787     0.113    0.000     0.820   0.000    1.000        0.830    0.000       1.506       814.074      0.047    0.766    0.057   0.000   0.925   0.000    1.001     0.678        0.023     383.530      53726.823     0.020    0.857     0.936     0.058      9725774087

Notes: This table shows simulation results from eliminating the sunk cost of exporting and labor adjustment costs.




                                                                                                                                       47
7.5      Sectoral Estimation Results                                                                                                                                                                      7     APPENDIX


7.4.2        Re-estimation

                                                         Table 21: Parameter Estimates: No Labor Adjustment Costs


             f                            SC f                                 w              z                     z               d             d                d             f                f              f                d

 SCE
            0.928          3.229         0.262             0.969          0.022             0.827               0.074             0.488         0.984          0.587           0.500             0.753         0.633               -
           (0.089)         (0.116)      (0.002)          (0.198)       (0.000)          (0.195)              (0.073)              (0.001)      (0.000)         (0.001)        (0.004)         (0.001)         (0.016)              -

 PCE
            9.689          33.201        0.948             0.737          0.211             0.987               0.025             0.640         0.990          0.771           0.698             0.990         0.401             0.808
           (0.052)         (4.416)      (0.001)          (0.002)       (0.000)          (0.052)              (0.000)              (0.000)      (0.000)         (0.003)        (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.001)         (0.001)

Notes:



                                                                       Table 22: Moments: No Labor Adjustment Costs


                                                                                                                    SCE
    Exporters            Moments            sc       JC30         Inact        JD30         xrate           ~ df
                                                                                                                         ~df         ~ df
                                                                                                                                               emp (p50)           emp (mean)           ep2nep         foe       ex int       small ex
                           DATA          0.871       0.086        0.154        0.032          -         0.955           0.937       0.964       690.993             1237.994            0.101         0.338      0.190           0.351
                           Model         0.957       0.077        0.000        0.171          -         1.003           0.653       0.005       414.989             666.868             0.108         0.328      0.192           0.319
 Non-Exporters           Moments            sc       JC30         Inact        JD30         xrate           ~d
                                                                                                                         ~d
                                                                                                                                     ~d        emp (p50)           emp (mean)           nep2ep
                           DATA          0.873       0.085        0.228        0.043          -         0.793           0.916       1.063       255.052             499.606             0.033
                           Model         0.984       0.060        0.000        0.087          -         1.000           0.984       0.000       271.781             525.425             0.049
  Stat. Value:          28474.9197

                                                                                                                    PCE
    Exporters            Moments            sc       JC30         Inact        JD30         xrate           ~ df
                                                                                                                         ~df         ~ df
                                                                                                                                               emp (p50)           emp (mean)           ep2nep         foe       ex int       small ex
                           DATA          0.886       0.172        0.295        0.055        0.042       0.748           0.900       0.885       157.863             237.361             0.095         0.428      0.647           0.079
                           Model         0.984       0.045        0.000        0.074        0.006       0.999           0.990       0.016       171.591             268.631             0.005         0.451      0.848           0.022
                                                                                                                d         d              d
 Non-Exporters           Moments            sc       JC30         Inact        JD30         xrate           ~
                                                                                                                         ~           ~         emp (p50)           emp (mean)           nep2ep
                           DATA          0.862       0.171        0.353        0.060        0.062       0.683           0.845       0.901        85.969             136.571             0.060
                           Model         0.986       0.125        0.000        0.195        0.007       1.000           0.967       0.000        53.428             168.967             0.002
  Stat. Value:          475539.596

Notes: These tables show moments from the estimation without labor adjustment costs.



7.5        Sectoral Estimation Results

                                                                                    Table 23: Parameter Estimates (by industries)


                    f                   SC f       +          -           F+           F-           +               -                    w       z         z           d        d         d           f         f         f            d

SCE APPAREL      11.389      6.911     2.030     0.368      0.955     14.605       110.439        0.022         0.184     0.930       0.170    0.687     0.989      0.725     0.962      0.431     0.508      0.949      1.006         -
                 (1.118)    (4.452)    (0.408)   (0.268)    (0.310)   (13.184)     (99.342)       (0.019)     (0.015)     (0.021)    (0.022)   (0.006)   (0.038)    (0.014)   (0.009)   (0.034)    (0.021)    (0.007)   (0.126)        -
SCE ELEC         2.535       5.262     0.495     0.704      2.229     12.952       32.464         0.073         0.073     0.969       0.159    0.843     1.312      0.709     0.914      0.376     0.721      0.939      0.544         -
                 (1.227)    (13.387)   (0.064)   (0.329)    (0.831)   (23.679)     (14.690)       (0.221)     (0.234)     (0.043)    (0.012)   (0.012)   (0.047)    (0.005)   (0.024)   (0.059)    (0.019)    (0.052)   (0.065)        -
SCE STEEL        4.305       0.120     0.368     1.562      1.704     29.319       123.494        0.028         0.152     0.995       0.141    0.864     1.438      0.712     0.879      0.316     0.760      0.818      0.295         -
                 (0.556)    (0.719)    (0.037)   (0.193)    (0.196)   (15.448)     (50.258)       (0.022)     (0.038)     (0.014)    (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.038)    (0.007)   (0.032)   (0.014)    (0.018)    (0.167)   (0.028)        -
PCE APPAREL      6.453       15.172    0.840     4.278      0.091     18.223        7.307         0.544         0.023     0.926       0.271    0.929     0.887      0.642     0.871      1.134     0.681      0.801      1.366     63.530
                 (1.591)    (6.692)    (0.045)   (0.249)    (0.062)   (4.738)      (2.132)        (0.047)     (0.019)     (0.020)    (0.016)   (0.011)   (0.059)    (0.006)   (0.012)   (0.032)    (0.012)    (0.008)   (0.039)    (2.572)
PCE ELEC         1.658       0.971     0.444     1.935      0.155     19.535        0.006         0.176         0.060     0.892       0.234    0.944     0.858      0.648     0.675      1.004     0.676      0.902      1.186     17.234
                 (0.632)    (3.896)    (0.040)   (0.527)    (0.147)   (1.217)      (4.547)        (0.028)     (0.015)     (0.015)    0.016)    (0.006)   (0.060)    (0.007)   (0.005)   (0.059)    (0.023)    (0.021)   (0.066)    (3.839)
PCE STEEL        1.871       5.276     0.288     2.804      0.023     17.717        0.305         0.294         0.031     0.833       0.349    0.946     0.798      0.643     0.839      1.174     0.679      0.885      1.190     31.017
                 (0.513)    (2.018)    (0.059)   (0.195)    (0.121)   (2.097)      (1.039)        (0.083)     (0.065)     (0.046)    (0.015)   (0.020)   (0.045)    (0.011)   (0.030)   (0.056)    (0.061)    (0.019)   (0.138)    (3.605)

Notes:




                                                                                                                    48
7.5      Sectoral Estimation Results                                                                                                                                                                                    7           APPENDIX


                                                                                                             Table 24: Moments (by industries)


                                                                Non-exporter                                                                                                          Exporter                                                            stat
                       sc     JC30    Inact   JD30    xrate    ~d      ~d
                                                                               ~d     emp (p50)   emp (mean)     nex2ex      sc    JC30    Inact   JD30    xrate   ~ df     ~df
                                                                                                                                                                                    ~ df
                                                                                                                                                                                           emp (p50)   emp (mean)   ex2nex    fox    ex int   small ex
              DATA    0.828   0.151   0.229   0.074     -     0.478   0.866   0.802    372.986     553.703       0.030     0.981   0.045   0.237   0.079     -     0.775   0.846   0.756    398.106     679.098     0.078    0.402   0.624     0.121
SCE APPAREL
              Model   0.987   0.062   0.228   0.039     -     1.126   0.677   0.698    267.160     578.641       0.035     0.985   0.066   0.258   0.032     -     0.954   0.675   0.571    474.680     867.346     0.071    0.362   0.402     0.155     129.76
              DATA    0.876   0.107   0.172   0.074     -     0.733   0.882   0.956    199.403     441.603       0.054     0.786   0.142   0.095   0.026     -     1.020   0.921   0.975    642.977     1145.098    0.052    0.605   0.282     0.203
   SCE ELEC
              Model   0.986   0.059   0.105   0.046     -     1.248   0.794   0.794    187.566     359.347       0.055     0.983   0.092   0.109   0.031     -     1.153   0.760   0.697    562.384     1263.827    0.057    0.592   0.296     0.261     242.53
              DATA    0.969   0.101   0.278   0.072     -     0.943   0.909   1.198    272.400     663.224       0.110     0.949   0.071   0.200   0.067     -     1.135   0.902   1.125   1044.930     1802.584    0.112    0.456   0.191     0.200
  SCE STELL
              Model   0.989   0.031   0.134   0.043     -     1.326   0.810   0.834    305.055     490.133       0.097     0.984   0.086   0.139   0.046     -     1.121   0.763   0.661   1124.204     2166.529    0.145    0.487   0.203     0.252     137.92
              DATA    0.851   0.175   0.340   0.077   0.075   0.640   0.830   0.840    145.133     199.974       0.137     0.878   0.138   0.353   0.060   0.053   0.669   0.855   0.758    206.091     277.488     0.079    0.664   0.814     0.025
PCE APPAREL
              Model   0.977   0.105   0.352   0.065   0.076   0.624   0.774   0.727    143.626     238.379       0.107     0.973   0.126   0.337   0.073   0.074   0.666   0.703   0.821    205.051     356.676     0.087    0.593   0.776     0.027     1532.46
              DATA    0.883   0.229   0.258   0.071   0.063   0.692   0.864   0.974    98.095      163.730       0.139     0.828   0.227   0.209   0.056   0.042   0.843   0.887   1.047    232.877     343.223     0.055    0.699   0.712     0.045
   PCE ELEC
              Model   0.963   0.132   0.255   0.070   0.095   0.668   0.602   0.753    100.442     155.175       0.141     0.981   0.132   0.263   0.066   0.053   0.864   0.743   0.667    150.755     315.124     0.062    0.703   0.731     0.043     2448.38
              DATA    0.893   0.198   0.335   0.061   0.096   0.903   0.774   0.970    93.599      154.183       0.025     0.910   0.192   0.281   0.047   0.042   0.946   0.879   1.084    154.663     238.210     0.226    0.130   0.349     0.145
  PCE STEEL
              Model   0.968   0.202   0.279   0.078   0.108   0.675   0.731   0.697    65.667      129.318       0.030     0.972   0.097   0.303   0.074   0.088   0.751   0.726   0.585    98.652      176.120     0.159    0.134   0.459     0.185     1532.46

Notes:




                                        Table 25: Costs relative to the mean value of Revenue (Industries)

                                                                                                    f                                      F+                    F-                 d
                                                                                                                                       SCE
                                                               APPAREL                            0.066              0.040             0.085                0.645                      -
                                                                ELEC                              0.015              0.031             0.077                0.192                      -
                                                                STEEL                             0.022              0.001             0.150                0.630                      -
                                                                                                                                       PCE
                                                               APPAREL                            0.035              0.083             0.100                0.040                  0.112
                                                                ELEC                              0.019              0.011             0.220                0.000                  0.066
                                                                STEEL                             0.017              0.049             0.165                0.003                  0.092


7.5.1         Sectoral Productivity

Figure 14 shows the distributions of average labor productivity by sector, export status and owernship.




                                                                                                                           49
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                7.5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Percentage                                                                                              Percentage                                                                                                      Percentage




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           35




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (-   ,-4.6]                                                                                             (-   ,-4.6]                                                                                                (-   ,-4.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [-4.6,-4.2]                                                                                             [-4.6,-4.2]                                                                                                [-4.6,-4.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [-4.2,-3.8]                                                                                             [-4.2,-3.8]                                                                                                [-4.2,-3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [-3.8,-3.4]                                                                                             [-3.8,-3.4]                                                                                                [-3.8,-3.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [-3.4,-3.0]                                                                                             [-3.4,-3.0]                                                                                                [-3.4,-3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [-3.0,-2.6]                                                                                             [-3.0,-2.6]                                                                                                [-3.0,-2.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [-2.6,-2.2]                                                                                             [-2.6,-2.2]                                                                                                [-2.6,-2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [-2.2,-1.8]                                                                                             [-2.2,-1.8]                                                                                                [-2.2,-1.8]




     the model for the PCE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [-1.8,-1.4]                                                                                             [-1.8,-1.4]                                                                                                [-1.8,-1.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [-1.4,-1.0]                                                                                             [-1.4,-1.0]                                                                                                [-1.4,-1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [-1.0,-0.6]                                                                                             [-1.0,-0.6]                                                                                                [-1.0,-0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [-0.6,-0.2]                                                                                             [-0.6,-0.2]                                                                                                [-0.6,-0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [-0.2,+0.2]                                                                                             [-0.2,+0.2]                                                                                                [-0.2,+0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [+0.2,+0.6]                                                                                             [+0.2,+0.6]                                                                                                [+0.2,+0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [+0.6,+1.0]                                                                                             [+0.6,+1.0]                                                                                                [+0.6,+1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sectoral Estimation Results




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ln(Labor Productivity)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ln(Labor Productivity)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ln(Labor Productivity)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [+1.0,+1.4]                                                                                             [+1.0,+1.4]                                                                                                [+1.0,+1.4]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (e) SCE Steel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (c) SCE ELEC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [+1.4,+1.8]                                                                                             [+1.4,+1.8]                                                                                                [+1.4,+1.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [+1.8,+2.2]                                                                                             [+1.8,+2.2]                                                     (a) SCE Apparel                            [+1.8,+2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [+2.2,+2.6]                                                                                             [+2.2,+2.6]                                                                                                [+2.2,+2.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [+2.6,+3.0]                                                                                             [+2.6,+3.0]                                                                                                [+2.6,+3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [+3.0,+3.4]                                                                                             [+3.0,+3.4]                                                                                                [+3.0,+3.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [+3.4,+3.8]                                                                                             [+3.4,+3.8]                                                                                                [+3.4,+3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [+3.8,+4.2]                                                                                             [+3.8,+4.2]                                                                                                [+3.8,+4.2]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Exporters




                                                                                                                   sectors, by export status and ownership.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [+4.2,+4.6]                                                                                             [+4.2,+4.6]                                                                                                [+4.2,+4.6]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Non-exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Non-exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Non-exporters




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [+4.6,+    )                                                                                            [+4.6,+    )                                                                                               [+4.6,+    )




50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Percentage                                                                                              Percentage                                                                                                      Percentage




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (-   ,-4.6]                                                                                             (-   ,-4.6]                                                                                                (-   ,-4.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [-4.6,-4.2]                                                                                             [-4.6,-4.2]                                                                                                [-4.6,-4.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [-4.2,-3.8]                                                                                             [-4.2,-3.8]                                                                                                [-4.2,-3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [-3.8,-3.4]                                                                                             [-3.8,-3.4]                                                                                                [-3.8,-3.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [-3.4,-3.0]                                                                                             [-3.4,-3.0]                                                                                                [-3.4,-3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [-3.0,-2.6]                                                                                             [-3.0,-2.6]                                                                                                [-3.0,-2.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [-2.6,-2.2]                                                                                             [-2.6,-2.2]                                                                                                [-2.6,-2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [-2.2,-1.8]                                                                                             [-2.2,-1.8]                                                                                                [-2.2,-1.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [-1.8,-1.4]                                                                                             [-1.8,-1.4]                                                                                                [-1.8,-1.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [-1.4,-1.0]                                                                                             [-1.4,-1.0]                                                                                                [-1.4,-1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [-1.0,-0.6]                                                                                             [-1.0,-0.6]                                                                                                [-1.0,-0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  [-0.6,-0.2]                                                                                             [-0.6,-0.2]                                                                                                [-0.6,-0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [-0.2,+0.2]                                                                                             [-0.2,+0.2]                                                                                                [-0.2,+0.2]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure 14: Data: Labor productivity Distributions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [+0.2,+0.6]                                                                                             [+0.2,+0.6]                                                                                                [+0.2,+0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [+0.6,+1.0]                                                                                             [+0.6,+1.0]                                                                                                [+0.6,+1.0]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ln(Labor Productivity)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ln(Labor Productivity)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ln(Labor Productivity)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [+1.0,+1.4]                                                                                             [+1.0,+1.4]                                                                                                [+1.0,+1.4]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (f) PCE Steel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (d) PCE ELEC




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [+1.4,+1.8]                                                                                             [+1.4,+1.8]                                                                                                [+1.4,+1.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (b) PCE Apparel




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [+1.8,+2.2]                                                                                             [+1.8,+2.2]                                                                                                [+1.8,+2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [+2.2,+2.6]                                                                                             [+2.2,+2.6]                                                                                                [+2.2,+2.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [+2.6,+3.0]                                                                                             [+2.6,+3.0]                                                                                                [+2.6,+3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [+3.0,+3.4]                                                                                             [+3.0,+3.4]                                                                                                [+3.0,+3.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [+3.4,+3.8]                                                                                             [+3.4,+3.8]                                                                                                [+3.4,+3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [+3.8,+4.2]                                                                                             [+3.8,+4.2]                                                                                                [+3.8,+4.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Exporters




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [+4.2,+4.6]                                                                                             [+4.2,+4.6]                                                                                                [+4.2,+4.6]




                                                                                                                   These figures show the distributions from the data of average labor productivity for the three
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Non-exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Non-exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Non-exporters




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 [+4.6,+    )                                                                                            [+4.6,+    )                                                                                               [+4.6,+    )




     captures the overlap in these distributions, as in the data. As before, there is little sorting produced by
        Figure 15 shows these distributions generated by the estimated model. The estimated model clearly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                APPENDIX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7.6




                                                                                                7.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Percentage                                                                                              Percentage                                                                                                 Percentage




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (-   ,-4.6]                                                                                             (-   ,-4.6]                                                                                                (-   ,-4.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [-4.6,-4.2]                                                                                             [-4.6,-4.2]                                                                                                [-4.6,-4.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [-4.2,-3.8]                                                                                             [-4.2,-3.8]                                                                                                [-4.2,-3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [-3.8,-3.4]                                                                                             [-3.8,-3.4]                                                                                                [-3.8,-3.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [-3.4,-3.0]                                                                                             [-3.4,-3.0]                                                                                                [-3.4,-3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [-3.0,-2.6]                                                                                             [-3.0,-2.6]                                                                                                [-3.0,-2.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [-2.6,-2.2]                                                                                             [-2.6,-2.2]                                                                                                [-2.6,-2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [-2.2,-1.8]                                                                                             [-2.2,-1.8]                                                                                                [-2.2,-1.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [-1.8,-1.4]                                                                                             [-1.8,-1.4]                                                                                                [-1.8,-1.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [-1.4,-1.0]                                                                                             [-1.4,-1.0]                                                                                                [-1.4,-1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [-1.0,-0.6]                                                                                             [-1.0,-0.6]                                                                                                [-1.0,-0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [-0.6,-0.2]                                                                                             [-0.6,-0.2]                                                                                                [-0.6,-0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [-0.2,+0.2]                                                                                             [-0.2,+0.2]                                                                                                [-0.2,+0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+0.2,+0.6]                                                                                             [+0.2,+0.6]                                                                                                [+0.2,+0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+0.6,+1.0]                                                                                             [+0.6,+1.0]                                                                                                [+0.6,+1.0]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ln(Labor Productivity)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ln(Labor Productivity)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ln(Labor Productivity)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+1.0,+1.4]                                                                                             [+1.0,+1.4]                                                                                                [+1.0,+1.4]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (e) SCE Steel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (c) SCE ELEC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+1.4,+1.8]                                                                                             [+1.4,+1.8]                                                                                                [+1.4,+1.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+1.8,+2.2]                                                                                             [+1.8,+2.2]                                                     (a) SCE Apparel                            [+1.8,+2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+2.2,+2.6]                                                                                             [+2.2,+2.6]                                                                                                [+2.2,+2.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+2.6,+3.0]                                                                                             [+2.6,+3.0]                                                                                                [+2.6,+3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Export Status: Further Regressions




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+3.0,+3.4]                                                                                             [+3.0,+3.4]                                                                                                [+3.0,+3.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+3.4,+3.8]                                                                                             [+3.4,+3.8]                                                                                                [+3.4,+3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+3.8,+4.2]                                                                                             [+3.8,+4.2]                                                                                                [+3.8,+4.2]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Exporters




                                                                                                                                     sectors, by export status and ownership.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+4.2,+4.6]                                                                                             [+4.2,+4.6]                                                                                                [+4.2,+4.6]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Non-exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Non-exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Non-exporters




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+4.6,+    )                                                                                            [+4.6,+    )                                                                                               [+4.6,+    )




                                                                                                Export Status: Further Regressions




51
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Percentage                                                                                              Percentage                                                                                                 Percentage




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (-   ,-4.6]                                                                                             (-   ,-4.6]                                                                                                (-   ,-4.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [-4.6,-4.2]                                                                                             [-4.6,-4.2]                                                                                                [-4.6,-4.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [-4.2,-3.8]                                                                                             [-4.2,-3.8]                                                                                                [-4.2,-3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [-3.8,-3.4]                                                                                             [-3.8,-3.4]                                                                                                [-3.8,-3.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [-3.4,-3.0]                                                                                             [-3.4,-3.0]                                                                                                [-3.4,-3.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [-3.0,-2.6]                                                                                             [-3.0,-2.6]                                                                                                [-3.0,-2.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [-2.6,-2.2]                                                                                             [-2.6,-2.2]                                                                                                [-2.6,-2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [-2.2,-1.8]                                                                                             [-2.2,-1.8]                                                                                                [-2.2,-1.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [-1.8,-1.4]                                                                                             [-1.8,-1.4]                                                                                                [-1.8,-1.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [-1.4,-1.0]                                                                                             [-1.4,-1.0]                                                                                                [-1.4,-1.0]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [-1.0,-0.6]                                                                                             [-1.0,-0.6]                                                                                                [-1.0,-0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [-0.6,-0.2]                                                                                             [-0.6,-0.2]                                                                                                [-0.6,-0.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [-0.2,+0.2]                                                                                             [-0.2,+0.2]                                                                                                [-0.2,+0.2]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure 15: Model: Labor productivity Distributions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+0.2,+0.6]                                                                                             [+0.2,+0.6]                                                                                                [+0.2,+0.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+0.6,+1.0]                                                                                             [+0.6,+1.0]                                                                                                [+0.6,+1.0]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ln(Labor Productivity)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ln(Labor Productivity)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ln(Labor Productivity)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+1.0,+1.4]                                                                                             [+1.0,+1.4]                                                                                                [+1.0,+1.4]




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (f) PCE Steel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (d) PCE ELEC




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+1.4,+1.8]                                                                                             [+1.4,+1.8]                                                                                                [+1.4,+1.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (b) PCE Apparel




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+1.8,+2.2]                                                                                             [+1.8,+2.2]                                                                                                [+1.8,+2.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+2.2,+2.6]                                                                                             [+2.2,+2.6]                                                                                                [+2.2,+2.6]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+2.6,+3.0]                                                                                             [+2.6,+3.0]                                                                                                [+2.6,+3.0]




     Here we replace the innovations with measures of profitability to explain export status.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+3.0,+3.4]                                                                                             [+3.0,+3.4]                                                                                                [+3.0,+3.4]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+3.4,+3.8]                                                                                             [+3.4,+3.8]                                                                                                [+3.4,+3.8]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+3.8,+4.2]                                                                                             [+3.8,+4.2]                                                                                                [+3.8,+4.2]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Exporters




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+4.2,+4.6]                                                                                             [+4.2,+4.6]                                                                                                [+4.2,+4.6]




                                                                                                                                     These figures show the distributions from the model of average labor productivity for the three
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Non-exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Non-exporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Non-exporters




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [+4.6,+    )                                                                                            [+4.6,+    )                                                                                               [+4.6,+    )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        APPENDIX
7.6   Export Status: Further Regressions                                                    7     APPENDIX



                                           Profitability : Data
                                     SCE                                     PCE
                        I          II      III       IV          I          II      III           IV
           ex-1       0.786      0.786    0.791     0.786      0.787     0.787     0.788         0.787
                     (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.004)    (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)       (0.001)
        ln(emp-1 )    0.026     0.026     0.032     0.026      0.032     0.032     0.032         0.032
                     (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)       (0.001)
            ~-1 )
         ln(A                   -0.001              0.015                -0.002                  0.003
                               (0.004)             (0.002)              (0.001)                 (0.000)
             ~)
          ln(A        0.016      0.017                         0.004      0.006
                     (0.002)   (0.004)                        (0.000)   (0.001)
                                          0.018     0.017                          0.006         0.006
                                         (0.004)   (0.004)                        (0.001)       (0.001)
           Year       YES       YES        YES       YES       YES       YES       YES           YES
         Industry     YES       YES        YES       YES       YES       YES       YES           YES
         Location     YES       YES        YES       YES       YES       YES       YES           YES
            N        24915     24915      24915     24915     360076    360076    360076        360076
                                           Profitability : Model
                                     SCE                                    PCE(Trim)
                         I         II      III       IV          I          II     III            IV
           ex-1        0.837     0.845    0.854     0.845      0.836     0.836    0.836          0.836
                     (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.001) (0.001)         (0.001)
        ln(emp-1 )    -0.005    0.001     0.010     0.001      0.005     0.006    0.006          0.006
                     (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)    (0.000)   (0.000) (0.000)         (0.000)
            ~-1 )
         ln(A                   -0.034              0.017                -0.022                  0.005
                               (0.000)             (0.000)              (0.001)                 (0.001)
             ~)
          ln(A        0.036      0.061                         0.023      0.038
                     (0.000)   (0.000)                        (0.001)   (0.001)
                                          0.061     0.061                         0.038          0.038
                                         (0.000)   (0.000)                       (0.001)        (0.001)

       Notes:




                                                    52
