                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               DETECTING DRIVERS OF BEHAVIOR AT AN EARLY AGE:
               EVIDENCE FROM A LONGITUDINAL FIELD EXPERIMENT

                                        Marco Castillo
                                         John A. List
                                        Ragan Petrie
                                        Anya Samek

                                     Working Paper 28288
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28288


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




We thank Edie Dobrez, Kristin Troutman, Amanda Chuan, Rui Chen, Andre Gray and Shreemayi
Samujjwala for excellent research assistance. This research was funded by the Kenneth and Anne
Griffin Foundation and by NIH grant 1R01DK114238. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Marco Castillo, John A. List, Ragan Petrie, and Anya Samek. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Detecting Drivers of Behavior at an Early Age: Evidence from a Longitudinal Field Experiment
Marco Castillo, John A. List, Ragan Petrie, and Anya Samek
NBER Working Paper No. 28288
December 2020
JEL No. C91,C93,D12,D81,I21,I26

                                          ABSTRACT

We use field experiments with nearly 900 children to investigate how skills developed at ages 3-5
drive later-life outcomes. We find that skills map onto three distinct factors - cognitive skills,
executive functions, and economic preferences. Returning to the children up to 7 years later, we
find that executive functions, but not cognitive skills, predict the likelihood of receiving
disciplinary referrals. Economic preferences have an independent effect: children who displayed
impatience at ages 3-5 were more likely to receive disciplinary referrals. Random assignment to a
parenting program reduced disciplinary referrals. This effect was not mediated by skills or
preferences.

Marco Castillo                                  Ragan Petrie
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
Texas A&M University                            Texas A&M University
4228 TAMU                                       4228 TAMU
College Station, TX 77843                       College Station, TX 77843
and The Melbourne Institute                     and The Melbourne Institute
and also IZA                                    rpetrie@tamu.edu
marco.castillo@tamu.edu
                                                Anya Samek
John A. List                                    University of California, San Diego
Department of Economics                         Rady School of Management
University of Chicago                           Wells Fargo Hall
1126 East 59th                                  9500 Gilman Drive #0553
Chicago, IL 60637                               La Jolla, CA 92093-0553
and NBER                                        and NBER
jlist@uchicago.edu                              anyasamek@gmail.com
1     Introduction

In a landmark study in the 1970s, hundreds of 4-year-old children decided whether
to eat a marshmallow now, or wait until later and eat two marshmallows. The re-
search, now popularly dubbed the “marshmallow test,” is a psychological experiment
that measured whether the child could resist the temptation of eating the marshmal-
low immediately (Mischel et al., 1972). Reports suggested that children who delayed
gratification in this task at the age of four had improved cognition, educational out-
comes, and health in adolescence and adulthood (Mischel et al., 1989; Shoda et al.,
1990; Schlam et al., 2013).1
    The marshmallow test captured the imagination of the public and generated hun-
dreds of academic citations in part because of humankind’s desire to understand the
driving forces that shape our behavior. In addition to delay of gratification, researchers
point to the importance of executive functioning skills - e.g., working memory, in-
hibitory control, and attention (Zelazo et al., 2016). Educators, on the other hand,
have historically paid attention to early life cognitive or academic kills - e.g., reading,
writing, and math. Finally, a small but growing literature points to an important role
of economic preferences - e.g., time, risk, and social preferences (List et al., 2018). In-
deed, models of human capital formation suggest that early life skills are key predictors
of later life outcomes, and recognize potential synergies among skills in the education
production function (Carneiro and Heckman, 2003).
    An understanding of the interrelationships between the above-mentioned skills and
their contributions to later-life outcomes is a necessary ingredient for the optimal design
of early education policy. There is now a consensus that early skills matter (Heckman,
   1
     The interpretation that the marshmallow test only captured delay of gratification has come un-
der some scrutiny. One study showed that varying environment reliability changed child wait time,
suggesting that at least part of the ability to wait is driven by trust in the environment (Kidd et al.,
2013). Another study showed that the delay of gratification data collected in early childhood did not
predict mid-life outcomes and survey data collected in adolescence was more predictive (Benjamin
et al., 2020).




                                                   1
2000; Carneiro and Heckman, 2003), but there is limited work exploring the interrela-
tionships of different skills. One exception is Cunha et al. (2010), who use data from
the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth to estimate the technology of the forma-
tion of cognitive ability and non-cognitive ability such as temperament and behavior.2
Given the growing interest in investing in early childhood programs, such evidence is
becoming increasingly important as it can help answer questions about how skills shape
outcomes (Currie, 2001; Almond et al., 2018).
       In this study, we conduct field experiments with a large group of children aged
3-5 years old to generate data on their cognitive skills (receptive vocabulary, letter
recognition, writing and math), executive functions (working memory, inhibitory con-
trol, emotion regulation and attention), economic preferences (time, risk and social
preferences) and delay of gratification.3 The data are paired with survey data on
demographic and socio-economic (SES) background to explore early-life correlations.
This analysis allows us to evaluate how the critical skills of executive functioning and
economic preferences correlate with cognitive skills, data that are not evaluated in
Cunha et al. (2010).
       A key novelty of our work is that we return to the same children when they are
ages 5-12 and collect administrative data on disciplinary referrals at school, which are
considered an important predictor of adult outcomes (e.g. Segal, 2013). Finally, we
take advantage of a field experiment in which a sub-set of our participants were ran-
domized into an early childhood program—which we conducted and designed—called
the Chicago Heights Early Childhood Center (CHECC). The data complementarities
permit us to evaluate the causal impact of early childhood programs on skills and dis-
ciplinary referrals while simultaneously exploring whether early life skills mediate the
   2
     More recently, Heckman et al. (2020) evaluates the impact of home visiting programs in China on
an array of skills, including language, executive functions and social-emotional skills.
   3
     The literature most often refers to executive functions as ‘higher order cognitive skills.’ Such skills
are rarely targeted by standard academic achievement tests that measure cognitive ability; hence, in
this paper we consider them separately.




                                                     2
influences of CHECC.
       We report four main results. Our first finding is that cognitive skills, executive
functions, and economic preferences measured at an early age map to distinct ‘factors.’
Importantly, economic preferences are not strongly associated with cognitive skills or
executive functions at this early age and map to their own factors.4 In related work with
children, Bettinger and Slonim (2007) find no association between time preferences and
math skills, whereas Andreoni et al. (2019a) find an association between risk preferences
and cognitive abilities. Adolescents and adults seem to display stronger relationships
between skills and preferences (Burks et al., 2009; Benjamin et al., 2013). Taken
together, these findings open up the distinct possibility that economic preferences may
be less correlated with skills at early ages, but preferences drive decisions about human
capital investments, such that preferences and skills assessed later in life are correlated.
       Our second finding is that some - but not all - early life skills have substantial
predictive power on later life outcomes. A statistically significant relationship exists
for executive functions: an increase of one standard deviation in executive functions
is associated with an 1.9 percentage point decrease in the likelihood of disciplinary
referrals several years later. The baseline likelihood of disciplinary referral is 14.7%.
On the other hand, cognitive skills measured at ages 3-5 do not predict disciplinary
referrals in our data. The result that executive functions - which encompass attention
and emotion regulation - drive future disciplinary referrals is consonant with Heckman
(2000), who advances an argument pertaining to the importance of ‘non-cognitive’ or
’soft’ skills that are not targeted by typical academic achievement tests.
       Our third finding relates to the relationship between economic preferences and
disciplinary referrals. We might have expected young children who are more patient,
   4
    Interestingly, delay of gratification as measured by the marshmallow task does not map to any of
the main factors that we identify and is not strongly associated with time preferences as measured
by our experiment. The major difference between the two paradigms is that in the latter, we give
children a deliberate choice between now and later, whereas in the former children need to exercise
inhibitory control for a length of time to avoid eating the marshmallow.




                                                 3
less risk-seeking, and more pro-social to have fewer disciplinary referrals than their
counterparts.5 This expectation is borne out for time preferences: we find that a
one standard deviation increase in patience as measured by our time preference task
is associated with an 2.3 percentage point decrease in the likelihood of disciplinary
referrals. This relationship holds even when controlling for a wealth of other factors,
including academic skills and executive functions. Alternatively, risk preference, social
preferences, or delay of gratification as measured by the marshmallow task do not have
similar predictive power.
       Our fourth finding is that random assignment to our early childhood program,
CHECC, and in particular into CHECC’s parenting program - which encouraged par-
ents to teach to their children at home - reduced the likelihood of disciplinary referrals
later in life. However, while these programs have some impact on the skills that we
measure, we do not find evidence that changes in these skills mediate the impact of
our CHECC treatments. We conclude that other unmeasured skills or mechanisms
potentially drive the effects. In this spirit, our analysis joins the work of Heckman
et al. (2013), who studied the mechanisms behind the long-term effects of the Perry
Preschool project.
       Overall, we view our work as speaking to several distinct literatures. We contribute
to the literature on human capital development by providing data on the roles of cog-
nitive skills, executive functions, and economic preferences. This literature has largely
overlooked the role of economic preferences of children. Our finding that economic
preferences are a distinct contributing factor to disciplinary referrals - and further, are
distinct from behavior in the marshmallow task - highlights the importance of incor-
porating experimental measures of economic preferences into this literature. Children
have agency and make decisions every day that are influenced by their own patience or
willingness to take risks. Deciding whether or not to attend class, complete homework
   5
    This would be consistent with findings from studies with adolescents (Castillo et al., 2011, 2019,
2018; Sutter et al., 2013)


                                                  4
assignments, or misbehave are choices that can have a compounding effect on human
capital formation. Gaining a deeper understanding of the processes shaping human
capital formation is essential to analyzing educational interventions that focus on each
of these skills. In addition, data on economic preferences might be useful in identifying
children who have the most to gain from such interventions.6
       We also contribute to a growing literature in experimental economics on the impact
of economic preferences on decision-making. This literature has reported on correla-
tions between economic preferences, behaviors, and outcomes. Among adults, time dis-
counting is associated with take-up of financial education (Meier and Sprenger, 2013),
health outcomes (Khwaja et al., 2007; Harrison et al., 2010), and the distribution of
wealth (Epper et al., 2020). Among adolescents, time discounting and risk preferences
have been associated with greater likelihood of disciplinary referrals, school drop out,
and adverse health behaviors (see List et al. (2018) for a review). Limitations of these
studies include potential for omitted variable bias and reverse causality, since they
most often consider a narrow set of skills and collect data contemporaneously.7 None
of the related work has considered the association of economic preferences measured
as young as age 3-5 on later-life outcomes.
       Our study augments this literature in several important ways. First, our compre-
hensive data allow us to disentangle the role of economic preferences from potentially
confounding cognitive and executive function skills, which is typically not possible in
related work. This limits the omitted variables problem. Second, we collect data on
children at the earliest ages when experimental preference elicitation can reasonably
be carried out. This is important since we seek to capture the impact of base economic
   6
     This paper is thus along the lines of Almlund et al. (2011), who assert that personality and
cognition are two important factors shaping IQ and later-life outcomes.
   7
     Exceptions to the reverse causality problem include Castillo et al. (2019) who evaluate time
preferences measured in pre-adolescence with high school dropout 5 years later, Alan and Ertac (2018)
who examine a patience intervention on behavior one year later, Golsteyn et al. (2014) who examine
hypothetical delayed consumption choices as a teenager on educational attainment as an adult and
Epper et al. (2020) who show that earlier survey measures of patience relate to wealth distribution.




                                                 5
preferences. The related literature has shown rapid changes in risk, time, and social
preferences during childhood - relative to younger children, older children tend to be
more patient, less likely to take risks and more egalitarian (see Sutter et al. (2019) for
a review). Third, our study separates the measured skills and field outcomes in time
by multiple years, limiting the reverse causality problem. Finally, we take advantage
of a field experiment with random assignment to evaluate the causal impact of early
childhood programs on skills and outcomes.
    Our study also has direct policy relevance. Our outcome measure captures misbe-
havior, which is shown to be a predictor of economic outcomes later in life, such as
educational achievement and wages (Bowles et al., 2001; Heckman et al., 2006; Lang and
Ruud, 1986) and high school drop-out rates (Alexander et al., 1997; Rumberger, 1995).
Our study indicates that multiple early life skills are drivers for later-life disciplinary
referrals and points to the value of early childhood interventions on this outcome. In
addition, we study children in an urban, low-performing school district who may have
the greatest amount to gain from early interventions relative to their higher-income
counterparts.
    In what follows, Section 2 describes the experimental design and discusses the
construction of our variables. Section 3 presents our main results. Section 4 provides a
discussion of the impact of the early childhood interventions on disciplinary referrals.
Section 5 concludes.



2     Experimental Design and Variable Construction

2.1    Overview

Our data are generated from children who took part in the Chicago Heights Early Child-
hood Center (CHECC) project, a unique, large-scale field experiment implemented in
a prototypical low-performing urban school district in Chicago Heights, Illinois (Fryer


                                            6
et al., 2015). Nearly 80% of Chicago Heights is Black or Hispanic, and average per
capita (pretax) income is $17,546, according to the 2020 US census. Households with
children aged 3-4 were recruited to participate in CHECC between 2010 and 2014. Re-
cruitment included a large marketing campaign within the Chicago Heights school dis-
trict and in neighboring districts.8 Participants were randomized to receive a preschool
program, to receive a parenting program, or to a control group that did not receive any
intervention for a period of 1-2 years, depending on year of entry and the child’s age
at entry. Our demographic and SES data come from surveys completed by parents.
       We conducted assessments and experiments eliciting economic preferences with the
CHECC children in 2010-11, 2012, and 2013. All sessions proceeded one-on-one with a
trained staff member. Children from all CHECC programs were invited to participate,
and did so either during school or during an evening or weekend time when parents were
available to bring in their children.9 Administrative data on disciplinary referrals was
provided by the Chicago Heights school district after children started Kindergarten, and
is therefore only available for the sub-set of CHECC children who ultimately attended
Chicago Heights schools. Whether children attended Chicago Heights schools was
determined by their primary residence at the start of Kindergarten. Table 1 provides
a summary of the data available. Data on economic preferences were collected only
once each year, while data on skills were collected both before and after CHECC
interventions.


2.2       Childhood Skills

The skills assessment took 45 minutes to 1 hour to complete and always proceeded in
the order described below.
       Cognitive skills: We used standard, nationally-normed tests to measure cogni-
   8
     All households in the area with children aged 3–4 years were eligible to participate, as long as the
child did not have a learning difficulty that the program would be unable to address.
   9
     During the evening/weekend activities, parents were usually compensated between $10 and $50
to bring in their children.


                                                   7
tive skills, including receptive vocabulary, letter and word recognition, writing, and
math. Receptive vocabulary was tested using the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test
III (PPVT-III) (Dunn and Dunn, 1997), letter and word recognition was tested using
the Woodcock-Johnson III Test of Achievement (WJ-III) letter-word sub-test, writing
skills were tested using the WJ-III spelling sub-test, and math ability was tested using
the WJ-III applied problems and quantitative concepts sub-tests (Woodcock et al.,
2001). All of these tests are appropriate for children ages 2+ and start with easier
questions that get progressively more difficult. For example, the spelling test first asks
children to draw lines or trace letters and then progressively increases in difficulty to
ask children to write letters and words. In our analysis, we use the percentile score for
each test, which is obtained from the supplier based on their national norming sample.
   Executive function skills: At the time we conducted these assessments, a
normed standard for measuring executive function skills was not readily available.
Therefore, we measured working memory, inhibitory control, emotion regulation, and
attention in two ways. First, children participated in paper-and-pencil tasks developed
by psychologists Clancy Blair and Michael Willoughby. In the working memory task,
children were shown a series of images of animals in houses and then asked to recall
which animals were in which houses (Blair and Willoughby, 2006a). In the inhibitory
control task, children were asked to tap pictures of arrows corresponding to pictures
they saw in a booklet, where the left arrow sometimes appeared on the right and the
right arrow sometimes appeared on the left. Children had to inhibit their predominant
response to tap the wrong arrow (Blair and Willoughby, 2006b).
   Second, assessors blind to treatment completed a survey about the child’s behavior
at the end of the session. This survey - called the Preschool Self Regulation Assessment
(PSRA) - measures emotion regulation and attention (Smith-Donald et al., 2007). In
the survey, assessors chose the best fit statement in questions such as ‘pays attention
during instructions,’ whereby each statement was scored, with more points indicating



                                            8
higher emotion/attention. Since a normed standard for these tests are not available,
we use a ‘percent correct’ or ‘points attained out of maximum possible’ score in our
analysis.


2.3       Economic Preferences and Delay of Gratification

To measure economic preferences and delayed gratification, children received instruc-
tions for each experiment verbally and the monitor answered all questions prior to the
child making choices (see Appendix 1). Props were used to aid understanding. Chil-
dren were incentivized with candies or prizes. In different waves of data collection,
the tasks differed slightly as described in Table 1. To address this potential issue,
we standardized the measures for each preference, as described below. The economic
preference assessment lasted about 20 minutes, and the delay of gratification task was
typically conducted in a separate session and took 10-20 minutes to complete.
       Time preferences: Children made a series of choices between fewer candies at
the end of the same day or a greater number of candies at the end of the next day. To
avoid impulsive decisions, all choices featured a front-end delay.10 Table 1 describes
the choices in each wave; for example, in 2010, children chose from the following: 4
today versus 5 tomorrow, 4 today versus 6 tomorrow, 4 today versus 7 tomorrow and
4 today versus 8 tomorrow. Children were informed that only one decision would be
selected as the ‘decision that counts’ and would be paid at the end of the experiment.11
Time preferences are represented in our analysis by the percentage of times the child
was patient and chose to wait for the larger reward across all decisions.
       Risk preferences: Children made a series of choices between 1 prize for sure and
a larger number of prizes with some probability. As summarized in Table 1, in 2012
we varied the number of prizes in the risky box across decisions whereas in 2013 we
  10
     In most waves, this meant the ’end of the day today’ but in one instance we said ’the end of the
activity today’. In practice, this meant the delay was between 1-5 hours for the same day.
  11
     We implemented the decision that counts by storing selections from each round in small bins inside
of an opaque bag. Children had to close their eyes and choose a bin at the end of the experiment.


                                                  9
varied the probability of getting prizes in the risky box across decisions. Children were
informed that only one decision would be selected as the ‘decision that counts’ and
would be paid at the end of the experiment.
   A different risk elicitation was conducted in 2010-11 (Andreoni et al., 2019a). Chil-
dren were shown 5 pencils in a jar. One pencil had a red mark on the bottom while
others did not. Children chose how many pencils to take out of the jar. If none of
the chosen pencils had a red mark, then children kept all of the pencils. If any of the
pencils had a red mark on the bottom, then they forfeited the pencils. Since children
could not see which pencil had a red mark until the end, choosing to take more pencils
is associated with greater risk seeking preferences. In our analysis, risk preferences
are represented by the percentage of times the child chose the safe option over the
risky option across all decisions. For cohorts 2012 and 2013, this is equivalent to the
proportion of safe decisions over 4 pairwise comparisons. For the cohort 2010, this is
equivalent to the number of pencils not chosen out of 5.
   Social preferences: Children participated in a dictator game in which each child
was paired with another individual who did not participate in the experiments. In 2010-
11, we followed a protocol common in the psychology field whereby children divided 5
candies between themselves and a fictitious character (a teddy bear). In 2012 and 2013,
children divided 6 stickers between themselves and another anonymous child whereby
we distributed the shared stickers to other children who did not participate. Social
preferences are measured in the analysis by the percentage of stickers shared.
   Delay of gratification: We complement the marshmallow task designed to mea-
sure delay of gratification, following the design in Mischel et al. (1972). Because this
task was not the primary variable of interest for us, we only administered it to a subset
of the children. In this task, children were given the option to wait for some amount
of time and resist eating the fewer treats in front of them to receive more treats later.
The marshmallow task is represented in the analysis by whether or not the child ate



                                           10
the treat before 5 minutes had passed (since 5 minutes is the minimum wait time across
years).


2.4       Disciplinary Referrals

Disciplinary data are available for grades K-6 between the 2011-12 and 2017-18 school
years for children in the Chicago Heights school district. In the analysis, we first
examine whether a child had any referral in any year and the number of referrals
received. Next, we consider the severity of the referral. Disciplinary referrals can range
from relatively minor problems, such as being late to class, to more serious offenses,
such as striking another student. Teachers do not include a severity rating for the
referral but they do include a description of the incident.
       We therefore hired three independent coders (teachers from districts outside of
Chicago Heights), who, blind to treatment, rated the severity of each incident on a
scale of 1-7, where higher values signified lower severity of the referral. We asked
coders to rate each incident based on the following, ‘In your view, how badly did the
student behave this week?’ from 1 (Extremely badly) to 7 (Not badly at all). These
values were then reversed in sign (-1 to -7) for ease of interpretation in the analysis.12
       Our main outcome variable is misbehavior as measured by weekly disciplinary re-
ferrals. We construct three variables, 1) the propensity to receive at least one referral
in a school year, 2) the number of referrals received in a school year and 3) the severity
of the referrals received in a school year. The last variable is based on our independent
coder ratings.13
  12
     Since some teachers report referrals on a daily basis (e.g., ‘student was late to class today’) and
others report referrals on a weekly basis (e.g., ‘student was late to class 3 times this week’), for the
ratings and number of referrals, we compiled a dataset that contained the disciplinary referrals that
occurred over the course of a full week. Thus, all referrals over the course of a week are aggregated
for counts and rating.
  13
     In this analysis, children without a disciplinary referral are coded as having a rating of 8.




                                                  11
3        Results

3.1       Overview

We gathered data on skills and economic preferences for 856 unique children, but only
376 of these children attended one of the 9 schools in the Chicago Heights district and
therefore have data on disciplinary referrals on file.14 In sub-section 3.2, we use the
full sample of children with skills data to discuss the interrelationships between skills
in early childhood. In sub-section 3.3, we use the smaller sample of Chicago Heights
children who also have disciplinary referral data to discuss the association between
early childhood skills and disciplinary referrals later in life. Appendix 2 summarizes
the sample selection. We show in Appendix 3, Table A1 that children with skills
and preference data do not differ from those without available data with respect to
prevalence of disciplinary referrals. This makes sense since the missing data arises
from the location of the child’s house, and the neighborhoods in and out of district are
adjacent. Yet, there are some differences between samples along observables.
       Similar to the demographics of Chicago Heights, IL, our sample is diverse and
relatively low income. Within the larger sample, 40% are Hispanic, 37% are Black and
the remainder are White. The average age of the child’s mother at the birth of her
first child is about 23 years old, and about 76% of mothers have at least a high school
degree. Average household income is $28,875. Children were on average 3.8 years old
when they completed the skills and economic preference assessments.
       Within the Chicago Heights sub-sample, 59% are Hispanic, 21% are Black and the
remainder are White. The age of the child’s mother at the birth of her first child
is about 21 years old, and about 60% of mothers have at least a high school degree.
Average household income is $20,910. Children were on average 3.8 years old when
  14
    This smaller sub-sample was expected since the CHECC program intentionally drew on children
from many different districts, including the home district of Chicago Heights, and even provided free
bus service for some students outside the district.



                                                 12
they completed the skills and economic preference assessments. Appendix 3, Table A2
summarizes the characteristics of the full and the sub-sample. There are a few notable
differences - for example, the suburb of Chicago Heights has more Hispanic and fewer
Black households than the surrounding communities, and this is reflected in the racial
and ethnic composition of our samples. The larger sample is also somewhat more
educated and has a higher income than the Chicago Heights sample.
       Table 2 provides a summary of the children’s skills and economic preferences. Chil-
dren score on average in the 30th to 46th percentile on cognitive skills. This is somewhat
below the national average. Average scores on the executive functioning tests and as-
sessor reports are between 34% and 73%. Appendix 3, Table A3 provides the same
summary for the subsample with disciplinary data.
       Children choose the patient option in the time preference elicitation in 33% of the
cases, and the safe option in the risk preference elicitation 44% of the time. Children
share on average 34% of their endowment in the social preference elicitation. By
comparison, research with adults show sharing rates of about 20% (Forsythe et al.,
1994). Finally, 43% of children eat the marshmallow within five minutes. The children
in our sample are more willing to wait than those in the original Mischel study, where
75% of the children ate the marshmallow (Mischel et al., 1972). Part of the difference
could be attributed to the fact that we chose a shorter length of time to allow children
to wait. Appendix 3, Figure A2 provides the economic preference data by gender and
race. There, we see patterns consistent with related work: for example, we observe
that girls are more patient and more risk averse than boys (Sutter et al., 2019).15
       Figure 1 shows the percentage of children in our sample who received at least one
disciplinary referral by grade in school. Disciplinary referrals are more prevalent in
  15
    We also see that the Black children in our sample are more impatient than White or Hispanic
children in the time preference task and that White children are less likely to eat the marshmallow
in the delay task, consistent with findings by Andreoni et al. (2019b) and Castillo et al. (2011).
Interestingly, using adolescent data from the Chicagoland area, Cotton et al. (2020) find similar time
preference data over leisure preferences.




                                                 13
later elementary school grades than in early years. Kindergarten children are the least
likely to receive a referral (8% received a referral), and children in 5th grade are most
likely to receive a referral (23% received a referral). Most disciplinary referrals are
concentrated among a small percentage of children. Of the children in our sample,
62% have never received a referral. The average number of referrals in a year is 0.47
(s.d. 1.94), and 17% of the children received above the average number of referrals.



3.2    Interrelationships Between Skills and Preferences

We next evaluate the interrelationships between early life skills and economic pref-
erences. Table 3 provides correlations between skills and preferences. We observe
that while measures of cognitive skills and executive functions are correlated with one
another, they are importantly much less correlated with economic preferences. Inter-
estingly, while this correlation has been observed to be quite strong in adults (Burks
et al., 2009; Dohmen et al., 2010), the correlation amongst our 3-5 year-old sample
is much weaker. Also, we find that economic preferences are not strongly correlated
with one another, providing some optimism that such variables can provide unique
information for predicting later life outcomes.
   We next conduct exploratory factor analysis with our full sample of children to
evaluate whether the 13 measures we collected can be mapped to a smaller sub-set of
latent factors. This is useful for understanding interrelationships of early life skills. It is
also useful because we can then use an index of latent factors to better understand the
associations of early life skills to outcomes. This can be more powerful and informative
than evaluating the association of each measure individually.
   Table A4 in Appendix 3 summarizes the factor loadings from our exploratory anal-
ysis after using oblique rotation, which allows for the natural assumption that factors
can be correlated. Our results suggest four latent factors are represented by our 13



                                              14
measures.16
       As we may have predicted, our measures of cognitive skills and executive functions
each map on to two different factors in direct alignment with our earlier categorization
of these measures. More surprisingly, we find that economic preferences are distinct
from cognitive skills and executive functions. They map on to two separate factors,
with time and social preferences loading together and risk preferences alone. Further,
the delay of gratification task does not map to any of the four factors. We observe that
the two factors for economic preferences have low eigenvalues, providing weak evidence
of association. In the subsequent section, we use a factor for cognitive skills, a factor
for executive functions, and examine each economic preference separately.17


3.3       Associations with Disciplinary Referrals

We next examine the correlations of economic preferences, cognitive skills, and execu-
tive functions measured at age 3-5 years old with the propensity to receive disciplinary
referrals in elementary school. For the main analysis, we use an index for cognitive skills
and executive functions. We include economic preferences and the delay of gratification
measure separately.
       Our main outcome variables are the probability of having at least one referral
in a given school year and the average severity of the misbehavior reported in the
referrals for that year. As aforementioned, the severity of the referrals was compiled by
independent raters using a Likert scale of 1-7 from (1) very severe (e.g., child behaved
extremely badly) to (7) not severe (e.g., not badly at all). These values were then
reversed in sign for ease of interpretation.
       Table 4 reports the empirical results. We include each year for which we observe
  16
      We estimate the latent factors using Bartlett’s method (Bartlett, 1937). This method produces
unbiased factors that can be used in linear regressions to produce consistent estimates (Skrondal and
Laake, 2001). Horn’s parallel analysis (Horn, 1965) is used to determine the number of factors to keep
from the exploratory factor analysis. This yields the following adjusted eigenvalues for four factors:
3.340, 1.605, 1.014 and 1.005.
   17
      Analysis using factors for economic preferences and other averaging is in Appendix 3.


                                                 15
the child in elementary school as an observation, and all analyses control for the child’s
demographic characteristics and cluster standard errors at the child level. The first
two columns in Table 4 report on the propensity to receive a referral, and the last
two columns report on the severity. Each column in the table controls for each of the
economic preference measures, the cognitive skill index, the executive function index
and demographics.18
       We find that across all empirical specifications, higher executive functions in early
childhood are associated with a reduction in misbehavior in elementary school. This
is true both for the propensity of having a referral and the severity of referrals. For
example, a one standard deviation increase in the executive function index results in
a 1.9 percentage point decline in the probability of receiving a referral. The baseline
likelihood of disciplinary referrals is 14.7%. By contrast, cognitive skills in early child-
hood are not associated with changes in the propensity to have disciplinary referrals
or the severity of the referral.
       Most interestingly, early life economic preferences - specifically time preferences -
are separately associated with prevalence and severity of disciplinary referrals. Chil-
dren who are willing to wait for larger, later rewards at ages 3-5 are less likely to receive
disciplinary referrals in elementary school. For example, a one standard deviation in-
crease in the willingness to wait is associated with a reduction of the probability of
receiving a referral by 2.3 percentage points. However, risk preferences, social prefer-
ences and delay of gratification as measured by the marshmallow task are not strong
predictors of disciplinary referrals later in life.
       Finally, we find strong differences by gender and race in our sample: Boys and
Black children are significantly more likely to receive disciplinary referrals. Boys are
10% more likely to receive a disciplinary referral compared to girls, and Black children
  18
    We use two specifications in the analysis. First, we regress disciplinary referrals on all variables
on the sub-sample of children who have data on all measures. Second, to increase precision in our
estimates, we replace missing item responses by the mean of the variable and include dummies that
equal 1 if the item response is missing.


                                                  16
are 8% more likely to receive a disciplinary referral than their racial counterparts. This
finding is aligned with related work in economics (e.g. Castillo et al., 2011; Bertrand
and Pan, 2013), which shows that boys and Blacks are more likely to have disciplinary
referrals. More broadly, a large literature has documented a ‘discipline gap’ between
Blacks and non-Blacks, such that Blacks receive more referrals (Gregory et al., 2010).
    Our results are robust to a variety of alternative specifications, including using
number of disciplinary referrals as an outcome (see Appendix 3, Table A5). They are
also robust to using two factors for economic preferences, averaging across economic
preferences or adding additional family and household characteristics (see Appendix
3, Tables A6-A10). Using each cognitive and executive function skill separately yields
similar results (see Appendix 3, Table A11). The executive function assessment with
the greatest explanatory power is the self-regulation assessment on attention. That is,
a child’s ability to pay attention and patience in early childhood are both predictors
of later-life outcomes.



4     Mechanisms of mis-behavior

We next leverage the randomization inherent in CHECC to evaluate whether there is
an impact of early childhood programs on disciplinary referrals, and to understand the
role of skills and economic preferences as moderators or mediators. Our analysis ex-
ploits the fact that the CHECC treatments aimed to boost the cognitive and executive
functioning skills of participating children, and we have data on these skills both before
and after the intervention. Upon signing up for CHECC, households were randomly
assigned to one of the following treatments:


    • Preschool (PK): Children attended a free, full-day preschool for 1-2 years.
      Children were randomized to one of three curricula: a program focused on literacy
      and math, a program focused on executive functions, and a program focused on


                                           17
         both skills with a parent involvement component.

    • Parent Academy (PA): Parents attended a bi-monthly, 2-hour class to learn
         how to teach to their children. Parents received incentives of up to $3,000 based
         on attendance, homework completion, and their child’s performance. Parents
         were randomized to receive part of those incentives as cash or as a deposit in the
         child’s post-secondary education account.

    • Control group: This group did not receive educational interventions from us.19


       Fryer et al. (2020) report that the Preschool program improved cognitive skills,
while Fryer et al. (2015) find that the Parent Academy program improved executive
function skills. Related papers find that both programs also had an impact on fairness
views (Cappelen et al., 2020), but no impact on time preferences (Andreoni et al.,
2019b).
       Table 5 summarizes the impact of the CHECC program on skills for the sub-sample
of children who also have disciplinary referral data. Similar to (Fryer et al., 2020), we
find an impact of Preschool on cognitive skills in this sub-sample, but the impact of
Parent Academy on executive functioning skills is limited, potentially due to low power
given the smaller sample size relative to Fryer et al. (2015). We also do not find an
impact on time preferences, which is similar to the findings reported in the larger
sample of (Andreoni et al., 2019b).
       We next turn to evaluating whether CHECC had an impact on disciplinary referrals.
There is a general consensus in the literature that the effects of preschool programs
  19
     Another group was randomized to a shorter, summer preschool program called Kinderprep. We
do not evaluate that program here due to its smaller sample size and due to the fact that it is in
effect a lower-touch variant of the Preschool program. The total number of children randomized
to each program over the four years was Preschool, excluding Kinderprep N=532; Parent Academy,
N=316; Control group, N=1,132. We have disciplinary referral data for all children attending Chicago
Heights schools. We use disciplinary referral data on 501 children for the treatment effect analysis i.e.,
Preschool excluding Kinderprep, N=187 (35.15 %); Parent Academy, N=129 (40.82%) and Control
group, N=185 (16.34%). The smaller sub-sample is one limitation of this analysis. The smaller
proportion of control group present in Chicago Heights is due to the initial randomization, which
over-sampled Chicago Heights residents for the treatments in some years.

                                                   18
‘fade out’ in the years following the program (Duncan and Magnuson, 2013). Since
disciplinary referrals are collected through sixth grade, following this literature, we
might expect any effects to be muted.
       Table 6 presents the impact of CHECC on disciplinary referrals, using both whether
the child had any referral in a year and the severity of the referral as outcome mea-
sures.20 Table 6 shows that random assignment to the Parent Academy program had
a statistically significant effect of reducing the likelihood of receiving any disciplinary
referral by 27%. We also find suggestive evidence that random assignment to Preschool
reduced the likelihood of having any disciplinary referral by 15%, but this result is not
statistically significant at conventional levels. We also find that, consonant with our
earlier analysis, baseline skills are predictive of disciplinary referrals, but the coeffi-
cients are not statistically significant at conventional levels, likely at least in part due
to the smaller sample size.21
       In Columns (2)-(3) and (5)-(6) of Table 6, we include controls for the cognitive
and executive functioning skills at the completion of the intervention, respectively.
The executive function skills at the end of the program are strongly associated with
disciplinary referrals, whereas cognitive skills are not correlated. Adding these variables
does not change the treatment effects. Columns (4)-(6) replicate this analysis for
severity of referrals and show similar results.
       Taken together, the above results suggest that the CHECC treatments do not have
a robust effect on the mediating variables of cognitive skills and executive functioning
in the sub-sample that we study, but that at least one of the treatments does have
an impact on reducing disciplinary referrals. This finding suggests that the effect
of Parent Academy on discipline is direct and not mediated by cognitive skills and
  20
     Appendix Table A12 reports the same result using the number of weekly referrals in a year and
Appendix Table A14 reports the same result disaggregating the program curricula.
  21
     Note that the sample used in this analysis differs slightly from that used for Table 4, see Appendix
Figure A1. Table 4 examines the effect of overall time preferences of each child on disciplinary referrals
while Table 6 controls for the effect of only baseline time preferences i.e. time preferences collected
pre-treatment.


                                                   19
executive functions.
       As a robustness test, we account for the probability that children for whom we have
disciplinary data might be different from the children for whom we do not by estimating
inverse probability weighted (IPW) treatment effects in Table A17. IPWs are estimated
from running a probit regression on a binary variable indicating whether disciplinary
referral data is available for the child using gender, race, and age at assessment as
controls. Empirical results remain similar upon weighing the coefficients by IPWs.22
       Importantly, the design of the CHECC treatments affords an evaluation of alterna-
tive policy options. The Parent Academy treatment was designed to enhance parenting
practices, and in turn children’s available choice sets, rather than to boost cognitive
and executive function skills directly. Table 6 demonstrates that interventions targeted
at parenting practices can improve child outcomes even when they do not affect skills or
preferences. While it is still early to know the long-term outcomes of the interventions,
the evidence so far suggests they might be durable.23
       Finally, one might wonder about the generalizability of our insights. Beyond our
exploration of the results in this sample, how far can these results expand to other
populations of people and situations? To lend some insights, we follow the List (2020)
SANS conditions in our reporting.24 First, in terms of selection, our sample includes
students from the CHECC program, which were a representative group of pre-K stu-
dents from Chicago Heights and the surrounding area. Importantly, Chicago Heights
has observables similar to other inner-city school districts around the US. In terms
of attrition, our compliance rates with treatment were about 80% (Fryer et al., 2015,
  22
      We have a sub-sample of children included in the treatment analysis for whom we have time
preference data collected after completion of the intervention. Due to the very small sub-sample size,
we relegate the table adding endline time preferences in Table 6 to the Appendix, Table A15. In this
sub-sample we do not find a statistically significant effect of the Parent Academy program. Thus, we
cannot distinguish if time preferences mediate the effect of Parent Academy.
   23
      Jackson (2018) shows that teachers can affect students’ behavior and this can have a separate
effect on academic performance. That analysis, however, cannot distinguish whether teachers affect
behaviors by altering choice sets or by changing attitudes. Our results show that both channels are
possible.
   24
      SANS abbreviates Selection, Attrition, Naturalness and Scaling.


                                                 20
2020), while our administrative data on disciplinary referrals captures all children who
attended the Chicago Heights school district.
    Considering naturalness of the choice task, setting, and time frame, we use a combi-
nation of standardized tests and artefactual/framed field experimental manipulations.
Thus, our setting is one in which subjects are naturally engaged, and includes a mix-
ture of natural choices and some choices that place students on an artificial margin
in that they would not typically make such choices. In terms of scaling, CHECC was
designed as an early childhood program based on scaling, thus careful consideration
of the non-negotiables of CHECC, including most importantly human capital, was of
first order importance. Finally, since our key results are WAVE1 insights (List, 2020),
replications need to be completed to understand if the estimates manifest in other
school districts.



5     Conclusion

We use experiments to collect data on a wide range of skills and economic preferences
with children when they are ages 3-5 years old, and we return to the same children
when they are ages 5-12 years old to collect administrative data on disciplinary referrals,
a key predictor of adult outcomes. We find that cognitive and executive functioning
skills map to two distinct latent factors, and that economic preferences map to separate
latent factors. We also find that executive functions and time preferences are associated
with the propensity for disciplinary referrals several years later.
    We use disciplinary referrals in middle-childhood as our outcome measure, which
has been previously linked to adult outcomes such as educational attainment and labor
market earnings (e.g. Segal, 2013). Finding that early life executive functions and time
preferences predict disciplinary referrals in middle-childhood points to the importance
of considering such skills when designing early childhood assessments and optimal ed-
ucation policy. While the literature by James Heckman and co-authors (Cunha et al.,

                                            21
2010; Almlund et al., 2011) has often discussed the role of cognitive skills captured
by academic achievement tests and ‘soft skills’ such as character and temperament,
executive functions are higher-order cognitive skills that have been discussed less fre-
quently in the economics literature yet are of importance in the education production
function. An exception is recent work by Heckman et al. (2020) that explores the im-
pact of a home visiting program in China on a comprehensive set of skills, including on
executive functions (which the authors refer to as a component of ‘skills for learning.’)
Importantly, time preferences are prominent in the literature on determinants of adult
behavior (Barsky et al., 1997; Meier and Sprenger, 2013; Cohen et al., 2020). Evalu-
ations of how these preferences map to behavior in childhood are much more limited.
We show that such skills are relevant even among very young children, which suggests
that such skills should be routinely evaluated when considering the determinants of
child behavior and outcomes.
   Early studies of the ‘marshmallow test’ pointed to the importance of delay of grat-
ification in shaping human behavior. The interpretation that this task captured delay
of gratification and not other aspects of early childhood development or the child’s
environment has come under some scrutiny recently (Kidd et al., 2013). Our work
collects a comprehensive set of measures and suggests that while the marshmallow test
alone cannot predict behavior, other related constructs of executive functioning and
time preferences are separately predictive. Executive functions are well understood by
psychologists as a key developmental construct.
   Time preferences collected by standard economic experiments differ from either the
inhibitory control measure within executive function assessments or the marshmallow
test. Time preferences capture a deliberate decision (because all rewards are associated
with a front-end delay), while the others have an element of impulse control. Our
novel and perhaps surprising finding is that the deliberative decisions of toddlers and
preschoolers are informative of outcomes for these children years later. Economists



                                           22
studying human capital formation should consider economic preferences as a unique
driver of behavior.
   Our finding that such time preferences are also predictive of behavior among young
children provides further evidence of the importance of this skill as a separate pre-
dictor, as has been documented with adults. As we point out in List et al. (2018),
understanding the drivers of behavior at young ages is important because these help us
understand children and, by understanding children, we can better understand adults.
   Another important finding in our study is that early childhood interventions can
affect misbehavior in middle childhood, but that these effects appear not to be mediated
by the skills that we measure or by economic preferences. This suggests that early
childhood interventions operate directly or through alternative mediators that we did
not consider - e.g., other ‘soft skills,’ such as personality and character, or by changing
parents’ behavior. This is an area for further research.
   Interventions aimed at encouraging children to invest in human capital formation
should consider time preferences as an additional driver of behavior. For example,
children who discount the future most at early ages might be at greater risk for poor
outcomes in adulthood. This points to the importance of identifying children in need
of additional scaffolding and improving our understanding of the factors affecting chil-
dren’s preferences.




                                            23
References

Alan, S. and Ertac, S. (2018). Fostering patience in the classroom: Results from
  randomized educational intervention. Journal of Political Economy, 126(5):1865–
  1911.

Alexander, K. L., Entwisle, D. R., and Horsey, C. S. (1997). From first grade forward:
  Early foundations of high school dropout. Sociology of Education, pages 87–107.

Almlund, M., Duckworth, A. L., Heckman, J., and Kautz, T. (2011). Personality
  psychology and economics. In Handbook of the Economics of Education, volume 4,
  pages 1–181. Elsevier.

Almond, D., Currie, J., and Duque, V. (2018). Childhood circumstances and adult
  outcomes: Act ii. Journal of Economic Literature, 56(4):1360–1446.

Andreoni, J., Di Girolamo, A., List, J. A., Mackevicius, C., and Samek, A. (2019a).
  Risk preferences of children and adolescents in relation to gender, cognitive skills,
  soft skills, and executive functions. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization.

Andreoni, J., Kuhn, M. A., List, J. A., Samek, A., Sokal, K., and Sprenger, C. (2019b).
  Toward an understanding of the development of time preferences: Evidence from field
  experiments. Journal of Public Economics, 177:104039.

Barsky, R., Juster, F., Kimball, M., and Shapiro, M. (1997). Preference Parameters and
  Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health and Retirement
  Study. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(2):537–579.

Bartlett, M. (1937). The statistical conception of mental factors. British Journal of
  Psychology, 28:97–104.

Benjamin, D., Laibson, D., Mischel, W., Peake, P., Shoda, Y., Wellsjo Steiny, A., and
  Wilson, N. L. (2020). Predicting mid-life capital formation with pre-school delay

                                          24
  of gratification and life- course measures of self-regulation. Journal of Economic
  Behavior and Organization.

Benjamin, D. J., Brown, S. A., and Shapiro, J. M. (2013). Who is ‘behavioral’ ?
  cognitive ability and anomalous preferences. Journal of the European Economic
  Association, 11(6):1231–1255.

Bertrand, M. and Pan, J. (2013). The Trouble with Boys: Social Influences and
  the Gender Gap in Disruptive Behavior. American Economic Journal - Applied
  Economics, 5(1):32–64.

Bettinger, E. and Slonim, R. (2007). Patience among children. Journal of Public
  Economics, 91(1):343–363.

Blair, C. and Willoughby, M. (2006a). Measuring executive function in young chil-
  dren: Operation span. Chapel Hill, NC: The Pennsylvania State University and The
  University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

Blair, C. and Willoughby, M. (2006b). Measuring executive function in young children:
  Spatial conflict ii: Arrows. Chapel Hill, NC: The Pennsylvania State University and
  The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

Bowles, S., Gintis, H., and Osborne, M. (2001). The determinants of earnings: A
  behavioral approach. Journal of Economic Literature, 39(4):1137–1176.

Burks, S. V., Carpenter, J. P., Goette, L., and Rustichini, A. (2009). Cognitive skills
  affect economic preferences, strategic behavior, and job attachment. Proceedings of
  the National Academy of Sciences, 106(19):7745–7750.

Cappelen, A. W., List, J. A., Samek, A., and Tungodden, B. (2020). The effect
  of early-childhood education on social preferences. Journal of Political Economy,
  128(7):2739–2758.


                                          25
Carneiro, P. M. and Heckman, J. J. (2003). Human capital policy. In Inequality in
  America: What role for human capital policies? Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Castillo, M., Ferraro, P. J., Jordan, J. L., and Petrie, R. (2011). The today and
  tomorrow of kids: Time preferences and educational outcomes of children. Journal
  of Public Economics, 95(11):1377–1385.

Castillo, M., Jordan, J. L., and Petrie, R. (2018). Children’s rationality, risk attitudes,
  and field behavior. European Economic Review, 102:62–81.

Castillo, M., Jordan, J. L., and Petrie, R. (2019). Discount rates of children and high
  school graduation. The Economic Journal, 129(619):1153–1181.

Cohen, J., Ericson, K. M., Laibson, D., and White, J. M. (2020). Measuring Time
  Preferences. Journal of Economic Literature, 58(2):299–347.

Cotton, C., Hickman, B. R., List, J. A., Price, J. P., and Roy, S. (2020). Produc-
  tivity versus motivation in adolescent human capital production: Evidence from a
  structurally-motivated field experiment. National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Working Paper No. 27995.

Cunha, F., Heckman, J. J., and Schennach, S. M. (2010). Estimating the Technology
  of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation. Econometrica, 78(3):883–931.

Currie, J. (2001). Early childhood education programs. Journal of Economic Perspec-
  tives, 15(2):213–238.

Dohmen, T., Falk, A., Huffman, D., and Sunde, U. (2010). Are risk aversion and
  impatience related to cognitive ability? American Economic Review, 100:1238–1260.

Duncan, G. J. and Magnuson, K. (2013). Investing in preschool programs. Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, 27(2):109–32.



                                            26
Dunn, L. M. and Dunn, L. M. (1997). PPVT-III: Peabody picture vocabulary test.
  American Guidance Service.

Epper, T., Fehr, E., Fehr-Duda, H., Kreiner, C. T., Lassen, D. D., Leth-Petersen, S.,
  and Rasmussen, G. N. (2020). Time Discounting and Wealth Inequality. American
  Economic Review, 110(4):1177–1205.

Forsythe, R., Horowitz, J., Savin, N., and Sefton, M. (1994). Fairness in simple bar-
  gaining experiments. Games and Economic Behavior, 6(3):347–369.

Fryer, R. G., Levitt, S. D., List, J. A., and Samek, A. (2020). Introducing CogX: A
  new preschool education program combining parent and child interventions. National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 27913.

Fryer, R. J. G., Levitt, S. D., and List, J. A. (2015). Parental incentives and early
  childhood achievement: A field experiment in Chicago Heights. National Bureau of
  Economic Research, Working Paper No. 21477.

Golsteyn, B. H. H., Gronqvist, H., and Lindahl, L. (2014). Adolescent Time Preferences
  Predict Lifetime Outcomes. Economic Journal, 124(580, F):F739–F761.

Gregory, A., Skiba, R. J., and Noguera, P. A. (2010). The achievement gap and the
  discipline gap: Two sides of the same coin? Educational Researcher, 39(1):59–68.

Harrison, G. W., Lau, M. I., and Rutström, E. E. (2010). Individual discount rates
  and smoking: Evidence from a field experiment in Denmark. Journal of Health
  Economics, 29(5):708–717.

Heckman, J., Pinto, R., and Savelyev, P. (2013). Understanding the mechanisms
  through which an influential early childhood program boosted adult outcomes. Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 103(6):2052–2086.




                                         27
Heckman, J. J. (2000). Policies to foster human capital. Research in Economics,
  54(1):3–56.

Heckman, J. J., Liu, B., Lu, M., Zhou, J., et al. (2020). Treatment effects and the
  measurement of skills in a prototypical home visiting program. Technical report,
  Institute of Labor Economics (IZA).

Heckman, J. J., Stixrud, J., and Urzua, S. (2006). The effects of cognitive and noncog-
  nitive abilities on labor market outcomes and social behavior. Journal of Labor
  Economics, 24(3):411–482.

Horn, J. L. (1965). A rationale and test for the number of factors in factor analysis.
  Psychometrik, 30(2):179–185.

Khwaja, A., Silverman, D., and Sloan, F. (2007). Time preference, time discounting,
  and smoking decisions. Journal of Health Economics, 26(5):927–949.

Kidd, C., Palmeri, H., and Aslin, R. N. (2013). Rational snacking: Young children’s
  decision-making on the marshmallow task is moderated by beliefs about environ-
  mental reliability. Cognition, 126(1):109–114.

Lang, K. and Ruud, P. A. (1986). Returns to schooling, implicit discount rates and
  black-white wage differentials. The Review of Economics and Statistics, pages 41–47.

List, J., Petrie, R., and Samek, A. (2018). How experiments with children can inform
  economics. Work in Progress.

List, J. A. (2020). Non est disputandum de generalizability? a glimpse into the external
  validity trial. National Bureau of Economic Research - Working Paper No. 27535.

Meier, S. and Sprenger, C. D. (2013). Discounting financial literacy: Time preferences
  and participation in financial education programs. Journal of Economic Behavior &
  Organization, 95:159–174.

                                          28
Mischel, W., Ebbesen, E. B., and Raskoff Zeiss, A. (1972). Cognitive and attentional
  mechanisms in delay of gratification. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
  21(2):204.

Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., and Rodriguez, M. I. (1989). Delay of gratification in children.
  Science, 244(4907):933–938.

Rumberger, R. W. (1995). Dropping out of middle school: A multilevel analysis of
  students and schools. American Educational Research Journal, 32(3):583–625.

Schlam, T. R., Wilson, N. L., Shoda, Y., Mischel, W., and Ayduk, O. (2013). Preschool-
  ers’ delay of gratification predicts their body mass 30 years later. The Journal of
  Pediatrics, 162(1):90–93.

Segal, C. (2013). Misbehavior, education, and labor market outcomes. Journal of the
  European Economic Association, 11(4):743–779.

Shoda, Y., Mischel, W., and Peake, P. K. (1990). Predicting adolescent cognitive
  and self-regulatory competencies from preschool delay of gratification: Identifying
  diagnostic conditions. Developmental Psychology, 26(6):978.

Skrondal, A. and Laake, P. (2001). Regression among factor scores. Psychometrica,
  66(4):563–576.

Smith-Donald, R., Raver, C. C., Hayes, T., and Richardson, B. (2007). Preliminary
  construct and concurrent validity of the preschool self-regulation assessment (PSRA)
  for field-based research. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 22(2):173–187.

Sutter, M., Kocher, M. G., Glätzle-Rützler, D., and Trautmann, S. T. (2013). Impa-
  tience and uncertainty: Experimental decisions predict adolescents’ field behavior.
  The American Economic Review, 103(1):510–531.




                                          29
Sutter, M., Zoller, C., and Glätzle-Rützler, D. (2019). Economic behavior of children
  and adolescents–a first survey of experimental economics results. European Economic
  Review, 111:98–121.

Woodcock, R. W., McGrew, K. S., and Mather, N. (2001). Woodcock-Johnson tests of
  achievement. Itasca, IL: Riverside Publishing.

Zelazo, P. D., Blair, C. B., and Willoughby, M. T. (2016). Executive function: Impli-
  cations for education. NCER 2017-2000. National Center for Education Research.




                                          30
         Figure 1: Proportion of Children with Disciplinary Referrals by Grade
                    25
                    20
                    15
          Percent
                    10
                    5
                    0




                         K      1st       2nd         3rd     4th       5th       6th
Note: This figure shows the percentage of children who had at least one disciplinary referral in each
school year




                                                 31
                                    Table 1: Summary of Data

 Year       Skills                    Preferences                            Delay          Discipline
                        Time              Risk              Social
                     4v5, 4v6,                      5 candies, Marshmallow,
2010-11      Yes                      Pencil task                                                K
                     4v7, 4v8.                        teddy.      8 min.
                     3v3, 2v3,     1 v 50% chance 6 stickers, Marshmallow,
 2012        Yes                                                                               K-1st
                       1v3.          of 5, 4, 3, 2.   child.      5 min.
                                    1 v 20%, 25%,
                     2v3, 2v4,                      6 stickers,  Candy,
 2013        Yes                      33%, 50%                                                 K-2nd
                     2v5, 2v6.                        child.     15 min.
                                     chance of 2.
 2014        Yes                                                                              1st -3rd
 2015                                                                                         2nd -4th
 2016                                                                                         3rd -5th
 2017                                                                                         4th -6th
Note: Time data list decisions and trade-offs, i.e. “4v5” means “choose 4 candies today or 5 candies
tomorrow.” Risk data list decisions, i.e. “1 candy for sure or 50% chance of 5 candies.” Social data
list decisions, i.e. “Divide 5 candies between yourself and teddy. The ‘Pencil task’ is number of pencils
taken out of jar. Child keeps all pencils if no red mark on a pencil, o/w gets no pencils. The first
wave of preference data collection spanned two calendar years, while the remaining waves occurred
within one year. The years for which discipline data is available are academic years 2011-12 through
2017-18.




                                                   32
                                 Table 2: Summary Statistics

Cognitive Skills                                            Percentile Score               SD

  Letter and Word Recognition (WJ-III)                            41.94                   29.46
  Writing Skills (WJ-III)                                         36.41                   28.94
  Math - Applied Problems (WJ-III)                                40.18                   26.45
  Math - Quantitative Concepts (WJ-III)                           46.43                   23.98
  Receptive Vocabulary (PPVT-III)                                 30.45                   24.93

Executive Functions                                         Percent Correct                SD

  Attention (PSRA Assessment)                                     73.02                   25.76
  Emotion Regulation (PSRA Assessment)                            59.28                   24.04
  Working Memory (Blair & Willoughby)                             34.10                   31.52
  Inhibitory Control (Blair & Willoughby)                         66.30                   25.82

Economic Preferences                                            Decisions                  SD

  Time Preferences (% Patient Decisions)                          32.91                   33.69
  Risk Preferences (% Safe Decisions)                             43.57                   34.14
  Social Preferences (% Shared)                                   33.62                   26.47
  Delay of Gratification (% Ate Marshmallow)                      43.00                   48.39
Note: Cognitive measures are reported as percentile of age distribution. Executive function measures
are reported as percent correct relative to total possible score. Cognitive skills are based on the first
test administered to the child, and economic preferences are an average in the case the child completed
the task more than once. This table reports the data for the full sample (N=854). Similar measures
are obtained with the sub-sample for whom we have disciplinary data (N=376), see Appendix Table
A3.




                                                 33
                                                        Table 3: Cross-Correlation Table

           Variables    (1)            (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)        (9)        (10)   (11)    (12)     (13)
     (1):Letters        1.00
     (2):Writing        0.45***        1.00
     (3):Math Problems  0.44***        0.43***   1.00
     (4):Math Concepts  0.48***        0.36***   0.53***   1.00
     (5):Vocabulary     0.28***        0.29***   0.49***   0.45***   1.00
     (6):Attention      0.18***        0.32***   0.36***   0.18***   0.23***   1.00
     (7):Emotion        0.18***        0.29***   0.29***   0.20***   0.25***   0.52***   1.00
     (8):Working Memory 0.10***        0.22***   0.28***   0.02      0.20***   0.44***   0.29***   1.00




34
     (9):Inhib Control  0.14***        0.26***   0.36***   0.07**    0.26***   0.52***   0.27***   0.47*** 1.00
     (10):Time          -0.11***       -0.05     -0.06     0.03      -0.01     -0.02     -0.08**   -0.08** -0.09** 1.00
     (11):Risk          0.01           0.05      0.00      -0.06     -0.04     0.08**    0.07*     0.06     0.02     -0.03 1.00
     (12):Social        0.07*          0.05      0.00      0.06      0.05      0.02      -0.00     -0.01    -0.03    0.06* 0.02 1.00
     (13):Marshmallow   -0.02          -0.04     -0.08**   0.03      -0.06*    -0.13     -0.09**   -0.10*** -0.15*** 0.00 -0.01 0.02             1.00
     Notes: Cognitive measures are reported as percentile of age distribution. Executive function measures are reported as percent correct
     relative to total possible score. Cognitive skills are based on the first test administered to the child, and economic preferences are an
     average in the case the child completed the task more than once.Correlations are based on full sample of children who have skill and
     preference measures (740)
Table 4: Propensity to Have Disciplinary Referrals and Severity of Referrals - Probit
Marginal Effects Regression and Ordered Logit Regression

                                                  (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)
                                                  0-1         0-1       Severity     Severity

     Percent of patient decisions [0,1]         -0.07*     -0.07**       -0.61*       -0.62*
                                                (0.04)      (0.03)       (0.36)       (0.33)
     Percent of safe decisions [0,1]             -0.04       -0.04        -0.36        -0.42
                                                (0.04)      (0.03)       (0.36)       (0.32)
     Percent shared [0,1]                         0.01       0.00          0.10         0.06
                                                (0.04)      (0.04)       (0.42)       (0.37)
     Ate marshmallow before 5min                 0.01        0.00          0.15        0.02
                                                (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.22)       (0.22)
     Executive function index                   -0.02*     -0.02**       -0.20*      -0.21**
                                                (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.10)       (0.09)
     Cognitive index                             -0.01       -0.01        -0.10        -0.09
                                                (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.15)       (0.13)
     Male (d)                                  0.11***     0.11***      1.05***      1.00***
                                                (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.22)       (0.20)
     Age at experiment                            0.00       0.00       0.03**       0.03**
                                                (0.00)      (0.00)       (0.02)       (0.01)
     Black (d)                                   0.09*      0.12**      1.01***      1.14***
                                                (0.05)      (0.05)       (0.35)       (0.31)
     Hispanic (d)                                -0.01        0.01         0.17         0.31
                                                (0.03)      (0.03)       (0.31)       (0.26)
     Observations                                1265        1554         1313         1616
     R2                                          0.14        0.13          0.10         0.09
     Number of children                           313         369          318          375
     Note: Individual level clustered standard errors in parentheses. Controls for year, school,
     grade, and year of experiment not shown. Columns (2) and (4) replace missing experi-
     mental data with mean values and add dummies for each experimental measure missing.
     (d) for discrete change of dummy variable from 0 to 1. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.010




                                                 35
                   Table 5: Average Treatment Effects on Skills

          (1)                            (2)                           (3)
    Cognitive Index           Executive Function Index         % Patient Decisions
 PA      0.12                           0.02                          -0.14
        (0.12)                         (0.16)                        (0.33)
 PK     0.32∗∗∗                         0.20                           0.05
        (0.11)                         (0.15)                        (0.29)
 R2      0.78                           0.67                           0.25
 N        376                           376                            135
Notes: This table reports treatment effects on skills. Column 1 uses cognitive score at
the end of the treatment year as the outcome (calculated as the mean of the standard-
ized values of each of the subtests). Column 2 uses Executive Function score at the end
of the treatment year as the outcome, and Column 3 uses proportion of patient deci-
sions post-treatment as the outcome. Regressions control for cognitive baseline scores
and Executive Function baseline scores, gender, race, home language, age at test date,
matched pair grouping, test form, number of previous assessments, year of randomiza-
tion, an indicator for aged above or below 4 at randomization, mother age at child birth,
birthweight, assessor and an indicator if the pretest is from a previous year. * p<0.10,
** p<0.05, *** p<0.010




                                            36
      Table 6: Average Treatment Effects on Propensity to Have Disciplinary Referrals and
      Severity of Referrals

                                         (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
                                         0-1        0-1         0-1       Severity    Severity    Severity

 PK                                      -0.15      -0.10      -0.17        -0.23       -0.16        -0.28
                                        (0.12)     (0.13)     (0.13)       (0.22)      (0.23)       (0.23)
 PA                                    -0.27**    -0.25**    -0.33***     -0.46**      -0.42*      -0.56**
                                        (0.13)     (0.12)     (0.13)       (0.22)      (0.22)       (0.23)
 Cognitive Baseline                      -0.05      -0.05      -0.09        -0.10       -0.11        -0.15
                                        (0.08)     (0.08)     (0.08)       (0.15)      (0.16)       (0.16)
 Executive Function Baseline             -0.10      -0.10      -0.04        -0.16       -0.16        -0.06
                                        (0.06)     (0.06)     (0.07)       (0.12)      (0.12)       (0.12)
 Baseline Time Preferences               -0.07      -0.09      -0.12        -0.07       -0.09        -0.16
                                        (0.09)     (0.09)     (0.09)       (0.17)      (0.17)       (0.17)
 Cognitive End Year                                  0.00       0.12                     0.01         0.19
                                                   (0.09)     (0.09)                   (0.15)       (0.15)
 Executive Function End Year                                 -0.29***                             -0.47***
                                                              (0.08)                                (0.13)
 Observations                           2264       2264        2264        2313         2313         2313
 R2                                     0.166      0.169       0.185       0.104        0.105       0.113
 Number of children                      486        486         486         501          501          501
Notes: This table reports treatment effects on disciplinary behavior. Column 1, 2 and 3 use a binary variable
as the outcome indicating whether the child has had at least one disciplinary referral. Columns 4, 5 and 6 use
the severity (rated by independent coders) of the disciplinary referral as the outcome variable. All regressions
control for cognitive baseline scores and Executive Function baseline scores, baseline time preferences (with
missing values replaced as 0 and including a dummy indicating if they are truly missing), gender, race, age at
test date, matched pair grouping, test form, year of randomization, an indicator for aged above or below 4 at
randomization, mother age at child birth, birthweight, and an indicator if the pretest is from a previous year. *
p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.010




                                                       37
                 Online Appendix 1: Experiment Instructions

Time Preferences

Wave 1 (2010)

Now you are going to make some choices about candies. I will show you plates of candies
and you will decide which plate you want. Some plates you choose, you can have TODAY,
but some plates you choose you can have TOMORROW. I am going to put each plate you
choose inside this box. At the end, you will CLOSE YOUR EYES and pick ONE plate from
the box and that will be the plate you get to take home.

Okay, let’s start! If you pick THIS plate (point to plate with 4), you could have it at the end
of school TODAY. If you pick THIS plate (point to plate with 5), you could have it at the
end of school TOMORROW.

Q1. Can you tell me, if you pick THIS plate (point to plate with 4),    when can you have it,
today or tomorrow? (Yes/No, if you pick THIS plate you can have it      today.)
Q2. Can you tell me, if you pick THIS plate (point to plate with 5),    when can you have it,
today or tomorrow? (Yes/No, if you pick THIS plate you can have it      tomorrow)

Okay, which plate do you want, this one TODAY or this one TOMORROW?

Okay, now I will put the plate you picked in the box. Let’s play again! If you pick THIS plate
(point to plate with 4), you could have it at the end of school TODAY. If you pick THIS
plate (point to plate with 6), you could have it at the end of school TOMORROW.

Q3. Can you tell me, if you pick THIS plate (point to plate with 4),    when can you have it,
today or tomorrow? (Yes/No, if you pick THIS plate you can have it      today.)
Q4. Can you tell me, if you pick THIS plate (point to plate with 6),    when can you have it,
today or tomorrow? (Yes/No, if you pick THIS plate you can have it      tomorrow)

Okay, which plate do you want, this one TODAY or this one TOMORROW?

If you pick THIS plate (point to plate with 4), you could have it at the end of school
TODAY. If you pick THIS plate (point to plate with 7), you could have it at the end of
school TOMORROW.

Q5. Can you tell me, if you pick THIS plate (point to plate with 4),    when can you have it,
today or tomorrow? (Yes/No, if you pick THIS plate you can have it      today.)
Q6. Can you tell me, if you pick THIS plate (point to plate with 7),    when can you have it,
today or tomorrow? (Yes/No, if you pick THIS plate you can have it      tomorrow)

Okay, which plate do you want, this one TODAY or this one TOMORROW? Okay, now I
will put the plate you picked in the box. Let’s play again! If you pick THIS plate (point to
plate with 4), you could have it at the end of school TODAY. If you pick THIS plate (point
to plate with 8), you could have it at the end of school TOMORROW.

Q7. Can you tell me, if you pick THIS plate (point to plate with 4), when can you have it,
today or tomorrow? (Yes/No, if you pick THIS plate you can have it today.)



                                              38
Q8. Can you tell me, if you pick THIS plate (point to plate with 8), when can you have
it, today or tomorrow? (Yes/No, if you pick THIS plate you can have it tomorrow) ’ Okay,

which plate do you want, this one TODAY or this one TOMORROW? Okay, now I will put
the plate you picked in the box.

Wave 2 (2012)

Now you are going to make some choices about candies. I will show you plates of candies
and you will decide which plate you want. Some plates you choose, you can have TODAY,
but some plates you choose you can have TOMORROW. I am going to put each plate you
choose inside this box. At the end, you will CLOSE YOUR EYES and pick ONE plate from
the box and that will be the plate you get to keep. Okay, let’s start!
[TRIAL 1] If you pick THIS plate (point to plate with 3), you could have it at the end
of our activity TODAY. If you pick THIS plate (point to plate with 3), you could have it
TOMORROW.

Q1. Can you tell me, if you pick THIS plate (point to the TODAY plate), when can you
have it, today or tomorrow? (Yes/No, if you pick THIS plate you can have it today.) Q2.
Can you tell me, if you pick THIS plate (point to the tomorrow plate), when can you have
it, today or tomorrow? (Yes/No, if you pick THIS plate you can have it tomorrow)

Okay, which plate do you want, this one TODAY or this one TOMORROW?

Okay, now I will put the plate you picked in the box. Let’s play again!

[TRIAL 2] If you pick THIS plate (point to plate with 2), you could have it at the end
of our activity TODAY. If you pick THIS plate (point to plate with 3), you could have it
TOMORROW.

Q1. Can you tell me, if you pick THIS plate (point to plate with 2), when can you have
it, today or tomorrow? (Yes/No, if you pick THIS plate you can have it today.) Q2. Can
you tell me, if you pick THIS plate (point to plate with 3), when can you have it, today or
tomorrow? (Yes/No, if you pick THIS plate you can have it tomorrow)

Okay, which plate do you want, this one TODAY or this one TOMORROW?

[TRIAL 3] If you pick THIS plate (point to plate with 1), you could have it at the end
of our activity TODAY. If you pick THIS plate (point to plate with 3), you could have it
TOMORROW.
Q1. Can you tell me, if you pick THIS plate (point to plate with 1), when can you have
it, today or tomorrow? (Yes/No, if you pick THIS plate you can have it today.) Q2. Can
you tell me, if you pick THIS plate (point to plate with 3), when can you have it, today or
tomorrow? (Yes/No, if you pick THIS plate you can have it tomorrow)

Okay, which plate do you want, this one TODAY or this one TOMORROW?

Okay, now I will put the plate you picked in the box.

At the end of our activity today, you will pick the box that you get to keep.

Wave 3 (2013)



                                             39
Now we are going to play some games where you make choices about candies. There are going
to be 4 (show four on fingers) games. For each game, I will show you plates of candies and
you will decide which plate you want. Some plates you choose, you can have TODAY, but
some plates you choose you can have TOMORROW. In each game, the number of candies
on the plates are different, so pay attention!

You will play 4 games (show four on fingers) but only 1 game (show one on fingers) will be
the one that counts. At the end of all the games, I will roll a dice (show dice) to decide which
game is the game that counts. If you chose the TODAY plate in the game that counts, you
get that plate to take home today. If you chose the TOMORROW plate in the game that
counts, you get that plate tomorrow. We don’t know which game will be the one that counts
until later, so when you make your decision in each game, you should pretend that it is the
only game and that it is the one that counts!

[2 vs 3] (Put out 2 plates. Purple plate has 2 candies, Light blue plate has 3 candies.) Here
are two plates. If you pick THIS plate (point to purple) you could have all the candies in
here at the end of today. If you pick THIS plate (point to light blue) you could have all the
candies in here at the end of TOMORROW.

Q1. Now before you pick - Can you tell me – if you pick THIS plate (point to red), when can
you have it, today or tomorrow? (Yes/No) If you pick this plate you can have it TODAY
Q2. How about this one, when can you have it, today or tomorrow? (Yes/No) If you pick
this plate you can have it TOMORROW.

Ok now we can decide. Which plate do you want, THIS plate for TODAY, or THIS plate
for TOMORROW? Ok I’ll write that down and we’ll play the next game. (put away, mark
response).

[2 vs 4] Put out 2 plates. Purple plate has 2 candies, Light blue plate has 4 candies. If you
pick THIS plate (point to purple) you could have all the candies in here at the end of today.
If you pick THIS plate (point to blue) you could have all the candies in here at the end of
TOMORROW.

Ok now we can decide. Which plate do you want, THIS plate for TODAY, or THIS plate for
TOMORROW? Mark response

[2 vs 5] Repeat as in [2 vs 4] Mark response. [2 vs 6] Repeat as in [2 vs 5] Mark response

Ok, great job. Now we’re going to put those plates away, and at the end of all the games I
will roll a dice to see which game will be the one that counts.

‘Marshmallow’ Task

Wave 1a (2010)

Now I‘m going to go get your bags ready, I will be back in a little while and then we will get
the pencils and stars out of the jar and pick the plate from the box, okay?

While you wait, I have some marshmallows here. I’m going to leave THIS one (one marsh-
mallow plate) on the table here. If you want to, you can eat it now. BUT if you wait until I
get back, then you can also have THIS one (two marshmallow plate).



                                              40
Q1. Can you tell me how many marshmallows you get if you eat some BEFORE I come
back? (Yes/No, you can have this one marshmallow)
Q2. Can you tell me how many marshmallows you get if you don’t eat any UNTIL I come
back? (Yes/No, you get ONE more marshmallow so you will have two)

Okay, I will be back in a while so we can play the pencil and candy game! Stay in your chair
and I will be back.

Wave 1b (2010)

I have some marshmallows here. Which plate do you like better? (show plate with 2 and 4
mini-marshmallows). I’m going to leave to run an errand for 8 minutes. I’m going to leave
this plate (show plate with 1 marshmallow) for you. Here are the rules. You can eat the
marshmallow in this plate anytime you want to. If you wait for 8 minutes until I get back, you
will get to eat this marshmallow (show plate with 1) AND the plate with these marshmallows
(show plate with 4). But, if you want to eat this marshmallow before 8 minutes, you will get
to eat this marshmallow (show plate with 1) AND the plate with these marshmallows (show
plate with 2). Also, as soon as you eat the marshmallow, I will know and I’ll come right
back.

Q1. Can you tell me which plate I’m going to leave here? (Yes/No, I’m leaving this plate
here – point to plate with 1 marshmallow
Q2. Can you tell me which plate you get if you eat this marshmallow before I come back?
(Yes/No, you get this plate – point to plate with 2 marshmallow)
Q3. Can you tell me which plate you get if you don’t eat this marshmallow until I come back
in 8 minutes? (Yes/No, you get this plate – point to plate with 4 marshmallows)

Okay, I am going to come back in 8 minutes. You have to stay in your chair during the game
or you won’t get any prizes at the end. I can tell if you get off the chair, ok?

Wave 2 (2012)

I have some marshmallows here. (Show plates, each with 1 large marshmallow on them.) I’m
going to leave to run an errand for 5 minutes. I’m going to leave this plate (show plate 1)
for you. Here are the rules. You can eat the marshmallow in this plate anytime you want
to. If you wait for 5 minutes until I get back, you will get to eat this marshmallow (show
plate 1) AND the plate with this marshmallow (show plate 2). But, if you want to eat this
marshmallow before 5 minutes, you will get to eat this marshmallow (show plate 1) and NOT
the other one. Also, as soon as you eat the marshmallow, I will know and I’ll come right
back.

Q1. Can you tell me which plate I’m going to leave here? (Yes/No, I’m leaving this plate
here – point to plate 1
Q2. Can you tell me which plate you get if you eat this marshmallow before I come back?
(Yes/No, you get this plate – point to plate 1)
Q3. Can you tell me which plates you get if you don’t eat this marshmallow until I come
back in 5 minutes? (point to both plates).

Okay, I am going to come back in 5 minutes. You have to stay in your chair during the game
or you won’t get any prizes at the end. I can tell if you get off the chair, ok?



                                             41
Wave 3 (2013)

Now we are going to play with these candies (show candies, unwrap them). These candies
are for TODAY. I’m going to leave to run an errand for 15 minutes. I’m going to leave this
plate (show purple plate with 1 candy) for you. Here are the rules. You can eat the candy
in this plate anytime you want to. If you wait and don’t eat the candy until I get back, you
will get to eat this candy (show purple plate with 1) AND the plate with this other candy
(show purple plate with another 1). But if you eat this candy before I get back, you will not
get any more candies. Also, any time you want to end the game, raise your hand high and I
will come back (demonstrate high hand raising) Remember, if you raise your hand, you will
not get any more candies!

Q1. Can you tell me how many candies you get if you eat this candy or raise your hand,
before I come back? (Yes/No) If you eat it or raise your hand, you will only get this candy
(point) and not the other one (point)
Q2. What about if you wait to eat the candy until I get back – and you don’t raise your
hand – then how many do you get? (Yes/No) If you wait to eat the candy and you don’t
raise your hand, you will get this candy AND this candy.

(Leave plate with one unwrapped candy and take other unwrapped candy out of the room.)
Okay, I am going to come back in 15 minutes. You have to stay in your chair during the
game or you won’t get any more candy. I can tell if you get off the chair, ok?

(Fill out response sheet. Watch child for 15 min or until ate / raised hand.)

Risk Preferences

Wave 1 (2010)

N/A

Wave 2 (2012)

In this activity, you will play for prizes. If you win stars, you will get to change the stars for
prizes that you can take home. Do you see these prizes? These are the prizes you will be able
to pick from. The token in this box always has ONE STAR on the bottom. See it? (pick
up the token, show star sticker on bottom). If you pick the token in this box, you will get
to exchange this token for a prize. The tokens in these boxes sometimes have TWO STARS
on the bottom and sometimes have NO stars. See them? (pick up token with 2 stars, pick
up token with no stars). If you get the token with TWO STARS, you can have two prizes.
If you get the token with NO stars, you won’t receive a prize for that token. You can’t see
if a token has a star until you pick it up. You will decide whether to pick out the box with
the token that ALWAYS has ONE star, or pick out the box that has some tokens with TWO
STARS and some tokens with NO STARS. You can pick EITHER this box OR this box.
If you pick THIS BOX (show sure option), you will get this token that always has a prize
(demonstrate). But if you pick THIS BOX (show risky option) there will be one more step.
You’re going to close your eyes and pick out one token. If the token you pick out has TWO
STARS, you will get to change them for TWO PRIZES. But if the token you pick has NO
STARS, you do not get any prizes. You will only pick out ONE token. You WONT KNOW
whether the token has stars on the bottom until after you pick it.


                                               42
Now you are going to make some choices about the boxes. I am going to put each box you
choose inside this big box here. At the end, you will CLOSE YOUR EYES and pick ONE
box and that will be the box you get to keep. Then, if it was a box with just one token, you
get that token. But if it was a box with many tokens, some that have TWO STARS and
some that have NO STARS, you will have one more choice – the choice of what token you
want. You only pick out one token.

[Round 1] – 5 tokens in big box. Now we’re going to play. I’m going to put this token HERE
(put sure token with 1 star in the sure box, face down). I’m going to put these tokens HERE
(put 2-star token plus 4 no star tokens in the risky box – make sure to demonstrate that only
one has 2 stars and the others have nothing). Now I’m going to shuffle these around (shuffle
the 5 token box around).

Q1. How many stars do you get if you pick THIS box (point to sure box). Answer: Yes (No),
1 star, and that equals 1 prize.
Q2. How many stars do you get if you pick THIS box (point to risky box). Answer: Yes
(No), you sometimes get 2 stars, and sometimes NO STARS
Q3. What can you change a star for? Answer: Yes (No), each star equals 1 prize

Ok, I will put your box away and you will choose it out of the big box later. Let’s go to the
next one.

[Round 2] – 4 tokens in big box. I’m going to put this token HERE (put sure token with
1 star in the sure box, face down). I’m going to put these tokens HERE (put 2-star token
plus 3 no star tokens in the risky box – make sure to demonstrate that only one has 2 stars
and the others have nothing). Now I’m going to shuffle these around (shuffle the 4 token box
around).

Q1. How many stars do you get if you pick THIS box (point to sure box). Answer: Yes (No),
1 star, and that equals 1 prize
Q2. How many stars do you get if you pick THIS box (point to risky box). Answer: Yes
(No), you sometimes get 2 stars, and sometimes NO STARS
Q3. What can you change a star for? Answer: Yes (No), each star equals 1 prize. Ok, I will
put your box away and you will choose it out of the big box later. Let’s go to the next one.

[Round 3] – 3 tokens in big box. I’m going to put this token HERE (put sure token with
1 star in the sure box, face down). I’m going to put these tokens HERE (put 2-star token
plus 2 no star tokens in the risky box – make sure to demonstrate that only one has 2 stars
and the others have nothing). Now I’m going to shuffle these around (shuffle the 3 token box
around).

Q1. How many stars do you get if you pick THIS box (point to sure box). Answer: Yes (No),
1 star, and that equals 1 prize
Q2. How many stars do you get if you pick THIS box (point to risky box). Answer: Yes
(No), you sometimes get 2 stars, and sometimes NO STARS
Q3. What can you change a star for? Answer: Yes (No), each star equals 1 prize

Ok, I will put your box away and you will choose it out of the big box later. Let’s go to the
next one. [Round 4] – 2 tokens in big box. I’m going to put this token HERE (put sure token
with 1 star in the sure box, face down). I’m going to put these tokens HERE (put 2-star
token plus 1 no star tokens in the risky box – make sure to demonstrate that only one has


                                             43
2 stars and the others have nothing). Now I’m going to shuffle these around (shuffle the 2
token box around).

Q1. How many stars do you get if you pick THIS box (point to sure box). Answer: Yes (No),
1 star, and that equals 1 prize.
Q2. How many stars do you get if you pick THIS box (point to risky box). Answer: Yes
(No), you sometimes get 2 stars, and sometimes NO STARS
Q3. What can you change a star for? Answer: Yes (No), each star equals 1 prize

Ok, I will put your box away and you will choose it out of the big box later.

Wave 3 (2013)

Now we are going to play some games where you make choices about bouncy balls. First
let me show you one of the spinner wheels we will play with. (Bring out spinner with 1/2
yellow). We will also play with these plates, which are for TODAY. (Bring out yellow and
white plate; yellow plate has 2 balls white 0).

I’ll spin and see what happens. (Spin wheel). Oh, it landed on (yellow/white).

(If it lands on yellow) If the wheel lands on YELLOW like this, that means you will get the
balls on this plate (point to yellow plate 2 balls) OR (If it lands on white) If the wheel lands
on WHITE like this, that means you will NOT get balls like this plate (point to white plate
0 balls)

Let’s try again – this is just for practice. (Spin wheel). Oh it landed on (yellow/white).

Q1: What plate would you get? (Yes/No) You would get this plate – that’s these/no balls
(point)

Let’s try again – this is just for practice. (show one more time).

Q2: What plate would you get?

Ok – are you ready to play for real now? There are going to be 4 (show four on fingers)
games but only 1 game (show one on fingers) will be the one that counts. At the end of all
the games, I will roll a dice (show dice) to decide which game is the game that counts. If you
got balls in that game, you take those home. We don’t know which game will be the one that
counts until later, so when you make your decision in each game, you should pretend that it
is the only game and that it is the one that counts! In each game you will decide whether to
take a FOR SURE plate (bring out plate with 1, put on other side of spinner) or whether to
SPIN. If you choose FOR SURE, then you get this plate, no matter what. We don’t spin the
wheel. But if you choose to SPIN, then we spin (point to wheel).

Let’s start. [1/8] Put out Wheel with 1/8 yellow, FOR SURE plate and 2 / 0 plates.

Q3. If you decide to take the FOR SURE plate, which plate do you point to? (Yes/No) If
you take FOR SURE, you get this plate TODAY

Q4. If you decide to SPIN, you will point to the wheel. Then what happens? (Yes/No) We
spin the wheel, and you might get THIS plate or THIS plate TODAY.

Q5. When I spin the wheel, it could come up on YELLOW or WHITE (point) If it comes up


                                              44
YELLOW, which plate do you get? (Yes/No) You get the plate with 2 balls (point to plate)

Q6. If it comes up WHITE, which plate do you get? (Yes/No) You get the plate with NO
balls (point to plate)

Do you want the FOR SURE plate or do you want me to SPIN? (Accept verbal or pointing
answers) - Mark response

[1/4] Put out Wheel with 1/8 yellow, FOR SURE plate and 2 / 0 plates. Ok, here is the next
game. Now we are going to use this spinner. Do you want the FOR SURE plate or do you
want me to SPIN? - Mark response

[1/2] Repeat -Mark response. [3/4] Repeat - Mark response

Social Preferences (Dictator Games)

Wave 1 (2010)

Now here is the next game! I am going to give you some candies, and you decide how many
to keep and how many to give to Teddy. The candies are for taking home at the end of today.
If you want to give candies to Teddy, you should put them on his plate right here. But if you
want to keep candies, you should put them on your plate.

Q1. Can you tell me which plate is Teddy’s? (That’s right, this is Teddy’s plate. Teddy will
take the candies on his plate home.)
Q2. Can you tell me which plate is yours? (That’s right, this is your plate. You will take the
candies on your plate home.)

Okay, go ahead and put the candies on the plates you want. (set 5 candies in front of child).


Wave 2 (2012)

Now here is the next game! I am going to give you some stickers, and you decide how many
to keep and how many to give to another student who didn’t get to play the game today.
The stickers are for taking home at the end of today. If you want to give stickers to the other
student, you should put them on the other student’s plate right here. But if you want to
keep stickers, you should put them on your plate. The stickers you want to keep for yourself
should go on this plate right here. You can give all, some, or none of your stickers to the
other student, and you can keep none, some, or all of the stickers for yourself.

Q1. Can you tell me which plate is for sending? (That’s right, this is the other student’s
plate. The other student will keep the stickers you put on this plate.)

Q2. Can you tell me which plate is yours? (That’s right, this is your plate. You will take the
stickers on your plate home.)

Okay, go ahead and put the stickers on the plates you want. (set 6 stickers in front of child).

Wave 3 (2013)

Here are some stickers, I am going to put these right here. They are yours now. (Put 6
stickers in a row in front of child, and point to child when saying ‘you’. Also take out one


                                              45
red and one blue plate.)

You are going to decide how many to keep, and how many to send to a boy/girl (match
gender with gender of child) who did not get to play this game today and did not get any
stickers. You don’t know who the other boy/girl is and (s)he won’t know who you are, but
(s)he will get the stickers you send him/her in the bag here. You can keep as many stickers
as you want, and you can send none, some or all of your stickers to the other boy/girl. Any
stickers you are going to keep, you will put them on your plate, here. Any stickers you want
to send to the other boy/girl, you will put them on the other child’s plate, here. At the end
of TODAY, you get to take home the stickers on your plate and the other boy/girl will get
to have the stickers on his/her plate.

Q1. Can you show me which plate is your plate? This is your plate. You take home the
stickers on this plate (point to blue plate) – we’ll put them in your bag for you (show today
bag).
Q2. Can you show me which plate is the other boy’s/girl’s plate? The other boy/girl takes
home the stickers on this plate (point to red plate) – we’ll put them in his/her bag (show
other child’s bag).

Okay, go ahead and decide where to put the stickers, on your plate or on the other boy’s/girl’s
plate. Remember, it is up to you what you decide! (Mark response).

Great job, now I am going to put the stickers from your plate in YOUR BAG and the stickers
from the other child’s plate in HIS or HER bag.




                                              46
                   Online Appendix 2: Sample Development
    Figure A1 provides a description of our overall sample and the analysis sample. CHECC
enrolled 2,185 children ages 3-5 in four cohorts (2010, 2011, 2012 and 2013). Since the
experiments were voluntary, only 854 of the children have experimental data. These children
are used in our factor analysis. Five hundred and one children have disciplinary data because
they are part of the school district (Chicago Heights) that agreed to share data with us.
These are the children in the analysis capturing the association between early life skills and
discipline. Since the experiments were conducted at various points in time of the intervention,
separating our data into baseline and endline time preferences (as is done in the far right
panel of Figure A1) shows that we have generally small numbers of children for whom we
can evaluate the impact of the programs on time preferences.
    The treatments that were part of the CHECC program are described in the bottom panel
of Figure A1. Below, we outline exclusion rules for our analysis. First, we only include the
children for whom we have disciplinary data, and do not use this overall sample. Second,
our analysis of treatment effects uses the Parent Academy (PA), Preschool (PK) and control
group data. We do not report on the treatment effects of the Kinderprep program because
this is a shorter version of the Preschool program and we also do not find significant impacts
of this program (this omits 73 children from the treatment effect analysis). Third, the 2011
cohort recruited an overly large group, and therefore at that time a decision was made to
only actively follow up with a sub-set of these families. We only include this sub-set of
control children in our analysis (this omits 70 additional children from the treatment effect
analysis). Fourth, randomization was done by first creating matched groups of children based
on age, gender and race, and then randomly assigning children from each group to treatment
or control. Children for whom a matched group was not created were placed in the control
group. As such, the regressions of treatment effects control for matched group and we omit
children who do not have a matched group assignment (this omits an additional 129 children).
    Our treatment effect analysis controls for baseline cognitive scores, baseline executive
function scores and baseline time preferences (which are replaced with 0 if missing and in-
clude a dummy variable indicating truly missing values). We further control for the fol-
lowing factors in the treatment analysis: school attending, school year, grade level, year of
randomization into the program, matched group (described above), whether the child was
randomized into the program for two consecutive years, whether the child was at least 4 years
old on September 1 of the year he/she enrolled in our program (which determines what year
he/she left the program), test form (some tests have an A and B version), test maximum
questions (some sub-tests asked more questions as the children got older), and the year from
which the baseline assessment is taken (sometimes we have baseline scores up to a year prior
to the randomization). When demographic controls are used, we control for gender, race,
home language, age at test date, mother’s age at child birth and child’s birth weight. There
are roughly 6,900 children from grades K to 8 in the Chicago Heights school district. One
potential source of bias would be if the children for whom we have experimental and skill data
are different in terms of misbehavior from the other children enrolled in the school district.
Children for whom we do not have disciplinary referral data either never lived within the
Chicago Heights School District (CHECC enrolled students from a number of districts in the
area) or lived within the district but moved out prior to starting Kindergarten.




                                              47
                                                      Figure A1: Sample Development


CHECC Study
N=2,185




                                                                                                               2010        Baseline            Endline
Have time, risk &
                                                                                                                           Time Prefs          Time Prefs
social preferences
                                                                                                                           N=88                N=44
(experimental) data
                                                                                     Have discipline
N=854
                                                                                     data (from SD 170)
                                    Factor Analysis                                  N=501                                 Baseline            Endline
                                                                Treatment                                      2011
                                                                                                                           Time Prefs          Time Prefs
                                                                Effect
                                                                                                                           N=4                 N=44
                                                                Analysis             Have experimental
                                                                                     and discipline data
                                                                                     N=376                                 Baseline            Endline
                                                                                                               2012
                                                                                                                           Time Prefs          Time Prefs
                                                                                                                           N=1                 N=26


                                                                                                                           Baseline            Endline
                                                                                                               2013        Time Prefs          Time Prefs
                                                                                                                           N=27                N=0


                                                                                                                           Used as time
                                                                                                                                               Sub-sample of
                                                                                                                         preference control
                                                                                                                                              children used in
                                                                                                                          in table 6 with
                                                                                                                                              Appendix Table
                                                                                                                           missing values
                                                                                                                                                    A15
                                                                                                                           dummied out




    PA College        PA-Cash   PK-Literacy     PK-Tools                                     Control**
                                                               PK-CogX       Kinderprep*
    N=166             N=150     N=133           N=136          N=263         N=205           N=1,132




           Any PA                                      Any PK

           N=316                                       N=737


                 Note: * Kinderprep is excluded from the treatment effect analysis. **In 2011, a randomly selected sub-set of the control
                 group is used in the treatment effect analysis




                                                                            48
                                           Online Appendix 3: Additional Analysis


                                            Figure A2: Economic Preference Experiments


                             Risk Preferences                                                          Time Preferences
                         Percent of Safe Decisions                                                Percent of Patient Decisions
                                    (a)                                                                       (b)




                                                                                             50
              50




                                                                                             40
              40




                                                                                             30
              30
   Percent




                                                                                   Percent
                                                                                             20
              20




                                                                                             10
              10
              0




                                                                                             0



                   All      Boys   Girls      Black   Hispanic   Non-Black/                       All    Boys   Girls   Black   Hispanic   Non-Black/
                                                                  Non-Hisp                                                                  Non-Hisp



             Marshmallow Task                                                                            Social Preferences
Percent who Ate Marshmallow Before 5 Minutes                                                            Percent who Shared
                    (c)                                                                                          (d)
                                                                                             50
              50




                                                                                             40
              40




                                                                                             30
              30




                                                                                   Percent
    Percent




                                                                                             20
              20




                                                                                             10
              10
              0




                                                                                             0




                   All      Boys   Girls      Black   Hispanic   Non-Black/                       All    Boys   Girls   Black   Hispanic   Non-Black/
                                                                  Non-Hisp                                                                  Non-Hisp




              Note: This figure shows decisions in the economic experiments by gender and race of the child. (a) is
              the percent safe decisions in the risk experiment, (b) is the percent of patient decision in the time
              experiment, (c) is the percent of children who ate the marshmallow within 5 minutes in the
              marshmallow experiment and (d) is the percent who shared in the dictator experiment.




                                                                              49
Table A1: Balance Tests of Differences in Disciplinary Referrals Comparing Children
With and Without Experimental Data. Reporting Test Statistic for Each Academic
Year of Data.

                    Panel A: Number of Disciplinary Referrals
                    Academic Year t-test         p-value
                        2011        1.00          0.32
                        2012       -0.15          0.88
                        2013       -0.25          0.80
                        2014        0.58          0.57
                        2015       -1.43          0.15
                        2016       -0.29          0.78
                        2017       -0.61          0.54

                    Panel B: Received a Disciplinary Referral
                    Academic Year t-test         p-value
                        2011         1.00          0.32
                        2012         0.23          0.82
                        2013        -0.45          0.65
                        2014         0.84          0.40
                        2015         1.02          0.31
                        2016         0.90          0.37
                        2017         0.74          0.46

                    Panel C: Severity of Disciplinary Referral
                    Academic Year t-test          p-value
                        2011         -1.11          0.27
                        2012         -0.31          0.76
                        2013         0.65           0.52
                        2014         -0.66          0.51
                        2015         -0.79          0.43
                        2016         -0.98          0.33
                        2017         -1.10          0.27
                   Notes: This table reports p-values of t-tests comparing
                   children with and without experimental data on dis-
                   ciplinary referrals by school year. Panel A reports p-
                   values with respect to number of disciplinary referrals.
                   Panel B reports p-values with respect to a binary vari-
                   able indicating if a child has received at least one disci-
                   plinary referral in the school year and Panel C reports
                   p-values with respect to the severity of the disciplinary
                   referral as rated by independent coders.




                                              50
Table A2: Description of Full Sample and Subsample with Disciplinary Referrals

                                                          Full Sample       Sub-Sample
     Variable                                              Mean/SD           Mean/SD
     Male (%)                                                 47.85             51.60

     Age of Child at Experiment (Months)                      45.79            45.66
                                                              (7.72)           (7.71)
     Black (%)                                                37.05            21.54

     Hispanic (%)                                             39.95             59.57

     Birthweight (Lbs)                                         7.14             7.21
                                                              (1.26)           (1.30)
     Mother’s Age at First Pregnancy (Years)                  23.02            21.35
                                                              (5.80)           (4.90)
     Mother’s Education
      Did Not Complete High School (%)                        23.57             39.41

        High School (%)                                       23.70             35.00

        Some College (%)                                      42.59             34.12

        Bachelor’s (%)                                        13.18             6.18

        Master’s Degree and Above (%)                          8.49             2.94

     Household Income (Yearly, $)                           28,875.32        20,909.63
                                                           (22,037.10)      (14,835.73)
     Number of Observations                                    854              376
    Notes: This table reports the summary statistics for the full sample, i.e the sample for
    which we have the experimental, cognitive and executive function data and the sub-
    sample, i.e the sample that attended Chicago Heights School District, and therefore
    for whom we have disciplinary data. Standard deviation reported in parenthesis for
    continuous variables.




                                              51
Table A3: Cognitive Skills, Executive Function and Economic Preferences - Subsample
with Disciplinary Referrals

 Cognitive Skills                                         Percentile Score               SD

   Letter and Word Recognition (WJ-III)                          32.65                  26.82
   Writing Skills (WJ-III)                                       31.53                  27.19
   Math - Applied Problems (WJ-III)                              35.25                  23.56
   Math - Quantitative Concepts (WJ-III)                         42.85                  22.79
   Receptive Vocabulary (PPVT-III)                               26.84                  23.74

 Executive Functions                                      Percent Correct                SD

   Attention (PSRA Assessment)                                   71.60                  26.14
   Emotion Regulation (PSRA Assessment)                          57.67                  24.35
   Working Memory (Blair & Willoughby)                           31.24                  30.68
   Inhibitory Control (Blair & Willoughby)                       64.51                  27.06

 Economic Preferences                                         Decisions                  SD

   Time Preferences (% Patient Decisions)                        35.35                  34.20
   Risk Preferences (% Safe Decisions)                           43.36                  33.73
   Social Preferences (% Shared)                                 31.43                  27.19
   Delay of Gratification (% Ate Marshmallow)                    44.51                  48.46
 Note: Cognitive measures are reported as percentile of age distribution. Executive function measures
 are reported as percent correct relative to total possible score. This table reports the data for the
 sub-sample for whom we have disciplinary data (N=376).




                                                52
                            Table A4: Factor Loadings after Oblique Rotation

Variable                                                             Factor 1     Factor 2    Factor 3    Factor 4

                                           Cognitive Skills

Letter/Word Recognition (WJ-III Letter-Word Test)                       0.76        -0.08       -0.13        0.13
Writing Skills (WJ-III Spelling Test)                                   0.59        0.20        -0.03        0.17
Woodcock-Johnston (Applied Prob.)                                       0.68        0.27        -0.04       -0.10
Woodcock-Johnston (Quantitative)                                        0.85        -0.13        0.07       -0.09
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (Receptive Vocabulary)                  0.59        0.19        0.09        -0.22

                                        Executive Functions

Preschool Self-Regulation Assessment (Attention)                        0.08        0.78        0.08        0.11
Preschool Self-Regulation Assessment (Emotion)                          0.17        0.55        -0.02       0.16
Blair & Willoughby Assessment (Working Memory)                         -0.08        0.75        -0.06       0.03
Blair & Willoughby Assessment (Inhibitory Control)                      0.00        0.77        -0.05       -0.09

                                       Economic Preferences

Percent    of Patient Decisions                                        -0.08         0.01       0.80        -0.15
Percent    of Safe Decisions                                           -0.09        0.09        -0.04       0.79
Percent    Shared                                                       0.12        -0.05       0.61        0.40
Mischel    Marshmallow Task (Ate Within 5 Min)                          0.14        -0.40       -0.12        0.30
Notes: Factor loadings based on the exploratory factor analysis with direct quartimin rotation (Jennrich and Samp-
son, 1966) are shown. Factor loadings relating factors to corresponding potential dedicated measures are in bold.
Based on 740 observations.




                                                        53
               Table A5: Likelihood, Severity and Number of Disciplinary Referrals

                                           (1)         (2)       (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)
                                           0-1         0-1     Severity    Severity    Number       Number


Percent of Patient Decisions [0,1]        -0.07*    -0.07**      -0.61*      -0.62*    -0.90***     -0.85***
                                          (0.04)     (0.03)      (0.36)      (0.33)      (0.34)       (0.31)
Percent of Safe Decisions [0,1]            -0.04      -0.04       -0.36       -0.42       -0.15        -0.29
                                          (0.04)     (0.03)      (0.36)      (0.32)      (0.38)       (0.33)
Percent Shared [0,1]                        0.01       0.00        0.10        0.06       -0.05        -0.17
                                          (0.04)     (0.04)      (0.42)      (0.37)      (0.39)       (0.35)
Ate Marshmallow Before 5 Mins               0.01       0.00       0.15         0.02        0.31         0.17
                                          (0.02)     (0.02)      (0.22)      (0.22)      (0.22)       (0.21)
Executive Function Index                  -0.02*    -0.02**      -0.20*     -0.21**      -0.19*     -0.23***
                                          (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.10)      (0.09)      (0.10)       (0.09)
Cognitive Index                            -0.01      -0.01       -0.10       -0.09       -0.07        -0.12
                                          (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.15)      (0.13)      (0.15)       (0.14)
Male (d)                                 0.11***    0.11***     1.05***     1.00***     1.12***      1.10***
                                          (0.02)     (0.02)      (0.22)      (0.20)      (0.23)       (0.20)
Age at Experiment                           0.00       0.00     0.03**      0.03**       0.03**      0.03**
                                          (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.02)      (0.01)      (0.02)       (0.01)
Black (d)                                  0.09*     0.12**     1.01***     1.14***     1.11***      1.30***
                                          (0.05)     (0.05)      (0.35)      (0.31)      (0.33)       (0.30)
Hispanic (d)                               -0.01       0.01        0.17        0.31        0.11         0.29
                                          (0.03)     (0.03)      (0.31)      (0.26)      (0.30)       (0.27)
Observations                               1265       1554        1313        1616        1317         1620
R2                                          0.14      0.13         0.10        0.09        0.12         0.12
Number of Children                          313        369         318         375         318          375
Note: Individual-level clustered standard errors in parentheses. Controls for year, school, grade, and year of
experiment included, but not shown. Columns (2) and (4) replace missing experimental data with mean values
and add dummies for each missing experimental measure. (d) for discrete change of dummy variable from 0 to
1. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.010




                                                     54
                           Table A6: Likelihood of Disciplinary Referrals - Disaggregated Economic Preference Measures

                                                 (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)          (5)       (6)    (7)        (8)     (9)          (10)
                                                                  Available data                    Completed data (accounting for item non-response)
     Percent of patient decisions [0,1]        -0.08**                                              -0.08**
                                                (0.03)                                               (0.03)
     Percent of safe decisions [0,1]                        -0.03                                             -0.03
                                                           (0.04)                                            (0.04)
     Percent shared [0,1]                                              -0.00                                            -0.00
                                                                      (0.04)                                           (0.04)
     Ate marshmallow before 5min                                                  0.00                                           -0.00
                                                                                 (0.02)                                         (0.02)
     Average of experimental measures                                                        -0.11*                                          -0.10*
                                                                                             (0.06)                                          (0.06)
     Executive function index                  -0.02**    -0.02**     -0.02*       -0.02      -0.02 -0.02** -0.02** -0.02** -0.02**         -0.02**
55




                                                (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.01)     (0.01)  (0.01)  (0.01)    (0.01)   (0.01)       (0.01)
     Cognitive index                             -0.01      -0.00      -0.01       -0.01      -0.01   -0.01   -0.01     -0.01    -0.01        -0.01
                                                (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.01)     (0.01)  (0.01)  (0.01)    (0.01)   (0.01)       (0.01)
     Male (d)                                  0.10***    0.11***    0.11***     0.11***    0.11*** 0.11*** 0.11*** 0.11*** 0.11***        0.11***
                                                (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.02)      (0.02)     (0.02)  (0.02)  (0.02)    (0.02)   (0.02)       (0.02)
     Age at experiment                           0.00      0.00*       0.00       0.00*        0.00    0.00  0.00*     0.00*     0.00*        0.00*
                                                (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)     (0.00)  (0.00)  (0.00)    (0.00)   (0.00)       (0.00)
     Black (d)                                 0.09**      0.10**    0.11**       0.11**      0.09*  0.11** 0.13*** 0.13*** 0.13***        0.12***
                                                (0.04)     (0.05)     (0.05)      (0.05)     (0.05)  (0.05)  (0.05)    (0.05)   (0.05)       (0.05)
     Hispanic (d)                                -0.00      -0.01       0.00       -0.01      -0.01    0.01    0.01      0.01     0.01        0.02
                                                (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)      (0.03)     (0.03)  (0.03)  (0.03)    (0.03)   (0.03)       (0.03)
     Observations                                1418       1425       1456        1384       1265    1554    1554      1554     1554         1554
     R2                                          0.12        0.12       0.12       0.13        0.13    0.12    0.12      0.12     0.12        0.13
     Number of children                           342        342        351         338        313     369     369       369      369          369
     Note: Individual-level clustered standard errors in parentheses. Controls for year, school, grade, and year of experiment included, but not shown. Columns
     (6)-(10) replace missing experimental data with mean values and add dummies for each missing experimental measure. (d) for discrete change of dummy
     variable from 0 to 1. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.010.
                             Table A7: Severity of Disciplinary Referrals - Disaggregated Economic Preference Measures

                                                  (1)        (2)         (3)      (4)          (5)        (6)      (7)       (8)       (9)        (10)
                                                                   Available data                       Completed data (accounting for item non-response)

     Percent of patient decisions [0,1]        -0.73**                                                   -0.71**
                                                (0.33)                                                    (0.32)
     Percent of safe decisions [0,1]                         -0.34                                                    -0.34
                                                            (0.34)                                                   (0.34)
     Percent shared [0,1]                                               0.04                                                      0.01
                                                                       (0.37)                                                    (0.38)
     Ate marshmallow before 5min                                                   0.03                                                      -0.04
                                                                                  (0.23)                                                    (0.22)
     Average of experimental measures                                                         -0.97*                                                       -0.84
                                                                                              (0.58)                                                      (0.54)
56




     Executive function index                  -0.24*** -0.23**        -0.18*     -0.17*      -0.18* -0.23***       -0.20**     -0.22**    -0.22**       -0.20**
                                                 (0.09)  (0.09)        (0.09)     (0.10)      (0.10)  (0.09)         (0.09)      (0.09)     (0.09)        (0.09)
     Cognitive index                              -0.07   -0.04         -0.10      -0.10       -0.09   -0.08          -0.08       -0.06      -0.06         -0.07
                                                 (0.13)  (0.12)        (0.13)     (0.13)      (0.14)  (0.12)         (0.12)      (0.12)     (0.12)        (0.12)
     Male                                       0.97*** 1.00***       1.07***    1.04***     1.08*** 1.00***        0.98***     0.99***    0.99***       1.03***
                                                 (0.21)  (0.21)        (0.20)     (0.21)      (0.22)  (0.20)         (0.19)      (0.20)     (0.20)        (0.20)
     Age at experiment                           0.03**  0.03**       0.03**      0.03**     0.04**   0.03**         0.03**      0.03**    0.03**         0.03**
                                                 (0.02)  (0.01)        (0.01)     (0.02)      (0.02)  (0.01)         (0.01)      (0.01)     (0.01)        (0.01)
     Black                                      1.04*** 1.08***       1.10***    1.09***     1.03*** 1.10***        1.16***     1.17***    1.17***       1.17***
                                                 (0.34)  (0.32)        (0.31)     (0.32)      (0.35)  (0.31)         (0.31)      (0.31)     (0.30)        (0.30)
     Hispanic                                      0.18    0.13         0.23        0.17        0.16   0.27            0.27       0.29        0.29          0.34
                                                 (0.29)  (0.28)        (0.28)     (0.29)      (0.31)  (0.27)         (0.27)      (0.27)     (0.27)        (0.27)
     Observations                                 1477    1484          1509       1434        1313    1616           1616        1616       1616          1616
     R2                                            0.09   0.09           0.09       0.09       0.10    0.09            0.09        0.09      0.09           0.09
     Number of children                            348     348           356        343         318     375            375         375        375           375
     Note: Individual-level clustered standard errors in parentheses. Controls for year, school, grade, and year of experiment included, but not shown. Columns
     (6)-(10) replace missing experimental data with mean values and add dummies for each missing experimental measure. (d) for discrete change of dummy
     variable from 0 to 1. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.010.
                            Table A8: Number of Disciplinary Referrals - Disaggregated Economic Preference Measures

                                                  (1)        (2)         (3)      (4)          (5)        (6)      (7)       (8)       (9)        (10)
                                                                   Available data                       Completed data (accounting for item non-response)

     Percent of patient decisions [0,1]        -0.97***                                                 -0.93***
                                                (0.31)                                                   (0.31)
     Percent of safe decisions [0,1]                         -0.17                                                    -0.19
                                                            (0.33)                                                   (0.32)
     Percent shared [0,1]                                               -0.28                                                     -0.32
                                                                       (0.35)                                                    (0.36)
     Ate marshmallow before 5min                                                   0.14                                                      0.10
                                                                                  (0.21)                                                    (0.21)
     Average of experimental measures                                              -1.40**                                                               -1.33**
                                                                                    (0.60)                                                                (0.55)
57




     Executive function index                  -0.21**     -0.22** -0.19** -0.21**   -0.16 -0.25*** -0.23** -0.23** -0.24***                             -0.22**
                                                (0.09)      (0.10)  (0.10)  (0.10)  (0.11)  (0.09)   (0.09)  (0.09)  (0.09)                               (0.09)
     Cognitive index                             -0.11       -0.04   -0.10   -0.06   -0.04   -0.13    -0.08   -0.08   -0.08                                -0.10
                                                (0.14)      (0.15)  (0.14)  (0.15)  (0.15)  (0.14)   (0.14)  (0.14)  (0.14)                               (0.14)
     Male                                      1.06***     1.12*** 1.21*** 1.17*** 1.10*** 1.13*** 1.13*** 1.14*** 1.15***                               1.10***
                                                (0.21)      (0.21)  (0.20)  (0.21)  (0.22)  (0.20)   (0.20)  (0.20)  (0.20)                               (0.20)
     Age at experiment                          0.03*      0.03** 0.03** 0.04** 0.03**      0.03** 0.03*** 0.04*** 0.04***                                0.03**
                                                (0.01)      (0.01)  (0.01)  (0.01)  (0.02)  (0.01)   (0.01)  (0.01)  (0.01)                               (0.01)
     Black                                     1.10***     1.13*** 1.21*** 1.26*** 1.13*** 1.24*** 1.29*** 1.28*** 1.32***                               1.35***
                                                (0.32)      (0.31)  (0.31)  (0.31)  (0.32)  (0.31)   (0.31)  (0.30)  (0.31)                               (0.30)
     Hispanic                                     0.11        0.08   0.15     0.15    0.05   0.24     0.23    0.22     0.26                                 0.31
                                                (0.29)      (0.30)  (0.28)  (0.29)  (0.30)  (0.27)   (0.29)  (0.28)  (0.28)                               (0.27)
     Observations                                1481        1488    1513    1438    1317    1620     1620    1620    1620                                 1620
     R2                                           0.11       0.11     0.11    0.11   0.12    0.11     0.11     0.11    0.11                                 0.12
     Number of children                           348         348     356     343     318     375      375     375     375                                  375
     Note: Individual-level clustered standard errors in parentheses. Controls for year, school, grade, and year of experiment included, but not shown. Columns
     (6)-(10) replace missing experimental data with mean values and add dummies for each missing experimental measure. (d) for discrete change of dummy
     variable from 0 to 1. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.010.
     Table A9: Likelihood, Severity and Number of Disciplinary Referrals - Additional
     Controls

                                          (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)
                                          0-1        0-1      Severity    Severity    Number       Number

Percent of patient decisions [0,1]      -0.07**    -0.07**      -0.61       -0.63* -0.93***        -0.85***
                                         (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.37)       (0.34)  (0.33)           (0.31)
Percent of safe decisions [0,1]           -0.03      -0.04      -0.26        -0.42   -0.10            -0.23
                                         (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.33)       (0.30)  (0.36)           (0.32)
Percent shared [0,1]                       0.02      0.02        0.22         0.25   0.18             0.06
                                         (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.40)       (0.36)  (0.41)           (0.35)
Ate marshmallow before 5min               0.01       -0.00       0.09        -0.03   0.31             0.16
                                         (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.24)       (0.23)  (0.22)           (0.21)
Executive function index                -0.02**    -0.02**    -0.23**     -0.24*** -0.24**         -0.27***
                                         (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.11)       (0.09)  (0.10)           (0.09)
Cognitive index                           -0.00      -0.01      -0.04        -0.04    0.01            -0.05
                                         (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.15)       (0.13)  (0.14)           (0.13)
Male (d)                                0.11***    0.11***    1.09***      1.04*** 1.09***          1.09***
                                         (0.02)     (0.02)     (0.21)       (0.20)  (0.22)           (0.20)
Age at experiment                          0.00     0.00*      0.04**      0.03**   0.04**          0.03**
                                         (0.00)     (0.00)     (0.02)       (0.01)  (0.02)           (0.01)
Black (d)                                0.08*      0.10**    1.01***      1.05*** 1.09***          1.14***
                                         (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.35)       (0.32)  (0.34)           (0.31)
Hispanic (d)                              -0.00       0.01       0.15         0.28    0.11             0.23
                                         (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.30)       (0.27)  (0.31)           (0.28)
Observations                              1265       1554       1313         1616    1317             1620
R2                                        0.17       0.16        0.12         0.11    0.14             0.14
Number of children                         313        369        318          375     318              375
Note: Individual-level clustered standard errors in parentheses. Controls for year, school, grade, and year of
experiment included, but not shown. Columns (2) and (4) replace missing experimental data with mean values
and add dummies for each missing experimental measure. Additional controls are birth weight, age of mother at
first birth, mother’s education, household income and variable dummies accounting for item non-response. (d)
for discrete change of dummy variable from 0 to 1. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.010.




                                                     58
                   Table A10: Likelihood, Severity and Number of Disciplinary referrals

                                                   (1)         (2)       (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)
                                                   0-1         0-1     Severity     Severity    Number      Number

Average of time and social preferences            -0.08      -0.08*       -0.67       -0.64     -1.14**     -1.13***
                                                 (0.05)      (0.05)      (0.49)      (0.45)      (0.44)       (0.41)
Percent of safe decisions [0,1]                   -0.03       -0.04       -0.35       -0.46       -0.09        -0.30
                                                 (0.04)      (0.03)      (0.34)      (0.32)      (0.36)       (0.33)
Executive function index                         -0.02*      -0.02*     -0.20**     -0.19**      -0.17*      -0.21**
                                                 (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.10)      (0.09)      (0.10)       (0.09)
Cognitive index                                   -0.01       -0.01       -0.08       -0.08       -0.07        -0.11
                                                 (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.14)      (0.12)      (0.15)       (0.14)
Male (d)                                        0.11***     0.10***     1.04***     0.99***     1.14***      1.09***
                                                 (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.21)      (0.19)      (0.22)       (0.20)
Age at experiment                                  0.00        0.00      0.03*      0.03**       0.03*        0.03**
                                                 (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.02)      (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.01)
Black (d)                                         0.08*      0.12**     0.97***     1.13***     1.00***      1.26***
                                                 (0.04)      (0.05)      (0.34)      (0.31)      (0.32)       (0.30)
Hispanic (d)                                      -0.02        0.01        0.09        0.28       -0.00         0.24
                                                 (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.30)      (0.26)      (0.30)       (0.28)
Observations                                      1310        1554        1360        1616        1364         1620
R2                                                 0.12        0.13        0.09        0.09        0.11         0.12
Number of children                                 322         369         327         375         327          375
Note: Individual-level clustered standard errors in parentheses. Controls for year, school, grade, and year of exper-
iment included, but not shown. Columns (2) and (4) replace missing experimental data with mean values and add
dummies for each missing experimental measure. (d) for discrete change of dummy variable from 0 to 1. * p<0.10,
** p<0.05, *** p<0.010




                                                          59
            Table A11: Likelihood, Severity and Number of Disciplinary Referrals - Disaggregated
            Cognitive and Executive Functions Measures

                                                             (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)      (5)    (6)
                                                             0-1        0-1     Severity Severity Number Number

Percent of patient decisions [0,1]                 -0.06* -0.07** -0.54      -0.63* -0.74** -0.75**
                                                   (0.03)  (0.03)   (0.37)   (0.34)   (0.34)   (0.33)
Percent of safe decisions [0,1]                     -0.03   -0.04    -0.34    -0.51    -0.05    -0.25
                                                   (0.04)  (0.03)   (0.36)   (0.32)   (0.39)   (0.33)
Percent shared [0,1]                                 0.02    0.02     0.20     0.23     0.07     0.02
                                                   (0.04)  (0.04)   (0.38)   (0.34)   (0.39)   (0.34)
Ate marshmallow before 5min                          0.01   -0.00     0.14     0.01     0.37     0.18
                                                   (0.02)  (0.02)   (0.26)   (0.23)   (0.23)   (0.21)
Letter/word recognition (WJ-III letter-word test) 0.00*** 0.00* 0.01*** 0.01**          0.01     0.00
                                                   (0.00)  (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.00)
Spelling (WJ-III spelling test)                     -0.00   -0.00    -0.00    -0.00     0.00     0.00
                                                   (0.00)  (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.00)
Woodcock-Johnston (applied prob.)                   -0.00   -0.00    -0.01    -0.01    -0.01    -0.01
                                                   (0.00)  (0.00)   (0.01)   (0.01)   (0.01)   (0.01)
Peabody Picture Vocabulary test                     -0.00   -0.00    -0.00    -0.00    -0.00     0.00
                                                   (0.00)  (0.00)   (0.01)   (0.01)   (0.00)   (0.00)
Woodcock-Johnston (quantitative)                    -0.00   -0.00    -0.01    -0.00    -0.00    -0.00
                                                   (0.00)  (0.00)   (0.01)   (0.01)   (0.01)   (0.01)
Preschool self-regulation assessment (attention) -0.14*** -0.14*** -1.38*** -1.27*** -1.98*** -1.83***
                                                   (0.05)  (0.05)   (0.50)   (0.44)   (0.52)   (0.45)
Preschool self-regulation assessment (emotion)     0.11*    0.09*     0.74     0.63     0.54     0.32
                                                   (0.06)  (0.05)   (0.61)   (0.49)   (0.55)   (0.45)
Operation span                                      -0.03   -0.05    -0.11    -0.36     0.27     0.21
                                                   (0.04)  (0.04)   (0.41)   (0.37)   (0.41)   (0.38)
Arrows task                                         0.04    0.03      0.20     0.18     0.73     0.49
                                                   (0.04)  (0.04)   (0.49)   (0.41)   (0.52)   (0.39)
Male (d)                                          0.10*** 0.10*** 1.02*** 0.99*** 1.07*** 1.06***
                                                   (0.02)  (0.02)   (0.20)   (0.20)   (0.21)   (0.20)
Age at experiment                                    0.00    0.00     0.03    0.03*     0.02    0.02*
                                                   (0.00)  (0.00)   (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.01)
Black (d)                                            0.04    0.07    0.68* 0.83*** 0.85*** 0.94***
                                                   (0.04)  (0.04)   (0.36)   (0.32)   (0.32)   (0.30)
Hispanic (d)                                        -0.01    0.01     0.07     0.24     0.03     0.16
                                                   (0.03)  (0.03)   (0.29)   (0.26)   (0.29)   (0.27)
Observations                                        1265    1554     1313     1616     1317     1620
R2                                                   0.18    0.17    0.13      0.12     0.15     0.14
Number of children                                   313     369      318      375      318      375
Note: Individual-level clustered standard errors in parentheses. Controls for year, school, grade, and year of experiment
included, but not shown. Columns (2) and (4) replace missing experimental data with mean values and add dummies for
each missing experimental measure. (d) for discrete change of dummy variable from 0 to 1. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.010

                                                            60
          Table A12: Average Treatment Effects on Number of Disciplinary Referrals

                                                    (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)
                                                  Number      Number       Number       Number      Number

 PK                                                 -0.08       -0.05         -0.24       0.01         -0.31
                                                   (0.23)      (0.24)        (0.24)      (0.23)       (0.47)
 PA                                                -0.38*       -0.36       -0.56**     -0.50**        -0.22
                                                   (0.23)      (0.23)        (0.22)      (0.22)       (0.51)
 Cognitive Baseline                                 -0.14       -0.17       -0.32**       -0.10         0.02
                                                   (0.13)      (0.14)        (0.14)      (0.13)       (0.28)
 Executive Function Baseline                       -0.19*      -0.20*         -0.04       -0.10       0.39*
                                                   (0.11)      (0.11)        (0.11)      (0.12)       (0.23)
 Baseline Time Preferences                          -0.17       -0.17        -0.26*       -0.16        -0.21
                                                   (0.15)      (0.16)        (0.15)      (0.15)       (0.37)
 Cognitive End Year                                              0.04      0.37***
                                                               (0.13)        (0.14)
 Executive Function End Year                                               -0.63***
                                                                             (0.11)
 Cognitive End Kindergarten                                                              -0.18
                                                                                        (0.15)
 Executive Function End Kindergarten                                                   -0.47***
                                                                                        (0.14)
 Endline Time Preferences                                                                           -0.79***
                                                                                                     (0.16)
 Observations                                      2318         2318        2318         2318          575
 R2                                                0.127        0.127       0.142        0.137        0.235
 Number of children                                 501          501         501          501          124
Notes: This table reports treatment effects on disciplinary behavior, clustered by individual using number
of disciplinary referrals in a school year as the outcome variable. Columns 4 uses the same specification as
column 1 but adds cognitive and executive function scores 1 year after treatment. Column 1-4 control for
cognitive baseline scores and executive function baseline scores, baseline time preferences (with missing values
replaced as 0 and including a dummy indicating if they are truly missing) gender, race, age at test date,
matched pair grouping, baseline test form, year of randomization, an indicator for aged above or below 4 at
randomization, mother age at child birth and birthweight and an indicator if the pretest is from a previous
year. Columns 3 and 4 omit endline executive function subtest form dummies due to collinearity. Column
5 omits baseline executive function subtest forms controls, indicator for aged above 4 at randomization and
previous year pretest indicator to avoid collinearity due to small number of observations. p<0.10, ** p<0.05,
*** p<0.010




                                                      61
Table A13: Average Treatment Effects on Skills - Disaggregated Treatment Arms

                         (1)                     (2)                     (3)
                   Cognitive Score      Non-Cognitive Score        Time Preference
   PA-Cash             0.24∗                    0.09                    -0.49
                       (0.14)                 (0.19)                   (0.38)
   PA-College           0.03                   -0.03                    -0.17
                       (0.15)                 (0.20)                   (0.36)
   PK-Tools            0.26∗                  0.34∗                     -0.07
                       (0.15)                 (0.20)                   (0.38)
   PK-Lit             0.47∗∗∗                   0.14                   -0.82∗
                       (0.16)                 (0.21)                   (0.44)
   Cog-X               0.30∗                    0.13                    0.78∗
                       (0.16)                 (0.21)                   (0.40)
   R2                   0.78                    0.67                     0.32
   N                    376                     376                      152
  Notes: This table reports disaggregated treatment effects on skills. PA Cash is the
  treatment arm where parents were randomized to receive part of the incentives as
  cash whereas PA College is the treatment arm where they would receive part of the
  incentives as a deposit in the child’s post-secondary education account. PK Tools
  is the treatment arm under Preschool treatment where children received the Tools
  of the Mind curriculum and PK Lit is where children received the Literacy Express
  Curriculum. Cog-X is the treatment arm under Preschool treatment focused on cog-
  nitive and non-cognitive skills with a parent involvement component. Column 1 uses
  cognitive score at the end of the treatment year as the outcome (calculated as the
  mean of the standardized values of each of the subtests). Column 2 uses Executive
  Function score at the end of the treatment year, and Column 3 uses time preferences
  measured after treatment (measured as proportion of patient decisions). Regressions
  control for cognitive baseline scores and Executive Function baseline scores, gender,
  race, home language, age at test date, matched pair grouping, test form, number of
  previous assessments, year of randomization, an indicator for aged above or below 4
  at randomization, mother age at child birth, birthweight, assessor and an indicator if
  the pretest is from a previous year. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.010




                                              62
  Table A14: Average Treatment Effects on Propensity to Have Disciplinary Referrals
  and Severity of Referrals - Disaggregated Treatment Arms

                                         (1)       (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)
                                         0-1       0-1         0-1      Severity     Severity    Severity

 PA-Cash                               -0.29*    -0.25*     -0.31**      -0.48*        -0.40      -0.50*
                                       (0.15)    (0.15)      (0.15)      (0.26)       (0.27)      (0.27)
 PA-College                             -0.19     -0.18      -0.29*       -0.37        -0.37      -0.57*
                                       (0.17)    (0.16)      (0.17)      (0.31)       (0.30)      (0.31)
 PK-Tools                               -0.13     -0.09       -0.13       -0.19        -0.14       -0.22
                                       (0.18)    (0.18)      (0.19)      (0.33)       (0.33)      (0.34)
 PK-Lit                                 -0.03      0.02       -0.11       -0.12        -0.05       -0.27
                                       (0.17)    (0.18)      (0.18)      (0.30)       (0.31)      (0.33)
 Cog-X                                  -0.27     -0.23       -0.27       -0.38        -0.30       -0.36
                                       (0.21)    (0.21)      (0.22)      (0.40)       (0.40)      (0.42)
 Cognitive Baseline                     -0.05     -0.05       -0.09       -0.10        -0.11       -0.16
                                       (0.07)    (0.08)      (0.08)      (0.15)       (0.16)      (0.16)
 Executive Function Baseline            -0.10     -0.10       -0.03       -0.15        -0.16       -0.05
                                       (0.06)    (0.07)      (0.07)      (0.12)       (0.12)      (0.12)
 Baseline Time Preferences              -0.07     -0.08       -0.11       -0.06        -0.09       -0.16
                                       (0.09)    (0.09)      (0.09)      (0.17)       (0.17)      (0.17)
 Cognitive End Year                               -0.00        0.12                     0.01        0.20
                                                 (0.09)      (0.09)                   (0.16)      (0.16)
 Executive Function End Year                               -0.29***                              -0.47***
                                                             (0.07)                               (0.13)
 Observations                           2264      2264        2264        2313        2313         2313
 R2                                     0.167     0.170       0.185       0.104       0.105        0.113
 Number of children                      486       486         486         501         501          501
Notes: This table reports disaggregated treatment effects on disciplinary referrals. PA Cash is the treatment
arm where parents were randomized to receive part of the incentives as cash whereas PA College is the
treatment arm where they would receive part of the incentives as a deposit in the child’s post-secondary
education account. PK Tools is the treatment arm under Preschool treatment where children received the
Tools of the Mind curriculum and PK Lit is where children received the Literacy Express Curriculum.
Cog-X is the treatment arm under Preschool treatment focused on cognitive and non-cognitive skills with
a parent involvement component. Column 1, 2 and 3 use a binary variable as the outcome indicating
whether the child has had at least one disciplinary referral. Columns 4, 5 and 6 use the severity (rated
by independent coders) of the disciplinary referral as the outcome variable. All regressions control for
cognitive baseline scores and Executive Function baseline scores, gender, race, age at test date, matched
pair grouping, test form, year of randomization, an indicator for aged above or below 4 at randomization,
mother age at child birth, birthweight, assessor and an indicator if the pretest is from a previous year.
p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.010




                                                    63
    Table A15: Average Treatment Effects on Propensity to Have Disciplinary Referrals
    and Severity of Referrals - Endline Time Preferences

                                            (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)           (6)
                                            0-1          0-1          0-1       Severity     Severity      Severity

 PK                                         -0.53        0.00         -0.45   -0.83     0.31                 -0.44
                                           (0.35)      (0.30)        (0.33)  (0.61)   (0.57)                (0.56)
 PA                                         -0.22       -0.15         -0.18   -0.52    -0.20                 -0.27
                                           (0.31)      (0.30)        (0.33)  (0.60)   (0.55)                (0.62)
 Cognitive Baseline                      -0.76***       -0.05       -0.71** -1.46***   -0.05               -1.32**
                                           (0.28)      (0.20)        (0.31)  (0.56)   (0.44)                (0.64)
 Executive Function Baseline               0.37**       0.11         0.26*    0.64*     0.28                  0.44
                                           (0.17)      (0.13)        (0.15)  (0.36)   (0.27)                (0.31)
 Cognitive End Year                       0.87***                   0.87*** 1.60***                        1.60***
                                           (0.21)                    (0.22)  (0.39)                         (0.41)
 Executive Function End Year             -0.59***                  -0.53*** -0.97***                      -0.82***
                                           (0.15)                    (0.16)  (0.28)                         (0.30)
 Baseline Time Preferences                              0.03           0.00             0.26                  0.30
                                                       (0.22)        (0.20)           (0.45)                (0.40)
 Endline Time Preferences                             -0.47***     -0.43***          -0.77***             -0.67***
                                                       (0.12)        (0.14)           (0.25)                (0.24)
 Observations                              519           519           519     575      575                   575
 R2                                       0.327         0.304        0.349    0.206    0.188                0.216
 Number of children                        114           114           114     124      124                   124
Notes: This table reports treatment effects on disciplinary behavior, clustered by individual using sub-sample of
children who have endline time preferences. Columns 1,2 and 3 use a binary variable as the outcome indicating
whether the student has had any disciplinary referrals. Columns 4,5 and 6 use severity, as rated by independent
coders of the disciplinary referral. All regressions control for cognitive baseline scores, executive function baseline
scores, baseline time preferences (with missing values replaced as 0 and including a dummy indicating if they
are truly missing), proportion of patient decisions post-treatment, gender, race, age at test date, matched pair
grouping, test form, year of randomization, an indicator for aged above or below 4 at randomization, mother age
at child birth, birthweight, assessor and an indicator if the pretest is from a previous year. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05,
*** p<0.010




                                                        64
   Table A16: Average Treatment Effects on Number of Disciplinary Referrals - Disag-
   gregated Treatment Arms

                                                    (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)
                                                  Number      Number       Number       Number      Number

 PA-Cash                                          -0.66**      -0.63**     -0.80*** -0.76***          0.25
                                                   (0.28)       (0.27)       (0.27)  (0.27)          (0.59)
 PA-College                                         -0.07        -0.07        -0.30   -0.20           0.64
                                                   (0.28)       (0.28)       (0.28)  (0.27)          (0.57)
 PK-Tools                                           -0.02         0.01        -0.06    0.11          1.26**
                                                   (0.32)       (0.32)       (0.33)  (0.33)          (0.57)
 PK-Lit                                             0.06         0.08         -0.28    0.07           0.58
                                                   (0.29)       (0.30)       (0.31)  (0.28)          (0.56)
 Cog-X                                              -0.23        -0.21        -0.38   -0.10         -2.02***
                                                   (0.43)       (0.45)       (0.45)  (0.40)          (0.66)
 Cognitive Baseline                                 -0.13        -0.15      -0.30**   -0.10           0.04
                                                   (0.13)       (0.14)       (0.14)  (0.13)          (0.20)
 Executive Function Baseline                       -0.19*       -0.20*        -0.04   -0.10          0.47**
                                                   (0.11)       (0.12)       (0.11)  (0.12)          (0.22)
 Baseline Time Preferences                          -0.15        -0.15        -0.24   -0.14           0.54
                                                   (0.15)       (0.15)       (0.15)  (0.15)          (0.34)
 Cognitive End Year                                               0.03      0.37***
                                                                (0.13)       (0.14)
 Executive Function End Year                                               -0.64***
                                                                             (0.11)
 Cognitive End Kindergarten                                                           -0.16
                                                                                     (0.15)
 Executive Function End Kindergarten                                                -0.44***
                                                                                     (0.14)
 Endline Time Preferences                                                                           -0.65***
                                                                                                     (0.17)
 Observations                                      2318         2318        2318         2318          646
 R2                                                0.129        0.129       0.143        0.138        0.241
 Number of children                                 501          501         501          501          141
Notes: This table reports disaggregated treatment effects on disciplinary behavior, clustered by individuals
using number of disciplinary referrals in a school year as the outcome variable. Columns 4 uses the same
specification as column 1 but adds cognitive and executive function scores 1 year after treatment. Column
1-4 control for baseline cognitive and executive function scores, baseline time preferences (with missing values
replaced as 0 and including a dummy indicating if they are truly missing), gender, race, age at test date,
matched pair grouping, baseline test form, year of randomization, an indicator for aged above or below 4 at
randomization, mother age at child birth and birthweight and an indicator if the pretest is from a previous
year. Columns 3 and 4 omit endline executive function subtest form dummies due to collinearity. Column
5 omits baseline executive function subtest forms controls, indicator for aged above 4 at randomization and
previous year pretest indicator to avoid collinearity. p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.010



                                                     65
  Table A17: Average Treatment Effects on Propensity to Have Disciplinary Referrals
  and Severity of Referrals - IPW

                                          (1)       (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)
                                          0-1       0-1         0-1      Severity     Severity    Severity

 PK                                      -0.15  -0.09   -0.17               -0.23       -0.14        -0.29
                                        (0.12) (0.13)  (0.13)              (0.22)      (0.23)       (0.23)
 PA                                    -0.26** -0.25* -0.33***            -0.45**      -0.42*      -0.56**
                                        (0.13) (0.13)  (0.13)              (0.23)      (0.23)       (0.23)
 Cognitive Baseline                      -0.05  -0.03   -0.07               -0.10       -0.08        -0.13
                                        (0.08) (0.09)  (0.09)              (0.15)      (0.16)       (0.16)
 Executive Function Baseline            -0.11* -0.11*   -0.04               -0.17       -0.17        -0.06
                                        (0.06) (0.07)  (0.07)              (0.12)      (0.12)       (0.12)
 Baseline Time Preferences               -0.05  -0.07   -0.11               -0.02       -0.05        -0.13
                                        (0.09) (0.09)  (0.09)              (0.17)      (0.17)       (0.17)
 Cognitive End Year                             -0.03    0.10                           -0.04         0.15
                                               (0.09)  (0.09)                          (0.15)       (0.15)
 Executive Function End Year                          -0.30***                                    -0.48***
                                                       (0.08)                                       (0.13)
 Observations                            2264   2264    2264               2313        2313          2313
 R2                                      0.177  0.179   0.197              0.110       0.112        0.120
 Number of children                       486    486     486                501         501           501
Notes: This table reports treatment effects on disciplinary behavior weighted by inverse probability weights.
Weights are estimated from running a probit regression on a binary variable indicating whether disciplinary
referral data is available for the child regressed on gender, race and age at assessment of the child. Column
1, 2 and 3 use a binary variable as the outcome indicating whether the child has had at least one disciplinary
referral. Columns 4, 5 and 6 use the severity (rated by independent coders) of the disciplinary referral as
the outcome variable with same controls as described for Columns 1, 2 and 3 respectively. All regressions
control for cognitive baseline scores and executive function baseline scores, baseline time preferences (with
missing values replaced as 0 and including a dummy indicating if they are truly missing), gender, race, age
at test date, matched pair grouping, test form, year of randomization, an indicator for aged above or below
4 at randomization, mother age at child birth, birthweight, and an indicator if the pretest is from a previous
year. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.010




                                                    66
