                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE SOCIAL SIDE OF EARLY HUMAN CAPITAL FORMATION:
USING A FIELD EXPERIMENT TO ESTIMATE THE CAUSAL IMPACT OF NEIGHBORHOODS

                                           John A. List
                                         Fatemeh Momeni
                                           Yves Zenou

                                       Working Paper 28283
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28283


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2020




  This study was previously titled: Are Estimates of Early Education Programs Too Pessimistic?
  Evidence from a Large-Scale Field Experiment that Causally Measures Neighbor Effects. We
  thank Alec Brandon, Leonardo Bursztyn, Raj Chetty, Steven Durlauf, Nathaniel Hendren, Justin
  Holz, Michael Kremer, Thibaut Lamadon, Costas Meghir, Magne Mogstad, Julie Pernaudet,
  Stephen Raudenbush, Matthias Rodemeier, Juanna Schrøter Joensen, and Daniel Tannenbaum for
  valuable comments. We received helpful feedback from seminar participants at the University of
  Chicago, University of Wisconsin Milwaukee, Depaul University, Purdue University, and
  Monash University. We thank Clark Halliday, Uditi Karna, Alexandr Lenk, Ariel Listo, and Lina
  Ramirez for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
  and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

  NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
  peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
  official NBER publications.

  © 2020 by John A. List, Fatemeh Momeni, and Yves Zenou. All rights reserved. Short sections of
  text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
  credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Social Side of Early Human Capital Formation: Using a Field Experiment to Estimate
the Causal Impact of Neighborhoods
John A. List, Fatemeh Momeni, and Yves Zenou
NBER Working Paper No. 28283
December 2020
JEL No. C93,I21,I24,I26,I28,R1

                                          ABSTRACT

The behavioral revolution within economics has been largely driven by psychological insights,
with the sister sciences playing a lesser role. This study leverages insights from sociology to
explore the role of neighborhoods on human capital formation at an early age. We do so by
estimating the spillover effects from a large-scale early childhood intervention on the educational
attainment of over 2,000 disadvantaged children in the United States. We document large
spillover effects on both treatment and control children who live near treated children.
Interestingly, the spillover effects are localized, decreasing with the spatial distance to treated
neighbors. Perhaps our most novel insight is the underlying mechanisms at work: the spillover
effect on non-cognitive scores operate through the child's social network while parental
investment is an important channel through which cognitive spillover effects operate. Overall, our
results reveal the importance of public programs and neighborhoods on human capital formation
at an early age, highlighting that human capital accumulation is fundamentally a social activity.


John A. List                                     Yves Zenou
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
University of Chicago                            Monash University
1126 East 59th                                   Caulfield VIC 3145
Chicago, IL 60637                                Australia
and NBER                                         yves.zenou@monash.edu
jlist@uchicago.edu

Fatemeh Momeni
Crime and Education Labs
University of Chicago
33 N LaSalle St.
Chicago, IL 60602
fmomeni@uchicago.edu
"... I will emphasize again and again: that human capital accumulation is a social activity, involving
groups of people in a way that has no counterpart in the accumulation of physical capital..." Lucas
(1988)



1    Introduction

Human capital theory can be traced to Mincer (1958), who created the framework to examine the
nature and causes of inequality in personal incomes. Empirically, human capital is typically opera-
tionalized as being measured in years of schooling completed and is commonly tied to labor market
outcomes. A key branch of this work explores individual's educational investment decisions and
how those choices map into higher future incomes. A related line of work, estimating education pro-
duction functions, complements the human capital literature by investigating the determinants of
human capital (Heckman, 2008; Hanushek, 2020; Cotton et al., 2020). In this literature, standard-
ized test scores, or some other proxy for cognitive and executive function skills, are measured and
subsequently modeled as individual-specific skills potentially valued by employers. In this manner,
the received education production estimates reflect the long-run economic impacts of educational
inputs, effectively linking the two literatures (Hanushek, 2020).

To date, this line of economics research and related work in the contemporary psychology of educa-
tion literature are dominated by an empirical and theoretical focus on the individual (Schunk, 2020;
Cotton et al., 2020). This individual-centric approach has served the literatures well, as developing
knowledge on issues as varied as the foundations of learning to the causes and consequences of
human capital accumulation and skill formation, serve to deepen our understanding and clarify op-
timal policy solutions. Such insights also have frequently made their way into public policy circles,
either through advanced reforms or pedagogical changes in the classroom.

Yet, the Lucas' quote in the epigraph summons a distinctly different line of inquiry, one which
includes the wisdom of Sociology to deepen our understanding of human capital accumulation.
As Jonassen (2004) notes, Sociology is concerned with many things, but primarily it relates to
explaining social phenomena, and this cannot be done if we examine individuals alone. Rather,
we must also scrutinize how people interact in group settings, and how those interactions shape
individuals and their choices, including those that augment human capital.

With this contribution in mind, our backdrop is that between 2010 and 2014, a series of early
childhood programs were delivered to low-income families with young children in the Chicago
Heights Early Childhood Center (CHECC; see Fryer et al., 2015; 2018). CHECC was located
in Chicago Heights, IL, a neighborhood on Chicago's South Side with characteristics similar to
many other low-performing urban school districts. The goals of the intervention were to examine
how investing in cognitive and non-cognitive skills of low-income children aged 3 to 4 affects their

                                                  2
short- and long-term outcomes, and to evaluate the effectiveness of investing directly in the child's
education versus indirectly through the parents. To that end, families of over 2,000 disadvantaged
children were randomized into (i) an incentivized parent-education program (Parent Academy),
(ii) a high-quality preschool program (Pre-K), or (iii) a control group. The children's cognitive
and non-cognitive skills were assessed on a regular basis, starting before the randomization and
continuing into the middle and end of the programs. Follow-up assessments were also conducted
on a yearly basis.

Making use of these data, we consider insights from Sociology to focus on explorations of group
interactions. A useful starting point is Coleman (1988), who introduces social capital to parallel
economic concepts (physical capital and human capital) to embody relations among people. Once
in place, the effect of social capital is argued to have great import in the formation of human
capital, especially in the development of children. The Sociology literature has taken Coleman's
work in several directions (Bourdieu, 1985; Putnam, 1993; Schuller, 2000), with critical factors of
early child human capital development relating to both parental relationships and the composition
of children's peer play groups (Sheldon, 2002). Importantly, the Sociology literature teaches us
that detailing group composition at various ages of children is important since there are key age-
level interactions that affect human capital development of children (Cochran and Brassard, 1979;
Corsaro, 2005).

To explore the interplay between social interactions and human capital formation, we follow two
distinct steps. First, we provide causal evidence of the impact of neighborhood on educational
outcomes in early childhood. Instead of following the standard approach in economics, which uses
residential movers to identify neighborhood effects (see citations below), we exploit a unique form of
exogeneity induced by the CHECC intervention: the experimental variation in the spatial exposure
to treated families (within and between individuals) caused by the delivery of programs across
multiple years. By doing so, we are able to isolate the role of neighbors on individual outcomes and
examine how the exogenous changes in treated neighbors' quality affect a child's outcomes. Our
second step is to follow the Sociology literature to explore underlying mechanisms at work, both
from child to child as well as from parent to parent.

In the first step, we document large and significant spillover effects on both cognitive and non-
cognitive skills. We find the non-cognitive spillover effects are about two times larger than the
cognitive spillover effects. Our estimates suggest that, on average, each additional treated neighbor
residing within a three-kilometer radius of a child's home increases that child's cognitive score by
0.0033 to 0.0042 standard deviations ( ), whereas it increases her non-cognitive score by 0.0069
to 0.0070 . Given that an average child in our sample has 178 treated neighbors residing within
a three-kilometer radius of her home--and making a (strong) assumption of linearity--we infer
that, on average, a child gains between 0.6 to 0.7 in cognitive test scores and about 1.2 in non-


                                                  3
cognitive test scores in spillover effects from her treated neighbors. As discussed more fully below,
the spillover effect is a key component of the total intervention effect. Interestingly, we find that
the spillover effects are localized and fall rapidly as the distance to a treated neighbor increases.

Fryer et al. (2015) also report interesting racial and gender heterogeneity in their treatment effects.
For example, through comparing outcomes between treatment and control children, they find the
Parent Academy significantly increases test scores for Hispanics and Whites, but does not improve
outcomes of Black children. These findings prompted us to examine whether such heterogeneities
also exist in our estimated spillovers. We find that non-cognitive spillover effects are significantly
larger for Blacks than Hispanics. According to our fixed-effects estimates, an additional treated
neighbor within a three-kilometer radius increases the non-cognitive test score of a Black child by
0.0100 , whereas it increases the non-cognitive score of a Hispanic child by only 0.0045 . We find
no significant racial differences in cognitive spillover effects. Focusing on gender, our estimates
suggest boys tend to benefit more than girls from cognitive and non-cognitive spillovers, although
these gender differences are not significant at the conventional levels. This observation is in the
spirit of previous empirical evidence on neighborhood effects, which tend to be larger for boys
(Entwisle et al., 1994; Halpern-Felsher et al., 1997; Leventhal and Brooks-Gunn, 2000; Katz et al.,
2001; Chetty and Hendren, 2018b).

Turning to Step 2, we recognize that the program effects from CHECC can spill over through
two main channels. The first channel is the direct social interactions between children who were
randomized during the intervention. Importantly, consonant with the Sociology literature, our
analysis includes observations from early childhood (3 to 4 years of age, when peer influence at
the neighborhood level starts) to middle childhood (8 to 9 years of age, when social interactions
within neighborhoods increase dramatically as children enter school). Therefore, direct exposure to
treated children who live in the same neighborhood is a likely mechanism that can generate spatial
spillover effects.1 The second channel is parental interactions. While Sociology presents a useful
guide, observational studies in the other sciences have also shown the import of this channel. For
example, Psychologists have found that neighborhoods can influence parental behavior and child-
rearing practices (Leventhal and Brooks-Gunn, 2000), which play critical roles in early development
(Cunha and Heckman, 2007; Waldfogel and Washbrook, 2011; Kautz et al., 2014; Fryer et al., 2015;
Kalil, 2015). Because CHECC also offered education programs to parents, treatment effects can spill
over through information and preference externalities, generated by parental social interactions.

To shed light on the mechanisms through which spillover effects operate, we start by comparing the
effects from neighbors who were assigned to the parental-education programs with the effects from
neighbors who were assigned to the preschool programs. Because, unlike in the Pre-K treatments,
  1
    See Epple and Romano (2011) and Sacerdote (2011) for recent reviews of the literature on peer effects in Eco-
nomics.



                                                       4
the focus of Parent Academies was on educating parents rather than children, if spillover effects are
driven by interactions between parents, we might expect Parent Academy neighbors to generate
larger effects than Pre-K neighbors.2 Alternatively, larger spillovers from Pre-K neighbors than
from Parent Academy neighbors could imply the peer-influence channel plays an important role
in generating the effects. Our estimates suggest non-cognitive spillovers are more likely to operate
through preschool neighbors. According to our estimates, whereas an additional Parent Academy
neighbor within three kilometers of a child's home induces a 0.0017 to 0.0045 increase in her
non-cognitive score, an additional Pre-K neighbor living within the same distance increases her
non-cognitive score by 0.0099 to 0.0108 . This finding suggests non-cognitive spillover effects are
more likely to operate through children's rather than parents' social networks. We do not find any
significant differences in cognitive spillover effects from Parent Academy and Pre-K neighbors.

Given our evidence suggesting peer influence at the neighborhood level is a key mechanism in gen-
erating non-cognitive spillover effects, we hypothesize that the racial differences in non-cognitive
spillovers might be at least partially driven by differences in social interactions within neighbor-
hoods. We explore this idea using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health
Survey. Our analysis confirms that African American adolescents are significantly more likely than
Hispanics to (i) know most people in their neighborhoods, (ii) stop on the street and talk to some-
one from the neighborhood, and (iii) use recreation facilities in the neighborhood. Although these
results cannot be interpreted as causal evidence, they are consistent with our previous finding that
social interactions with peers within neighborhoods is a key channel in generating non-cognitive
spillover effects.

Finally, our evidence suggests cognitive spillover effects are likely to operate--at least partially--
through influencing the parents' decision to enroll their child in a (non-CHECC) preschool program.
Using survey data, we show that families with more treated neighbors are significantly more likely to
enroll their child in a preschool program (other than the ones offered at CHECC). Our evidence also
suggests children whose parents reported enrolling them in an alternative preschool program per-
form significantly better in cognitive assessments. Therefore, we conclude that influencing parental
investment decisions--as measured by the choice to enroll one's child in a preschool program--is a
channel through which spillover effects on cognitive test scores operate.

We conclude our analysis by measuring the total impact of the intervention on children's cognitive
and non-cognitive performance, accounting for the spillover effects. Our estimates suggest that,
on average, the intervention increased a treatment child's cognitive (non-cognitive) test score by
0.82 (1.32 ). Spillover effects make up a large portion of this total impact: whereas the average
direct effect of the intervention on a treatment child's cognitive (non-cognitive) score is 0.11
   2
    This intuition does not rule out possible spillover effects from Pre-K neighbors that are generated through parental
interactions. After all, parents of children who received the Pre-K treatments might also be impacted through the
Pre-K programs. This intuition merely assumes Parent Academies affect parents more than Pre-K treatments do.


                                                           5
(0.05 ), the corresponding indirect effect is 0.71 (1.27 ). Control children also gain considerably
as a result of the intervention: on average, the intervention increased a control child's cognitive
(non-cognitive) test score by 0.75 (1.25 ). If we were to disregard the spillover effects on the
control group and had simply based our estimates of the total impact on the outcome differences
between the treatment and control children, we would have severely understated the total impact.
Specifically, this approach would have indicated that the intervention only improved the cognitive
(non-cognitive) test scores of a treatment child by 0.06 (0.07 ). Ignoring spillover effects would
have also led us to underestimate the effects for African American children. Accounting for spillover
effects enables us to document a significant and large impact on non-cognitive performance that is
significantly larger for African Americans than Hispanics.

We view our results speaking to three distinct strands of research. First, we speak to the various
literatures that study the role of neighborhoods in shaping children's short- and long-term human
capital outcomes. The empirical evidence on how neighborhoods affect children comes mainly
from observational studies that document correlations between neighborhood characteristics and
children's outcomes, as well as studies that use experimental and quasi-experimental data to dis-
entangle the causal effects of neighborhood from selection effects.3 We contribute to this literature
in two important ways.

Our first contribution to this literature is to provide causal evidence on neighborhood effects by
exploiting a unique form of exogeneity, which was induced by our field experiment. The existing
experimental and quasi-experimental evidence on how neighborhoods shape children's outcomes
identifies neighborhood effects using data from residential movers (e.g., Katz et al., 2001; Edin et
al., 2003; Kling et al., 2005; °
                               Aslund et al., 2010; Damm and Dustmann, 2014; Chetty et al., 2016;
Chyn, 2018; Chetty and Hendren, 2018a and 2018b). The identification of neighborhood effects
in this literature relies on instruments such as randomly assigned housing vouchers, quasi-random
assignment of immigrants to different neighborhoods, or public housing demolitions as sources of
exogenous changes in neighborhood quality. We take a different approach in that our identification
strategy leverages a field experiment that provides both within and between individual variation
in the spatial exposure to treated families.

Our second contribution to this literature is to provide insights on the role of neighbors in generating
neighborhood effects and the mechanism underlying these effects. Neighborhoods have multiple
attributes, which can each influence a child's outcomes, such as school quality, crime rate, neighbors,
and so on. Unlike previous estimates on neighborhood effects, we are able to isolate and estimate
the effect of neighbors' quality as one of the many channels through which neighborhoods can
influence children's development. Specifically, our estimates suggest social interactions with other
   3
     See Leventhal and Brooks-Gunn (2000), Durlauf (2004), Ioannides and Topa (2010), Ioannides (2011), Topa and
Zenou (2015), Minh et al. (2017) and Graham (2018) for reviews of neighborhood effects on children.



                                                       6
children in the neighborhood play an important role in the development of children's non-cognitive
skills and that parental interactions influence a complementary aspect of child development.

The second strand of literature our study contributes to is the growing body of work that measures
spillover effects from programs and policy changes, designed to improve behaviors and outcomes in
various domains such as the labor market (Ferracci et al. 2014; Cr´
                                                                  epon et al., 2013; Lalive et al.,
2015; Muralidharan et al., 2017; Gautier et al., 2018), health (Miguel and Kremer 2004; Janssen,
2011; Avitabile, 2012), compliance behavior (Rincke and Traxler, 2011; Boning et al., 2018), voting
behavior (Sinclair et al., 2012; Gine and Mansuri, 2018), retirement saving decisions (Duflo and
Saez, 2003), and consumption (Angelucci and De Giorgi, 2009). We contribute to this literature by
providing the first evidence on spillover effects from a large-scale early education intervention, shed-
ding light on mechanisms, and estimating the total program impact when accounting for spillover
effects.

Finally, our results provide important insights for academics interested in modeling the formation
of early human capital, from economists to psychologists to sociologists. Within economics, for
example, a growing body of literature develops dynamic models of skill formation to explore the
role of various inputs in the production of cognitive and non-cognitive skills. Through structurally
estimating such models, this literature has found inputs such as schools, parental ability, home
environment, and parental investments to be important determinants in the formation of future
skills (e.g., Todd and Wolpin, 2007; Cunha and Heckman, 2007; Cunha et al., 2010; Attanasio et
al., 2015; Doepke and Zilibotti, 2017, 2019; Agostinelli et al., 2020; Attanasio et al., 2020; Boucher
et al., 2020; Cotton et al., 2020). We complement this literature by providing empirical evidence
for the role of neighbors' influence at young ages. Our estimates suggest neighbors' quality plays
an important role in producing cognitive and non-cognitive skills.

The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 summarizes key features of our
intervention, randomization, and assessments. Section 3 describes our data and presents our es-
timation strategy. We present our main findings in section 4, where we report our estimates of
spillover effects on cognitive and non-cognitive test scores from a fixed-effects model, and explore
heterogeneities by race and gender. Section 5 presents our estimates of the spillover effects from a
lagged dependent variable (LDV) specification and discusses the robustness of our findings to using
this alternative identification strategy. We discuss the mechanisms in section 6. In section 7, we
estimate the total impacts of CHECC, break down these estimates into direct and indirect effects,
and discuss how ignoring indirect effects would bias our estimates. We discuss policy implications
and conclude in section 8.




                                                   7
2        Program Details

2.1        Overview of treatments

Between 2010 and 2014, a series of early childhood interventions were delivered to low-income
families with young children in Chicago Heights Early Childhood Center (CHECC). The center was
located in Chicago Heights, IL, which is a South Side, Chicago, neighborhood with characteristics
similar to many other low-performing urban school districts. According to the 2010 Census, black
and Hispanic minorities constituted about 80% of the population of Chicago Heights; its per-capita
income was $17,546 per year; and 90% of students attending the Chicago Heights School District
were receiving free or reduced-price lunches.

The main goals of this large-scale intervention were (i) to examine how investing in cognitive and
non-cognitive skills of low-income children 3 to 4 years of age affects their long-term outcomes,
and (ii) to evaluate the effectiveness of investing directly in children's education versus indirectly
through their parents. To that end, families of over 2,000 children were randomized into either one
of four preschool programs (henceforth "Pre-K") or one of the two parental-education programs
(henceforth "Parent Academy") or a control group.

The Parent Academy was designed to teach parents to help their child with cognitive skills, such
as counting and spelling, as well as non-cognitive skills, such as working memory and self-control.
The curriculum for the Parent Academy was adapted from two effective preschool curricula: Tools
of the Mind, which focuses on fostering non-cognitive skills, and Literacy Express, which focuses
on improving cognitive skills.4 The curriculum was delivered to parents in eighteen, 90-minute
sessions, which were held every two weeks over a nine-month period. Parent Academy families
had the opportunity to earn up to $7,000 per year and could participate until their child entered
kindergarten. Earnings were based on parents' attendance, their performance on homework, and
their child's performance on the interim and end-of-year assessments. The two Parent Academy
treatments differed only in how they administered incentives. Payments made to families in the
"Cash" treatment were made via cash/direct deposits, whereas payments made to families in the
"College" treatment were deposited into an account that could only be accessed once the child was
enrolled in a full-time post-secondary institution.

Besides the Parent Academy, CHECC delivered four preschool programs in which children were
treated directly. We refer to these programs as Pre-K treatments. These four treatments dif-
fered in their curricula, as well as the duration and intensity of delivery. "Tools," "Literacy," and
"Preschool Plus" were nine-month full-day programs delivered during the school year, whereas
"Kinderprep" was a two-month half-day program delivered during the summer before a child en-
    4
        See Fryer et al. (2015) for more information on curriculum selection.


                                                             8
tered kindergarten.5 The curriculum for "Tools" was Tools of the Mind, which focuses on improving
non-cognitive skills, whereas "Literacy" was based on Literacy Express,6 which focuses on foster-
ing cognitive skills.7 A new curriculum called "Cog-X" was developed for "Preschool Plus" and
"Kinderprep", which emphasized both cognitive and non-cognitive skills.8


2.2    Randomization

Between 2010 and 2013, 2,185 children from low-income families in South Side, Chicago were
recruited and randomized into either one of the six treatments or the control group.9 The random-
ization took place once per year, at the beginning of each academic year.10 Some children were
randomized during more than one year, mainly to encourage families who were initially placed
in the control group to stay engaged with CHECC for assessments, by offering them a chance to
participate in future years.11 The yearly randomization schedule created four cohorts of children
we refer to by their year of randomization.12 Table 1 summarizes the randomization schedule for
each year of the program.
   5
     Preschool Plus and Kinderprep also offered a parental component that was much less extensive than the Parent
Academies, both in terms of education time and incentives. Parent Academy parents could earn up to $7,000 based on
their attendance, their performance on homework, and their child's performance on assessments, whereas Preschool
Plus and Kinderprep parents could only earn up to $900 and $200, based merely on their attendance to parental
workshops. Preschool Plus and Kinderprep treatments also offered fewer instruction time to parents. Whereas Parent
Academy parents could spend 27 hours in parental workshop, Preschool Plus and Kinderprep parents were offered
a maximum of 21 and 6 hours of parental education, respectively. The intensity of the preschool component of
Preschool Plus was similar to that of "Tools" and "Literacy Express" in terms of instruction time.
   6
     For more information on Literacy Express see http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/wwc/interventionreport.aspx?sid=
288.
   7
     For more information on Tools of the Mind see http://toolsofthemind.org.
   8
     Fryer et al. (2020) evaluated "CogX" under the assumption that the programs did not affect the outcomes of the
control group. Through comparing the performance of treatment and control children, the authors found "Cog-X"
treatments significantly improved cognitive scores (by about one quarter of a standard deviation), but failed to find
any significant effects on non-cognitive scores. For more information on Pre-K programs, see Fryer et al. (2020).
   9
     See Appendix A for maps of residential addresses.
  10
     The exceptions were years three and four of the intervention during which randomization took place twice per
year: In the first randomizations, children were randomized into either the nine-month preschool program, the
summer Kinderprep program, or the control group; and in the second, a smaller group of families were recruited and
randomized into either the summer kindergarten preparation program or the control group. Table 1 combines the
two randomizations.
  11
     As a result, some children who were in the control group in an earlier year were randomized into a treatment
group in later randomizations. In a few cases, a child who was randomized into a treatment group in an earlier year
was assigned to a different (or the same) treatment in later randomizations. Overall, 1,675 children were randomized
only once, 509 were randomized twice, and one child was randomized in three years.
  12
     Those children who were randomized in multiple years also appear in multiple cohorts.




                                                         9
                                   Table 1: Randomization by Year

                                                    Parent     9-Month Kindergarten
                                         Control
                                                   Academies    Pre-K   Preparation
                            Cohort-1
                                          242         153        172          0
                             (2010)
                            Cohort-2
                                          443         216        166          0
                             (2011)
                            Cohort-3
                                          422          0         196         107
                             (2012)
                            Cohort-4
                                          376          0         104         99
                             (2013)
                          Unique child    1270        317        539        206
                           Notes: The number of children randomized into each treat-
                          ment group in each year of the intervention is reported. The
                          bottom row presents the number of unique children in each
                          group, over the course of four years.




2.3   Assessments

Our key outcome measures are children's performances in cognitive and non-cognitive assessments,
which were used to evaluate the programs. These assessments consist of a pre-assessment admin-
istered to all incoming students prior to randomization, a mid-assessment between January and
February, a post-assessment, which occurred in May, immediately after the school year ended, and
a summer assessment at the end of the summer. Besides the assessments that took place during the
program year, graduated children were also assessed annually every April, starting the year after
they finished the program. These assessments are referred to as age-out assessments. Appendix B
presents the assessment schedule for all four cohorts.

Assessments included both cognitive and non-cognitive components and were administered by a
team of trained assessors. The cognitive component used a series of nationally normed tests,
measuring general intellectual ability and specific cognitive abilities such as receptive vocabulary,
verbal ability, oral language, and academic achievements. The non-cognitive component included a
combination of subtests measuring executive functions such as working memory, inhibitory control,
and attention shifting, as well as a questionnaire completed by assessors, which measured self-
regulation in emotional, attentional, and behavioral domains.



3     Data and the Econometric Model

Before describing our empirical approach at a detailed level, we find it potentially useful to provide
a roadmap for our exploration. Overall, we identify the spillover effects from CHECC by exploiting


                                                      10
certain unique features of our data. First, conditional on the total number of neighbors who signed
up to participate, the number of neighbors who were subsequently assigned to treatment is deter-
mined exogenously through the randomization process. We leverage this experimental variation in
spatial exposure to treatments across children to estimate spillover effects. Second, our main iden-
tification strategy also exploits the panel nature of our data and the within-individual variation in
exposure to treated neighbors induced by delivery of programs over multiple years. Specifically, by
including individual-specific fixed effects, our estimates control for any time-invariant individual,
family, and neighborhood unobserved characteristics that might be correlated with spatial expo-
sure to treatments. We also estimate the effects under a second model that relaxes the assumption
of time-invariant omitted variables by controlling for the lagged dependent variables (LDV) and
dispensing with the fixed effects (Section 5). Whereas our main identification strategy uses within-
individual variations to estimate the spillover effects, the LDV specification estimates the effects
by exploiting both within-individual and between-individual variations in spatial exposure to treat-
ments. Our findings, presented below, are robust to using this alternative specification.


3.1     Data

3.1.1    Construction of outcome variables

Our outcome measures are indices generated from standardized test scores on cognitive and non-
cognitive assessments.13 The cognitive assessment included the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test
(PPVT), which assesses verbal ability and receptive vocabulary (Dunn et al., 1965), and four
subtests of the Woodcock Johnson III Test of Achievement (WJ): (i) WJ-Letter and Word Identi-
fication (WJL), which measures the ability to identify letters and words; (ii) WJ-Spelling (WJS),
which measures the ability to correctly write orally presented words; (iii) WJ-Applied Problems
(WJA), which measures the ability to analyze and solve math problems; and (iv ) WJ-Quantitative
Concepts (WJQ), which assesses the knowledge of mathematical concepts, symbols, and vocabulary
(Woodcock, McGrew and Mather, 2001).

The non-cognitive component included the Blair and Willoughby Executive Function test (Willoughby,
Wirth and Blair, 2012), which is composed of three subtests assessing attention (Spatial Conflict),
working memory (Operation Span), and attention shifting (Same Game) and the Preschool Self-
Regulation Assessment (PSRA), which is designed to assess self-regulation in emotional, attentional,
and behavioral domains (Smith-Donald et al., 2007).14
  13
     These indices were constructed by Fryer et al. (2015, 2020) for the original evaluations of the programs.
  14
     Because Blair and Willoughby tests are designed for preschool, a new test was added for assessments that were
administered to older children (age-out assessments). For children in kindergarten or older, the Same Game test of
Blair and Willoughby was replaced with a variant of Wisconsin Card Sort game, which measures attention shifting
for children of that age. For more information, see www.parinc.com/Products?pkey=478.



                                                       11
A cognitive index was made up of averaged percentile scores on each cognitive subtest, and a non-
cognitive index was made up of average percent-correct scores on each non-cognitive subtest. The
two indexes were then standardized by the type of assessment (pre-assessment, mid-assessment,
etc.), including the entire study population (treated and control) who took that assessment, to
obtain a zero mean and standard deviation of one.

To explore the spatial spillovers on both treatment and control children, we construct three samples:
a pooled sample, including observations from both treatment and control groups; a control sample,
including data from control children; and a treatment sample, including observations from treated
children. Our treatment sample pools observations from children who were randomized into any of
the programs. We include observations from the baseline to the fourth age-out assessment. Our final
control, treatment, and pooled samples include 2,442, 3,074, and 5,208 observations, respectively.15
Appendix C presents the details regarding how we construct these three samples.

Table 2 provides summary statistics on the baseline demographic variables for our pooled sample.
Note the majority (90%) of the children are either African American or Hispanic, and 53% live in
families with an annual household income under $35,000.


3.1.2    Addresses and neighbor counts

To estimate the spatial spillover effects from the intervention, we follow the literature (see, e.g.,
Miguel and Kremer, 2004 and subsequent work) and calculate the number of treated neighbors of
a child at a given time and use it as a measure of spatial exposure to treatments. To do so, we
start by calculating commuting distances between the home locations of all pairs of children who
were randomized during the intervention.16 Commuting distances are calculated by considering the
street network structure and its restrictions (e.g., one-way roads, U-turns, etc.) and finding the
closest driving distance between each pair. The average travel distance between a pair of children
in our sample is 8.52 kilometers (std. dev.= 8.07), and 99.8% of the sample resides within 60
kilometers of each other. Figure 1 presents a histogram of travel distances between home locations
of all children who were randomized during the intervention.

We define a pair as neighbors if the commuting distance between the two is less than "r" kilometers,
and we call "r" the neighborhood radius. We conduct our analysis for various values of neighborhood
                                                 treated ) and control (N control ) neighbors of each
radii. We then calculate the number of treated (Ni,t |r                  i,t|r
child i at the time of her assessment t, and define the total number of CHECC neighbors of i as
  15
     Note that the number of observations in the pooled sample is smaller than the sum of the number of observations
in our control and treatment samples. The reason is that in a few cases, when a child was first randomized into
the control group and was placed into a treatment group in later randomizations, the pooled sample only includes
observations that took place after the child was randomized into treatments. See Appendix C for more information.
  16
     Distances were calculated using the ArcGIS OD Cost Matrix Analysis tool.



                                                        12
                        Table 2: Baseline Summary Statistics for the Pooled Sample

                Variable                         Share/Mean     Variable                           Share/Mean
                                   Gender                                     Mother's Education
                Male                                  .51       Less than high school                   .08
                                    Race                        Some high school but no diploma         .12
                Black                                 .40       High school diploma                     .13
                Hispanic                              .50       Some college but no degree              .17
                White                                 .09       College degree                          .18
                Other Race                            .01       Other                                   .06
                Missing Race                          .01       Missing Mother's Education              .25
                  HH Income and Unemployment Benefits                         Father's Education
                below 35K                             .53       Less than high school                   .09
                36K-75K                               .14       Some high school but no diploma          .1
                75K+                                  .06       High school diploma                     .13
                Missing Income                        .26       Some college but no degree              .12
                Receives Unemployment Benefit         .09       College degree                          .08
                Missing Unemployment Benefit          .31       Other                                   .06
                                                                Missing Father's Education              .44
                                                     45.32
                Baseline Age (months)
                                                     (6.91)

                Notes: Summary statistics for baseline demographic variables are presented. For education lev-
               els, Some high school but not diploma includes parents with a GED or high school attendance
               without a diploma, College degree includes associate's, bachelor's and master's degrees, Less than
               high school includes an education level below 9th grade or no formal schooling, and Other in-
               cludes vocational/technical or other unclassified programs. Standard deviations are reported in
               parentheses.


 total = N treated + N control . Note that as more children are randomized into treatment and control
Ni,t |r   i,t|r       i,t|r
groups over the four years of the intervention, the number of treated and control neighbors vary
over time.17 Table 3 reports the summary statistics for Ni,t
                                                         treated and N control , and Figure 2 presents
                                                             |r       i,t|r
                                    treated , for various values of neighborhood radii. Whereas
histograms of the exposure measure Ni,t |r
                                        treated is small, as the neighborhood radius increases to 3
for r = 1 kilometers, the variation in Ni,t |r
kilometers and beyond, we gain considerable variations in the exposure measure.


3.2    Econometric model

We exploit three unique features of our data to estimate the spillover effects. First, conditional on
                                                                         total ), the number of
the total number of a child's CHECC neighbors at a given point in time (Ni,t |r
                                               treated ) is determined exogenously through the
neighbors who are randomized into treatments (Ni,t |r
intervention. Second, the repeated assessment schedule generates a panel, which enables us to track
performance over time. Finally, multiple randomizations and the delivery of programs over the four
  17
     Because more children were receiving the treatments over the four-year span of the intervention, and a neighbor
who was previously in the control group in an earlier randomization might be assigned into a treatment group in
              control                                                    treated
later years, Ni,t |r  can both increase or decrease over time. However, Ni,t |r  can only increase over time, because
no child who was already treated could be assigned into the control group in later years.


                                                              13
Figure 1: Histogram of distances between children in the study. The horizontal axis is cut at 30
kilometers.

                                                                                       treated .
years of the intervention create within-individual variations in our exposure measure Ni,t |r

Although the experimentally induced variation in our exposure measure serves as an important
feature, which we exploit for identification, our estimation strategy does not rely on it exclusively.
Given our limited sample size and the fact that the intervention was not designed to measure
spatial spillovers, our exposure measure could be correlated with individual- or neighborhood-level
unobservable characteristics. Therefore, we exploit the panel nature of our data to provide clean
estimates of the spillover effects. The above three properties allow us to estimate the spillover
                                                                     treated ) through a fixed-effects
effects using within-individual variations in our exposure measure (Ni,t |r
specification. This technique uses the variations in spatial exposure over time and controls for any
unobserved time-invariant individual-, family-, or neighborhood-level characteristics that might be
                 treated .
correlated with Ni,t |r

We estimate spatial spillover effects from CHECC, using an individual fixed-effects specification of
the form:
                                            treated      total
                              Yi,t = 0 + 1 Ni,t |r  + 2 Ni,t |r + i + t +             i,t ,                         (1)
                                                                                              treated
where Yi,t is the standardized cognitive or non-cognitive test score of a child i on test t, Ni,t |r
                                                                                      total represents
represents the number of treated neighbors of i at time t as previously defined, and Ni,t |r
the total number of i's neighbors who were randomized in the intervention by time t.18 i and t
  18
    As aforementioned, Miguel and Kremer (2004), Gin´       e and Mansouri (2018) and Bobba and Gignoux (2019) use
similar specifications to estimate spatial spillover effects. Similar to our specification, these studies use the number
of treated individuals within a certain neighborhood radius as their measure of spatial exposure to treatments,
and control for the total number of neighbors in their regression analyses. Distinct from these studies, which rely
exclusively on the experimentally induced variations in the distribution of treated neighbors across individuals, we


                                                          14
                           Table 3: Neighbor Counts by Neighborhood Radius

                                         r= 1 km       r = 3 km      r = 5 km     r = 7 km

                          treated       27.89        178.13         325.63         422.81
                         Nr
                                       (27.73)      (154.21)       (238.75)       (272.08)
                          control       29.49        183.47         333.73         437.79
                         Nr
                                       (31.84)      (165.34)       (257.95)       (301.11)

                         Notes: This table presents the average number of treated and
                        control neighbors of a child in our pooled sample, for various
                        definitions of neighborhood radii. The numbers reflect all the
                        observations in our pooled sample for which we observe both
                        cognitive and non-cognitive scores. Standard deviations are re-
                        ported in parentheses.


are individual and test (time) fixed effects. Under this specification, 1 represents the average
effect of moving one of the control neighbors of a child i to a treatment group, holding the total
number of her CHECC neighbors constant. This measure (1 ) provides an intuitive estimate on the
spillover effects from the intervention because it enables a policymaker to weigh the benefits against
the costs associated with treating an additional child in the neighborhood. Section 5 presents an
alternative model, which relaxes the assumption of time invariance for individual effects and exploits
both within-individual and between-individual variation in spatial exposure to treated neighbors to
estimate spillover effects. As we will further discuss in Section 5, our findings are robust to using
this alternative specification.19



4     Results

4.1    Main findings

We estimate spillover effects for the neighborhood radii of 3, 5, and 7 kilometers. As Figure 2
                                                                       treated becomes too small,
suggests, when neighborhood is defined too narrowly, the variation in Ni,t |r
limiting our power to estimate the effects. Therefore, we start with a neighborhood radii of 3
                                                                   treated to estimate the effects.
kilometers and larger, which provides us with enough variation in Ni,t |r
Arguably, these choices of neighborhood radii are economically relevant. According to the National
Household Travel Survey, the average commuting distance to school for a 6 to 12 year-old child
are able to exploit the panel nature of our data and identify the spillover effects using within-individual variations
in exposure to treatments and remove all unobserved time-invariant individual-level characteristics that might be
correlated with the spatial exposure to treatments.
  19
     As a robustness check, we also run the regressions without baseline observations and our effects remain similar.




                                                         15
                             (a) r=1 km                               (b) r=3 km




                             (c) r=5 km                               (d) r=7 km

                                             treated for r = {1, 3, 5, 7} kilometers.
                     Figure 2: Histogram of Ni,t |r



is about 6 kilometers (3.6 miles).20 The average travel time from home to work for a Chicago
Heights resident is estimated to be 26.1 minutes (US Census Bureau statistics), which translates
to about 21 kilometers for a speed of 30 miles per hour.21 Because schools and workplaces provide
natural interaction spaces for children and their parents, we can reasonably assume our choices of
neighborhood radii are relevant distances within which social interactions can generate spillovers.

Table 4 presents estimated 1 's from equation (1) for neighborhood radii of 3, 5, and 7 kilometers.
Standard errors--clustered at the census-block-group level to allow for common error components
within geographical units--are reported in parentheses below each point estimate. The left (right)
panel presents the average spillover effect from treating an additional neighbor of a child on her
standardized cognitive (non-cognitive) test score. Columns (1) and (4) report the pooled effects
on both treatment and control children and reveal significant positive spillover effects on both
cognitive and non-cognitive test scores. The effects on non-cognitive scores are more than double
the effects on cognitive scores: an additional treated neighbor within 3 kilometers of a child's home
  20
    https://nhts.ornl.gov/briefs/Travel%20To%20School.pdf
  21
    This estimate is consistent with a report by the National Household Travel Survey that suggests the av-
erage commuting distance from home to work in the US is about 19 kilometers (11.8 miles). For more
information, see: https://www.bts.gov/sites/bts.dot.gov/files/docs/browse-statistical-products-and-data/national-
transportation-statistics/220806/ntsentire2018q1.pdf (page 73).


                                                       16
increases her cognitive score by 0.0033 (p < 0.01), whereas it increases her non-cognitive score by
0.0069 (p < 0.01). Empirical differences in cognitive and non-cognitive spillovers are statistically
significant.22

Columns (2) and (3) parse the effects on cognitive scores by treatment assignment. These estimates
reveal that both treatment and control children benefit from living close to treated families. While
the control group benefits slightly more than the treatment group from cognitive spillover effects, the
difference is not significant at conventional levels.23 Columns (5) and (6) report the spillover effects
in non-cognitive scores by treatment assignment. These estimates illustrate that the treatment
and control children both benefit from non-cognitive spillovers. The estimated spillover effects on
non-cognitive scores on the control and treatment groups are very similar and are not significantly
different across the two groups.24 These findings are robust to the choice of neighborhood radius,
r.25 , 26

In sum, we document significant positive spillover effects on both cognitive and non-cognitive test
scores and find the effect sizes are significantly larger for non-cognitive scores versus cognitive
scores.27 Yet, the richness of the data permits us to explore deeper into both the nature and extent
of such spillovers.


4.2         Spatial fade-out

A closer examination of the estimated 1 's reported in Table 4 suggests an important spatial
pattern: the spillover effect from an additional treated neighbor becomes smaller as we broaden the
neighborhood radius from 3 to 7 kilometers. To further explore this pattern and shed light on the
relationship between spillover effects and distance, we provide Figure 3, which shows the estimated
1 's for a broader range of r's.28 Note that the effects on both cognitive and non-cognitive scores
operate very locally.

As we increase the neighborhood radius, the marginal spillover effects from an additional treated
  22                                                                    cog     ncog               cog    ncog
      The p-values from the Wald test of the null hypothesis H0: 1          = 1      against H1: 1     = 1      are 0.001,
0.03, and 0.06 for neighborhood radii of 3, 5, and 7 kilometers, respectively.
   23                                             cog
      The p-values from the Wald test of equal 1      's for the control and treatment group are 0.11, 0.16, and 0.13 for
neighborhood radii of 3, 5, and 7 kilometers, respectively.
   24                                              ncog
      The p-values from the Wald test of equal 1          for treatment and control group for neighborhood radii of 3K,
5K, and 7K meters are 0.80, 0.84, and 0.78.
   25
      Appendix E breaks down these effects by subtests and explores which components of the cognitive/non-cognitive
index generate the effects.
   26
      Appendix D discusses the robustness of our estimated spillover effects to the exclusion of individual fixed effects
from our main specification and to the exclusion of other controls and lagged dependent variables from our alternative
(LDV) specification.
   27
      In Appendix F, we explore the potential role of sorting by estimating the effects using a subsample of children who
attended the majority of assessments. Our evidence suggests that selection is not an important factor in generating
our results.
   28
      The point estimates are reported in Appendix G.


                                                           17
       Table 4: Mean Effect Sizes on Cognitive and Non-cognitive Scores, Fixed-Effects Estimates

                                           Cognitive Scores                    Non-cognitive Scores
                                  Pooled      Control    Treatment      Pooled       Control   Treatment
                                    (1)          (2)           (3)       (4)           (5)        (6)

                                 0.0033*** 0.0038***          0.0016   0.0078*** 0.0069*** 0.0064***
                     r = 3 km
                                  (0.0010)     (0.001)    (0.0010)     (0.0013)     (0.0015)    (0.0013)
                                 0.0021***    0.0023**    0.0010*      0.0043*** 0.0037*** 0.0034***
                     r = 5 km
                                  (0.0006)    (0.0008)    (0.0006)     (0.0008)     (0.0011)    (0.0008)
                                 0.0018*** 0.0021***      0.0008*      0.0033*** 0.0025*** 0.0028***
                     r = 7 km
                                  (0.0005)    (0.0007)    (0.0005)     (0.0007)     (0.0010)    (0.0007)
                     Obs.          5,208        2,442         3,074     5,208         2,442      3,074

                      Notes: Spillover effects from each additional treated neighbor (^1 ) estimated from
                     equation (1) are presented. Columns 1-3 (4-6) represent the average spillover
                     effects from an additional treated neighbor on a child's standardized cognitive
                     (non-cognitive) score. Robust standard errors, clustered at the census-block-group
                     level, are in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



neighbor monotonically decrease. Because a larger neighborhood radius corresponds to a longer
average distance to neighbors, the negative relationship between ^1 and r implies that, as the
distance between a child and her treated neighbor grows, the spillover effect on both cognitive and
non-cognitive scores weakens. Specifically, the average spillover effect on a child's non-cognitive
score, from a treated neighbor within a 3-kilometer radius is about twice as large as the effect
from a treated neighbor who resides within a 7-kilometer radius (0.0069 vs. 0.0033 ). Similarly,
the average effect on the cognitive score from an additional treated neighbor who lives within 3
kilometers of a child is about twice as large as the effect from a treated neighbor who resides within
a 7-kilometer radius (0.0033 vs. 0.0018 ). In summary, we find that the spillover effects on both
cognitive and non-cognitive scores are localized and decrease as the distance to a treated neighbor's
home increases.29


4.3      Heterogeneous effects

Fryer et al. (2015) evaluated the parent-education component of CHECC (Parent Academy) by
comparing the outcomes of treatment and control children, under the assumption that treatments
  29
     An alternative approach for exploring such fade-out effects would be to parametrize the distribution by creating
bands (i.e., number of youth within 3 km, number of youth between 3 and 5 km, number of youth between 5 and 7 km)
            treated      total          treated      total
for both Ni,t |b    and Ni,t |b (where Ni,t|b   and Ni,t |b represent the number of treated neighbors within band b and
number of all neighbors within band b), and include these variables in the regression (see, e.g., Miguel and Kremer,
2004). Consistent with the fade-out pattern we document in our main specification, when we use this alternative
method, we find that for non-cognitive skills, the spillover effect is always significant from treated neighbors within
the first band (within 3 kilometers) and become insignificant as we move to treated neighbors who reside in bands
that are placed further away from a child's home. For the cognitive skills, the estimates are sporadically significant
from neighbors who reside in the closer bands and never significant from those who reside in bands that are further
away.



                                                                18
                                               Pooled




                        Control                                      Treated




Figure 3: The spillover effect from having an additional treated neighbor on a child's standardized
cognitive and non-cognitive scores, as functions of neighborhood radius.


did not induce externalities to the control group. They found that the assignment to Parent
Academies increases a child's non-cognitive scores by 0.203 , but does not significantly impact
cognitive scores. Moreover, the authors reported positive treatment effects on cognitive and non-
cognitive scores for Hispanic children, but did not find any significant treatment effects on African
American children. Parent Academy was also reported to have slightly larger effects on girls than
boys, although the gender differences were not significant. Motivated by the heterogeneity in
treatment effects from the Parent Academy component of the intervention reported in Fryer et
al. (2015), we investigate whether children of different races (or gender) benefit differently from
spillover effects. We do so by estimating equation (1), separately by race and gender.

Since African American and Hispanic children make up over 90% of our sample, our analysis
on heterogeneity along race focuses on these two groups. Panel (a) of Table 5 and Figure 4
presents ^1 's separately for African American and Hispanic children. Comparing the effects across
races, we find no significant differences in cognitive spillover effects between Hispanics and African


                                                 19
Americans. In contrast to the effects on cognitive scores, however, spillovers on non-cognitive scores
are significantly larger for African Americans than Hispanics.30 The empirical estimates indicate
that, on average, an additional treated neighbor increases the non-cognitive scores of an African
American child by about two to three times more than a Hispanic child. For instance, an additional
treated neighbor within a 3-kilometer radius increases the non-cognitive score of a Hispanic child
by 0.0045 , whereas it increases an African American child's non-cognitive score by 0.0100 .

       Table 5: Mean Effect Sizes within Gender and Race Subgroups, Fixed-Effects Estimates

                                  (a) Race                                          (b) Gender

                           Cognitive Scores Non-cognitive Scores      Cognitive Scores Non-cognitive Scores
                                 (1)                    (2)                 (3)                   (4)

                                       African American                                Boys
                               0.0014             0.0100***              0.0048***             0.0088***
                r = 3 km
                              (0.0015)                (0.0024)           (0.0016)              (0.0019)
                               0.0007             0.0055***              0.0029***             0.0048***
                r = 5 km
                              (0.0008)                (0.0015)           (0.0009)              (0.0012)
                               0.0009             0.0042***              0.0024***             0.0038***
                r = 7 km
                              (0.0008)                (0.0012)           (0.0007)              (0.0010)
                Obs.            2,087                  2,087               2,583                 2,583
                                           Hispanic                                    Girls
                              0.0042***           0.0045***               0.0017               0.0068***
                r = 3 km
                              (0.0013)                (0.0014)           (0.0011)              (0.0019)
                              0.0027***               0.0019**            0.0013*              0.0037***
                r = 5 km
                              (0.0009)                (0.0008)           (0.0007)              (0.0011)
                              0.0023***               0.0016**            0.0011               0.0028***
                r = 7 km
                              (0.0007)                (0.0008)           (0.0006)              (0.0009)
                Obs.            2,580                  2,580               2,625                 2,625


Notes: The spillover effects from each additional treated neighbor on cognitive and non-cognitive test scores, estimated from
the fixed-effects model (equation (1)). Panel (a) presents the effects, separately for African American and Hispanic receiving
children. Panel (b) reports the effects separately for boys and girls. Robust standard errors, clustered at the
census-block-group level, are in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



Panel (b) of Table 5 and Figure 4 presents the estimated effects by gender. Overall, boys benefit
more than girls from both cognitive and non-cognitive spillovers. However, these gender differences
are not statistically significant at the conventional levels.31 In section 6, we explore at a deeper
level the mechanisms through which spillover effects operate, and discuss a potential source of
heterogeneity in spillover effects along race and gender lines.

Note that our estimates cannot be directly compared with the heterogeneity in treatment effects
  30
      The p-values from Wald tests of the null of equal 1 for Hispanics and African American children's cognitive
(non-cognitive) test scores (in the pooled sample) are 0.15 (0.07), 0.10 (0.04), and 0.17 (0.07) for neighborhood radii
of 3, 5, and 7 kilometers, respectively.
   31
      The p-values from Wald tests of the null of equal 1 for cognitive (non-cognitive) test scores for boys and girls
(in the pooled sample) are 0.12 (0.47), 0.13 (0.50), and 0.10 (0.47) for neighborhood radii of 3, 5, and 7 kilometers,
respectively.


                                                                 20
reported by Fryer et al. (2015) due to two main differences between our samples. First, unlike
Fryer et al. (2015) who report heterogeneous effects from the Parent Academy, our analysis uses
data from all CHECC programs and considers heterogeneity in spillover effects on all children who
were randomized during the intervention. Second, whereas Fryer et al. (2015) base their estimates
on observations from the post program assessments (which took place immediately after the end
of program year), our estimates use the pre-, mid-, and post-program assessment as well as up to
four additional follow-up assessments, which were administered after a program year ended.

                     (a) Race                                         (b) Gender




Figure 4: The spillover effect from an additional treated neighbor on a child's standardized cognitive
and non-cognitive scores, estimated from the fixed-effects model. Panel (a) presents the effects
separately for African American and Hispanic children, and panel (b) presents the effects separately
for males and females.



5    Robustness

Our identification strategy, presented in Section 3 (individual fixed-effects model), is based on the
assumption that individual effects are time-invariant omitted variables. In this section, we relax
this assumption by directly controlling for the lagged dependent variables and removing individual
fixed effects. Whereas the fixed-effects specification uses within-individual variations in spatial
exposure to treatments, the lagged dependent variables (LDV) model exploits both within- and
between-individual variations to estimate the spillover effects.

In this spirit, Angrist and Pischke (2008) argue that fixed effects and LDV estimates have a brack-
eting property such that they provide upper and lower bounds for where the true effect lies. The
authors provide an empirical approach to estimate the effects under both specifications and check



                                                 21
whether they provide broadly similar results. We formulate this alternative specification as:

                                treated      total
                  Yi,t = 0 + 1 Ni,t |r  + 2 Ni,t |r + Yi,t-1 + Xi  + b + t + µc +                     i,t ,             (2)

              treated , and N total are defined as previously. We control for the lagged cognitive and
where Yi,t , Ni,t |r         i,t|r
non-cognitive test scores through Yi,t-1 , and include census-block group (b ) as well as time and
cohort fixed effects (t and µc ). Xi represents a vector of time-invariant characteristics including
gender, race, and age at the time of the baseline assessment. Under this specification, 1 reflects the
average spillover effect from an additional treated neighbor who lives within radius r on a child's
standardized cognitive or non-cognitive test score.32


5.1     Main effects

Table 6 presents 1 's, estimated from equation (2), for three different neighborhood radii: 3, 5, and
7 kilometers. The standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the census-block-group
level to allow for common error components within geographical units. Consistent with the results
presented in section 4.1, we find significant spillover effects on both cognitive and non-cognitive
test scores, with larger effects on non-cognitive scores.33

Comparing the effects on treated and control children leads to a similar conclusion as we found
in our fixed-effects specification: there are not significant differences in spillover effects between
children who were assigned to the treatment and control groups.34 Empirical estimates from the
two models are also similar in magnitude: An additional treated neighbor within 3 kilometers
of a child is estimated to increase that child's cognitive score by 0.0033 under the fixed-effects
specification and by 0.0042 under the LDV model. Similarly, an additional treated neighbor
residing within 3 kilometers is estimated to increase the child's non-cognitive score by 0.0069 and
0.0070 under the fixed-effects and LDV specifications, respectively.35
  32
     Appendix D discusses the robustness of our estimates to a gradual addition of controls.
  33                                                                 cog     ncog                               cog     ncog
     The p-values from the Wald test of the null hypothesis of 1         = 1      against the alternative of 1      = 1
are 0.045, 0.035, and 0.035 for neighborhood radii of 3, 5 and 7 kilometers, respectively.
  34                                              cog
     The p-values from the Wald test of equal 1       's for the control and treatment group are 0.34, 0.39, and 0.22 for
                                                                                                   noncog
neighborhood radii of 3K, 5K, and 7K meters, respectively. The corresponsing p-values for 1               's are 0.82, 0.37,
and 0.44.
  35
     In appendix D, we discuss how these estimates change as we gradually add controls in Equation (2). Our findings
suggest that our estimates of spillover effects are not very sensitive to the exclusion of lagged dependent variables or
other controls. Specifically, the non-cognitive spillover effects are positive and significant even in our most stripped-
down specification, which does not include any controls. That is, we can rely purely on the experimentally induced
variations in exposure to estimate the non-cognitive spillover effects. These effects remain stable as we include
additional controls to the model. The cognitive spillover effects become stable once we include neighborhood-level
(block-group) fixed effects in the model and remain stable afterwards.




                                                            22
         Table 6: Mean Effect Sizes on Cognitive and Non-cognitive Scores, LDV Estimates

                                           Cognitive Scores                     Non-cognitive Scores
                                  Pooled      Control    Treatment      Pooled        Control   Treatment
                                    (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)           (5)        (6)

                                 0.0042***    0.0052**        0.0019   0.0070*** 0.0059***      0.0067**
                      r = 3 km
                                  (0.0012)    (0.0025)    (0.0020)     (0.0015)      (0.0018)    (0.0026)
                                 0.0033***    0.0038**    0.0021*      0.0059*** 0.0037*** 0.0060***
                      r = 5 km
                                  (0.0009)    (0.0016)    (0.0011)     (0.0014)      (0.0011)    (0.0023)
                                 0.0027**    0.0034***        0.0015   0.0054*** 0.0035***      0.0053**
                      r = 7 km
                                  (0.0007)    (0.0013)    (0.0010)     (0.0014)      (0.0013)    (0.0022)
                      Obs.         3,403        1,495         2,093      3,403         1,495      2,093

                      Notes: Spillover effects from each additional treated neighbor (^1 ) estimated from
                     equation (2) are presented. Columns 1-3 (4-6) represent the effects from an addi-
                     tional treated neighbor on a child's standardized cognitive (non-cognitive) score.
                     Robust standard errors, clustered at the census-block-group level are in parenthe-
                     ses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



5.2    Spatial fade-out

We can use a similar robustness test for our fade-out estimates. Figure 5 displays the estimated
effects from an additional treated neighbor, as a function of neighborhood radius. The point
estimates are reported in Appendix G. Similar to Figure 3, the estimated effects from the LDV
specification also exhibit a downward-sloping relationship with the neighborhood radius. The
spatial fade-out is more salient for the effects on non-cognitive scores. Confirming our finding from
estimating the fixed-effects model reported in section 4.2, the LDV estimates show that the spillover
effect from a treated neighbor decreases as the spatial distance to that neighbor's home increases.


5.3    Heterogeneous effects

Performing a similar robustness test on the estimated heterogeneous effects, we present Table
7, which reports the spillover effects by race and gender estimated from the LDV specification
(equation (2)). Focusing on race (panel (a)), we find no significant differences in spillover on
cognitive scores between African Americans and Hispanic children.36 Similar to the fixed-effects
estimates, the LDV estimates of non-cognitive spillover effects reveal a large and significant racial
gap, with African American children benefiting about three to four times as much as Hispanics
from their treated neighbors.37
  36
     The p-values from Wald tests of the null hypothesis of equal spillover effects on cognitive scores (1 ) for Hispanics
and African Americans in the pooled sample are 0.59, 0.52, and 0.50 for neighborhood radii of 3, 5, and 7 kilometers,
respectively.
  37
     The p-values from Wald tests of the null hypothesis of equal spillover effects on non-cognitive scores (1 ) for
Hispanics and African Americans in the pooled sample are 0.001, 0.005, and 0.020 for neighborhood radii of 3, 5, and
7 kilometers, respectively.


                                                                23
                                                       Pooled




                                Control                                      Treated




Figure 5: The spillover effects, estimated under the LDV model, from an additional treated neighbor
on a child's standardized cognitive and non-cognitive test scores, as functions of neighborhood
radius.


Panel (b) of Table 7 reports the effects from the LDV specification by gender, and reveals that in
general, boys tend to benefit slightly more than girls from spillover effects. However, the gender
differences are not significant at conventional levels.38 . Overall, both the gender and race effects
are largely preserved after performing these robustness tests.



6        Exploring the Mechanisms

One attractive feature of our field experiment is that it generates data that has unique variation to
explore the underlying mechanisms at work for our observed spillovers. As the sociology literature
argues, early childhood human capital development relates both to parental and child interactions.
Whereby Sheldon (2002) and others argue that social activity can be represented by group com-
positions, and that those critically determine the nature and extent of spillovers, we were unable
    38
    The p-values from Wald tests of the null hypothesis of equal spillover effects on cognitive scores (1 ) for boys
and girls in the pooled sample are 0.29, 0.36, and 0.16 for neighborhood radii of 3, 5, and 7 kilometers, respectively.
The corresponding p-values for spillover effects in non-cognitive scores are 0.88, 0.82, and 0.53.



                                                          24
           Table 7: Mean Effect Sizes within Gender and Race Subgroups, LDV Estimates
                                     (a) Race                                          (b) Gender

                              Cognitive Scores Non-cognitive Scores      Cognitive Scores Non-cognitive Scores
                                    (1)                    (2)                 (3)                   (4)

                                          African American                                Boys
                                 0.0056***           0.0154***              0.0054***             0.0063***
                   r = 3 km
                                 (0.0019)                (0.0034)           (0.0026)              (0.0023)
                                 0.0037***           0.0108***              0.0037***             0.0059***
                   r = 5 km
                                 (0.0013)                (0.0025)           (0.0011)              (0.0021)
                                 0.0032***           0.0087***              0.0033***             0.0060***
                   r = 7 km
                                 (0.0012)                (0.0022)           (0.0009)              (0.0021)
                   Obs.            1,312                  1,312               1,693                 1,693
                                              Hispanic                                    Girls
                                 0.0042**                0.0034**           0.0032**              0.0067***
                   r = 3 km
                                 (0.0017)                (0.0016)           (0.0014)              (0.0017)
                                 0.0026**                0.0034**           0.0027***             0.0053***
                   r = 5 km
                                 (0.0011)                (0.0014)           (0.0010)              (0.0019)
                                 0.0022**                0.0031**            0.0017*              0.0044**
                   r = 7 km
                                 (0.0009)                (0.0016)           (0.0009)              (0.0018)
                   Obs.            1,760                  1,760               1,710                 1,710


Notes: Spillover effects from an additional treated neighbor on cognitive and non-cognitive test scores, estimated from LDV
specification (equation (2)). Panel (a) presents the effects, separately for African American and Hispanic receiving children.
Panel (b) reports the effects separately for boys and girls. Robust standard errors, clustered at the census-block-group level,
are in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




to find literature that uses random assignment to parse the spillover effects. In this manner, using
our randomization: variation in treatment and variation in treatment type, alongside distance to
treated and control neighbors, gender, and race variables, we can detail the underlying mechanisms
proposed to make human capital development inherently a social activity (Coleman, 1988; Cochran
and Brassard, 1979; Corsaro, 2005).


6.1     Parent Academy versus Pre-K

Since the intervention offered education programs for both children and parents, one might expect
the spillover effects to operate though the social network of children via direct interactions between
them, or indirectly through their parents' social networks. To shed light on which channel generates
stronger effects, we start by comparing spillovers from treated neighbors who were assigned to
the parent-education programs (Parent Academy neighbors) with the effect from those who were
assigned to the preschool programs (Pre-K neighbors). If spillovers mainly operate through parents'
social network, then we might expect larger effects from Parent Academy neighbors than from Pre-K
neighbors, because Parent Academy treatments involved parents more directly and more intensely
than Pre-K treatments. Alternatively, larger spillover effects from Pre-K neighbors could imply the


                                                                    25
                          (a) Race                                      (b) Gender




Figure 6: The spillover effect from an additional treated neighbor on a child's standardized cognitive
and non-cognitive scores, estimated from the LDV model. Panel (a) presents the effects separately
for African American and Hispanics, and panel (b) presents the effects by gender.


direct interactions between children play an important role in generating the effects.

To compare spillovers from Parent Academy and Pre-K neighbors, we estimate the fixed-effects
and LDV specifications of the following forms:39

                                     P arent      P reK    total
                       Yi,t = 0 + p Ni,t,r   + c Ni,t,r + Ni,t |r + i + t +           i,t                 (3)

                         P arent      P reK    total
           Yi,t = 0 + p Ni,t,r   + c Ni,t,r + Ni,t |r + Yi,t-1 + Xi  + b + µc + t +               i,t .   (4)
 P arent and N P reK represent the number of Parent Academy and Pre-K neighbors of a child i who
Ni,t,r        i,t,r
                                                                        total , Y , Y
reside within a distance r from i at the time of her assessment t, and Ni,t |r   i,t  i,t-1 , Xi , i , b , µc
and t are defined as previously. To simplify the analysis and retain statistical power, we construct
 P reK and N P arent by pooling neighbors who were assigned to any of the preschool programs as
Ni,t,r      i,t,r
Pre-K neighbors, and pooling those who were assigned to any of the two parent-education programs
as Parent Academy neighbors. Under the above specifications, p reflects the average spillover effect
                                                     P reK and N total constant. In other words,
from an additional Parent Academy neighbor, holding Ni,t,r      i,t|r
p represents the average effect of substituting a control neighbor with a Parent Academy neighbor.
Similarly, c represents the average spillover effect from an additional Pre-K neighbor on a child's
test scores.

Note that a child i may benefit from a Parent Academy neighbor k through two channels. The
first channel is the parents' social networks: k 's parents may influence the behavior and decisions
  39
     In a few cases in which a treated neighbor k was first assigned to a Parent Academy (Pre-K) treatment and
assigned to Pre-K (Parent Academy) in later years, k is counted as a Parent Academy (Pre-K) neighbor for the
observations prior to the second randomization, and as a Pre-K (Parent academy) neighbor for the observations
following the second randomization.



                                                     26
of i's parents', which may in turn shape i's development. Such effects can occur through infor-
mation externalities (i.e., k 's parents share their acquired knowledge from Parent Academy with
i's parents) or preference externalities between parents. The second channel is peer influence: if
Parent Academy improves k 's outcomes, then child i might benefit from direct interactions with
child k . The benefits from a Pre-K neighbor, however, are likely to spill over mainly through direct
interactions between children (peer influence) because parents are not the main target of the Pre-K
treatments.40 Thus, although   ^p might reflect spillovers through both the parents' and the child's
social networks, ^c is more likely to reflect an effect that is mainly driven by direct interactions
between children.

Table 8 reports estimated p and c for neighborhood radii of 3, 5, and 7 kilometers from the fixed-
effects and LDV specifications. Focusing on non-cognitive scores, the estimates from both models
suggest larger spillover effects from Pre-K neighbors than Parent Academy neighbors (  ^p < ^c ).41
According to the fixed-effects estimates, an additional Pre-K neighbor within a 3-kilometer radius
of a child increases her non-cognitive score by 0.0099 , whereas an additional Parent Academy
neighbor only induces a 0.0045 increase in the non-cognitive test score. Similarly, the LDV
estimates suggest an additional Pre-K neighbor within a 3-kilometer radius of a child increases
her non-cognitive test score by 0.0108 , whereas an extra Parent Academy neighbor within the
same radius induces only a 0.0017 increase in her non-cognitive test score. The larger spillovers
from Pre-K neighbors than from Parent Academy neighbors suggests that direct social interactions
between children (rather than between parents) plays an important role in generating the non-
cognitive effects.

Unlike the effects on non-cognitive scores, we find no significant differences in spillover effects on
cognitive scores from Parent Academy and Pre-K neighbors.42


6.2    Heterogeneity in neighborhood-level social interactions

Our estimates presented in Sections 4 and 5 suggested that non-cognitive spillover effects are
significantly larger for African Americans than Hispanics. We also found spillover effects to be
larger for boys than girls, although the gender difference was not significant at conventional levels.
  40
     As previously described previously in Section 2, two out of the four Pre-K treatments (Preschool Plus and
Kinderprep) had parental-education components that were not incentivised as heavily, and were much less intensive
than the one offered to Parent Academy families. Appendix H examines the spillover from Pre-K neighbors who were
randomized to preschool programs with and without the parental component and shows that our conclusions are not
sensitive to pooling these two treatments together.
  41
     The p-values for the fixed-effects estimates from Wald tests of the null hypothesis p = c against p = c for
r=3 km, r=5 km and r=7 km equal 0.004, 0.006, and 0.016, respectively. The corresponding p-values from the LDV
estimates are 0.004, 0.010, and 0.03.
  42
     For the fixed-effects estimates, the p-values from Wald tests of the null hypothesis p = c against p = c
for r=3 km, r=5 km and r=7 km are 0.82, 0.43, and 0.34, respectively. The corresponding p-values from the LDV
estimates are 0.76, 0.14, and 0.14.


                                                       27
       Table 8: Spillover Effects from Parent Academy and Pre-K Neighbors, Pooled Sample
                     (a) Fixed Effects Estimates                                                 (b) LDV estimates

                         Cognitive Scores     Non-cognitive Scores                      Cognitive Scores        Non-cognitive Scores
                    p             c             p               c                 p              c               p                c
                   (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)               (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)
     r = 3 km   0.0035***      0.0033***     0.0045***     0.0099***           0.0045***      0.0040***        0.0017         0.0108***
                 (0.0012)      (0.0011)      (0.0008)       (0.0018)           (0.0016)       (0.0014)         (0.0017)       (0.0021)
     r = 5 km   0.0024***      0.0019***     0.0024***     0.0055***           0.0046***      0.0030***        0.0019         0.0068***
                 (0.0008)      (0.0006)      (0.0006)       (0.0011)           (0.0013)       (0.0009)         (0.0017)       (0.0015)
     r = 7 km   0.0021***      0.0016***     0.0022***     0.0041***           0.0041***      0.0025***        0.0023         0.0058***
                 (0.0005)      (0.0005)      (0.0005)       (0.0009)           (0.0013)       (0.0007)         (0.0020)       (0.0013)
       Obs.                   5,208                     5,208                                3,403                        3,403


Notes: Columns 1 and 3 (2 and 4) report the average effect of an additional Parent Academy (Pre-K) neighbor who resides
within distance r of a child, on her standardized cognitive and non-cognitive scores. Panel (a) presents the estimates from the
fixed-effects specifications (equation 3), and panel (b) reports LDV estimates (4). Robust standard errors, clustered at the
census-block-group level, are in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




Given our evidence suggesting direct interactions with peers at the neighborhood level might be
an important mechanism in generating non-cognitive spillover effects, one might hypothesize that
the racial and gender differences in non-cognitive spillover effects originate from racial and gender
differences in social interactions within neighborhoods.

We explore this idea using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health survey
(Add Health),43 which includes measures of social interactions within neighborhoods. Add Health
is a longitudinal study of a nationally representative sample of adolescents in grades 7 to 12 in the
United States. Using the public-use data from Add Health, we explore racial and gender differences
in variables that reflect children's social interactions within neighborhoods. Table 9 presents our
findings. Consistent with our hypothesis, we find African American children are significantly (at
p < 0.001) more likely than Hispanics, and boys are significantly (at p < 0.001) more likely than
girls, to (i) know most people in their neighborhood, (ii) stop on the street to talk to someone from
the neighborhood, and (iii) use recreation facilities in the neighborhood. Although these data speak
to a slightly older age group than our subjects, we believe that these findings provide suggestive
evidence that the higher level of neighborhood-level social interactions for African Americans (and
for boys) is a possible cause of the larger non-cognitive spillover effects on this subgroup. Yet, more
research is necessary as we view this result as merely suggestive.
   43
      The AddHealth is a project directed by Kathleen Mullan Harris and designed by J. Richard Udry, Peter S.
Bearman, and Kathleen Mullan Harris at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and funded by grant
P01-HD31921 from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, with
cooperative funding from 23 other federal agencies and foundations. Information on how to obtain the Add Health
data files is available on the Add Health website (http://www.cpc.unc.edu/addhealth). No direct support was received
from grant P01-HD31921 for this analysis.




                                                                 28
          Table 9: Heterogeneity in Neighborhood Level Social Interactions (Add Health Data)

                                                                                 African American Hispanic Male Female
       (1) Know most people in the neighborhood                                       0.78                    0.69   0.79   0.71
                                      (p-value)                                              (0.00)                     (0.00)
       (2) Stop on the street to talk to someone who lives in the neighborhood        0.84                    0.78   0.86   0.79
                                      (p-value)                                              (0.00)                     (0.00)
       (3) Use recreation/sports center in the neighborhood                           0.25                    0.18   0.28   0.17
                                      (p-value)                                              (0.00)                     (0.00)
                                    Observations                                      1,121                   537    787    871

    Notes: The share of respondents who agreed with each statement. The data are restricted to African American and
   Hispanic respondents. Questions are from Wave II of the Add Health survey. Demographic information was obtained
   from Wave I of the survey. The precise wording of the survey questions are as follows: (1) You know most of the people
   in your neighborhood. (0 = false, 1= true); (2) In the past month, you have stopped on the street to talk with someone
   who lives in your neighborhood. (0 = false, 1 = true); (3) Do you use a physical fitness or recreation center in your
   neighborhood? (0 = no, 1 = yes). P-values from a two-sample test of proportions under the null hypothesis of equal
   proportions against the alternative of unequal proportions between each pair of subgroups are reported in parentheses.



6.3       Parental Investment

Spillover effects can also operate through influencing parental decisions, which affect children's
development. Parents might learn from their neighbors about returns to investments and the most
productive forms of investments in their children and adjust their choices accordingly. Our data
include a self-reported measure of investment concerning parents' decision to enroll their child in
preschool programs (other than CHECC). This variable was collected through a survey completed
by parents, which was administered at the end of each program year (at the time of the children's
post-assessment).44

We start by exploring whether this self-reported measure of parental investment has any predictive
power regarding children's cognitive and non-cognitive performance. That is, whether enrolling
one's child in a preschool program (other than CHECC) is associated with the child's cognitive or
non-cognitive development. We do so by estimating an LDV model of the following form:45

                                Yi,t = 0 + Zi,t + Yi,t-1 + Xi  + b + µc + t +                         i,t ,                        (5)

where Zi,t is a binary variable indicating whether parents of a child i reported enrolling i in a
preschool program during the school year prior to t.46 All other terms are defined as previously. In
this specification,  reflects whether a parent's decision to enroll her child in a preschool program
  44
     For the last cohort of families who were randomized in the program, this information was also collected from
parents at the time of pre-assessment (in addition to the post-assessment).
  45
     Since for the vast majority (over 90%) of our sample, we observe the investment measure only once, we cannot
estimate their effects on test scores using within-individual variations.
  46                   treated       total
     Controlling for Ni,t |r   and Ni,t |r or the child's treatment assignment does not change our point estimates very
much.




                                                               29
is correlated with the child's skill development (Yi,t ).47

Table 10 presents the estimated  from equation (5). The estimates suggest a parent's decision to
enroll her child in other (non-CHECC) preschool programs is significantly correlated with cognitive
development. Indeed, such enrollment is associated with increases in the child's cognitive test score
by 0.134 , whereas the effect on non-cognitive test-scores is not significant at conventional levels.
In the next step, we explore whether spillover effects occur on a parent's decision to enroll her child
in other programs.

  Table 10: Parent's Decision to Enroll a Child in Preschool Programs and Child's Development

                                                            Cognitive             Non-cognitive
                           Other Programs                   0.134***                   0.127
                                                             (0.048)                  (0.086)
                             Observations                      655                      655
                              R-squared                        0.80                    0.58

                           Notes: Estimated 's from equation (5) are presented. The point
                          estimates reflect the effect of the parental decision to enroll children
                          in preschool programs, and children's cognitive and non-cognitive test
                          scores. Although we have about 1,000 observations on investment
                          decisions, we observe lagged test scores for only about 60% of these
                          observations. Robust standard errors, clustered at the census-block-
                          group level, are reported in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
                          p<0.1


Our analysis of the spatial spillover effects on cognitive and non-cognitive test scores exploited
the panel nature of our outcome variables, allowing us to estimate the causal spillover effects
using individual fixed-effects or lagged dependent-variables specifications. Unfortunately, for a
large majority (over 90%) of our sample, the data on parental decisions to enroll children in non-
CHECC programs were collected only once (at the time of children's post-assessment). Therefore,
we cannot use the previous identification strategies to estimate the causal spillover effects on parents'
investment decision. Instead, we rely on the following OLS specification to explore this channel:

                                      treated    total
                        Zi,t = 0 + 1 Ni,t |r  + Ni,t |r + Xi  + b + µc + t +                         i,t ,       (6)

where Zi,t represents parents' investment decision, and other variables are defined as previously.
Under the above specification, 1 represents the relationship between having an additional treated
neighbor residing within distance r and a parent's decision to enroll her child in a non-CHECC
preschool program.

Table 11 presents estimated 1 's from equation 6. Interestingly, our estimates suggest positive and
  47
     Note that since Zi,t is not assigned randomly, we cannot interpret  as the causal effect of preschool enrollment
on children's development without making additional assumptions. The purpose of this exercise is to merely explore
whether this measure of parental investment is associated with child's development rather than to establish a causal
relationship.


                                                            30
significant spillover effects on this measure of parents' investment decision. Each additional treated
neighbor residing within a 3-kilometer radius of a child's home increases the likelihood of the child's
parents enrolling her in a preschool program by 0.55 percentage points. Given our previous finding
that enrolling a child in a non-CHECC program significantly improves her cognitive performance,
this result provides suggestive evidence that influencing the parental decision to enroll her child in
a preschool program is an important channel through which cognitive spillover effects operate.
             Table 11: Exposure to Treatments and the Parents' Investment Decision

                            Dependent Variable                     Other Programs
                                   r = 3k                             0.0055**
                                                                       (0.0023)
                                   r = 5k                              0.0066*
                                                                       (0.0040)
                                   r = 7k                              0.010**
                                                                       (0.0041)
                                Observations                             974

                             Notes: Estimated 1 's from equation (6) are presented.
                            Robust standard errors, clustered at the census-block-
                            group level, are reported in parentheses; *** p<0.01, **
                            p<0.05, * p<0.1


The above finding should be interpreted with caution for two reasons. First, our measure of parental
investment decision is self-reported, and therefore is not an objective measure of the actual choices.
Second, given that the structure of our survey data prevents us from using individual fixed-effects
or LDV methods in estimation, interpreting 1 as the causal spillover effect on parents' decision
                                                             total , X ,  , µ and  ) our exposure
would require an additional assumption that (conditional on Ni,t |r   i  b   c    t
          treated --is uncorrelated with unobserved individual-level characteristics. Recognizing
measure--Ni,t |r
these two caveats, we believe our results provide suggestive evidence that cognitive spillover effects
might operate--at least partly--through influencing parents' decisions to enroll their child in a
preschool program.



7    Total Impact

After measuring positive spillover effects from the programs delivered at CHECC, we now turn
to estimating the total impact of the intervention, accounting for these indirect effects. Beyond
estimating the total impact, we also (i) disentangle the direct and indirect (spillover) effects from
the intervention, and (ii) estimate the size of bias that would arise if we were to ignore spillovers.

Before presenting our evaluation strategy, we should emphasize three key features of this exercise.
First, whereas CHECC offered multiple education programs to both parents and children, the aim
of this exercise is not to separately evaluate each program. Instead, we provide an overall evaluation

                                                      31
of the intervention as a whole by pooling all treatments and accounting for spillovers. Second, given
that we estimate spillovers using panel data over multiple years, our total effect is also based on
observations over multiple years, starting at the time of randomization and terminating four years
after the program ends for the cohort. Therefore, our analysis provides an average estimate of
the total impact of CHECC over time, which includes the immediate as well as the longer-run
effects.48 Finally, to fix ideas and simplify the presentation of our results, we set the neighborhood
radii to 3 kilometers. Appendix I presents our estimates of the total impact for a broader range of
neighborhood radii and discusses the robustness of our findings to varying r.

The total impact of the intervention (T otal) on a child i who was randomized into one of the
treatments (Parent Academies or Pre-K) can be expressed as the sum of the direct treatment effect
(DE) and the spillover effects, which i receives from N other treated individuals in her vicinity
(ST N ): T otal = Direct + ST N . If an evaluator ignores the spillover effects on control children
(SC N ) and follows the standard approach, she naively reports the difference in the mean outcomes
between the control and treated groups as the total impact. This standard approach would result
in a biased estimate, which we call T otalStandard = T otal - SC N = Direct + ST N - SC N .

We evaluate the total impact of the intervention by estimating the following LDV model, using our
pooled sample, which includes observations from both the treated and control children. We focus
on the LDV specification for this estimation, because unlike the fixed-effects model, it allows us to
exploit between-individual variation to estimate the direct time-invariant treatment effect:

                    treated          treated        total
 Yi,t = 0 + Ti + 1 Ni,t |r  + (Ti × Ni,t |r  ) + 2 Ni,t |r + Yi,t-1 + Xi + t + µc + b +                      i,t .   (7)

Ti is a treatment indicator, which equals 1 if i was assigned to a treatment group, and 0 otherwise,
                     treated , N total , X ,  , µ , and  are defined as previously. We include an
and Yi,t , Yi,t-1 , Ni,t |r     i,t|r     i  t   c      b
                        treated ) to allow for different spillover effects on treatment and control
interaction term (Ti × Ni,t |r
children. Under this specification,  represents the average direct effect of the intervention on
a treatment child (Direct), 1 represents the average spillover effect from an additional treated
neighbor on a control child (SC 1 ), and 1 +  represents the average spillover effect from an
additional treated neighbor on a treatment child (ST 1 ). Assuming linearity, the average total
spillover effect from all treated neighbors on a control child (SC N ) can be expressed as N treated × ^1 ,
                                                                                                       r
       treated represents the average number of treated neighbors who reside within distance r of
where Nr
a child.49 Likewise, the average total spillover effect from all treated neighbors on a child who was
randomized into a treatment (ST N ) can be expressed as N treated × (     ^1 + ^ ). Therefore, the total
                                                                      r
impact of the intervention on a treatment child (T otal) is the sum of the direct and the spillover
   48
      For this reason, our estimates of the total impact cannot be directly compared to the ones reported in Fryer et
al. (2015), which are based on test scores from the assessments administered immediately after the programs ended.
   49
      Appendix J shows these findings do not change much if we relax the linearity assumption and allow for quadratic
and cubic terms.


                                                         32
           ^ =
effects: T otal ^ + N treated × (^1 + ^ ).
                     r

Table 12 reports the estimated coefficients from equation (7) for r = 3 kilometers. The first two
columns present the estimates for the pooled sample, and the last four report estimates separately
for African American and Hispanic children. Focusing on the pooled sample, we find the average
direct effects of being randomly assigned to a treatment group on a child's standardized cognitive
and non-cognitive scores are 0.11 and 0.05, respectively. The average total spillover effects on a
control child 's standardized cognitive and non-cognitive scores (SC N ) are estimated to be 0.75
and 1.25. The corresponding spillover effects on a treatment child are 0.71 and 1.27 . The total
impact of being assigned to treatment (including both the direct and spillover effects) on a child's
standardized cognitive and non-cognitive test scores is estimated to be 0.82 and 1.32, respectively.
Note that the total spillover effects on both cognitive and non-cognitive scores of treatment children
are larger than the direct treatment effects, suggesting a large portion of the total impact is due
to the network effects that emerge from interactions with other treated individuals. This finding
implies that if one were to treat a single child in isolation, the average cognitive and non-cognitive
treatment effects would be about ( 0 .82          1.31
                                   0.11 ) 7 and ( 0.05 ) 26 times smaller than the estimated
impacts in the presence of spillovers from other treated children.

                                            Table 12: Total Program Impact

                                              All                   African American                 Hispanic
                                   Cognitive Non-cognitive Cognitive Non-cognitive Cognitive            Non-cognitive
                                   (1)         (2)            (3)         (4)             (5)           (6)
                    ^ (Direct)
                                   0.1070*** 0.0456           0.0145      -0.0558         0.276***      0.135
                                   (0.0393)    (0.0642)       (0.0667)    (0.111)         (0.0671)      (0.0978)
                    ^
                                   0.0042*** 0.0070***        0.0056*** 0.0154***         0.0044**      0.0034**
                                   (0.0013)    (0.0015)       (0.0019)    (0.0034)        (0.0018)      (0.0016)
                    ^
                                   -0.0002*    0.0001         0.0001      0.0005          -0.0007*** -0.0000
                                   (0.0001)    (0.0002)       (0.0003)    (0.0003)        (0.0002)      (0.0003)
                    SC N           0.75***     1.25***        0.72***     1.99***         1.27***       0.81**
                                   (0.22)      (0.27)         (0.24)      (0.44)          (0.48)        (0.38)
                    ST N           0.71***     1.27***        0.74***     2.05***         1.05**        0.80**
                                   (0.22)      (0.27)         (0.25)      (0.45)          (0.49)        (0.36)
                    T otal         0.82***     1.32***        0.75***     1.99***         1.38***       0.93***
                                   (0.23)      (0.27)         (0.25)      (0.44)          (0.47)        (0.37)
                    T otalStandard 0.06***     0.07**         0.03        0.01            0.11***       0.12***
                                   (0.02)      (0.03)         (0.05)      (0.07)          (0.03)        (0.04)
                    Observations 3,403         3,403          1,312       1,312           1,760         1,760
                    R-squared      0.659       0.384          0.684       0.441           0.613         0.362

                   Notes: Estimated coefficients from equation (7) are presented. Robust standard errors, clustered
                   at the census-block-group level, are in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. N includes
                   all observations for which we have lagged cognitive and non-cognitive scores, and other regressors.
                                         treated = 128.83;N treated = 237.38
                   N treated = 178.13; NBlack              Hispanic




The comparison across the last two rows of Table 12 shows that if we were to ignore the spillover
effects, we would severely underestimate the total impact of the intervention. For example, if we
were to disregard the spillover effects, we would have wrongly concluded the intervention only


                                                                    33
induced a 0.06 and 0.07 increase in cognitive and non-cognitive test scores, respectively.50 These
estimates on cognitive and non-cognitive scores are considerably smaller than our estimated effects,
which account for spillovers to the control group (T otal).

We report our estimates of impacts on African Americans and Hispanics in columns (3)-(6) of Table
12.51 The first observation is that the direct effects of being randomized into a treatment group
(Direct) on both cognitive and non-cognitive test scores are larger for Hispanics than African Amer-
icans, although the difference is only significant for cognitive skills.52 While the racial difference in
cognitive spillovers are small and insignificant (p > 0.40), non-cognitive spillovers are significantly
larger for African Americans (p < 0.05). Overall, the intervention increases the cognitive scores for
African American and Hispanic children who were randomized into treatment by 0.75 and 1.38 ,
which are not significantly different from each other (p = 0.45).

By contrast, African American children who were offered the chance to participate in one of the
programs gain more than their Hispanic counterparts in non-cognitive skills as a result of the
intervention. The average total program impact (T otal) on the non-cognitive test score of an African
American treatment child is 1.99 , which is significantly larger than 0.93 , the corresponding effect
on a Hispanic treatment child (p = 0.07). Importantly, disregarding spillover effects and evaluating
CHECC by naively differencing the outcomes between control and treatment children results in
a quite conservative representation of findings. Our estimates, presented in the last row, suggest
that ignoring spillovers would have led us to conclude that whereas Hispanic children benefited as
a result of the intervention, African Americans gained nothing. Note that this conclusion was in
fact the one Fryer et al. (2015) reached in their evaluation of the parent academy intervention.
  50
      Note these estimates are considerably smaller than the estimated effects of the Parent Academy arm of the
intervention previously reported in Fryer et al. (2015). Fryer et al. (2015)--who ignore spillover effects--report that
Parent Academies increased cognitive and non-cognitive test scores by 0.119 and 0.203 , by the end of the program
year. Our T otalStandard estimates of the whole intervention (which ignore spillover effects to the control group) on
cognitive and non-cognitive scores are 1.99 (=0.119/0.06) and 2.9 (=0.203/0.07) times smaller than the reported
effects by Fryer et al. (2015). Two important factors cause the difference in these two sets of estimates: First, Fryer
et al. (2015) focus only on one treatment arm of the intervention (Parent Academies), whereas we estimate the
impact of CHECC as a whole, and our sample includes observations from all children who were randomized over the
four years of the intervention. Second, Fryer et al. (2015) focus on the short-term treatment effects and compare
test scores from assessments that were administered immediately at the end of a program year. Our analysis, on the
other hand, uses data from up to four years after a program ends, meaning we rely on both short- and longer-term
outcomes to estimate the impact. In fact, the treatment effects wear off and the differences in test scores between
the treatment and control groups become smaller over time, which suggests our estimates of T otalStandard should be
smaller than the effects reported in Fryer et al. (2015).
   51
      In our sample, on average, an African American (Hispanic) child has 129 (237) treated neighbors within 3
kilometers from her home.
   52
      The corresponding p-values for cognitive and non-cognitive scores are 0.006 and 0.17.




                                                          34
8        Discussion

Evaluations of early childhood programs have played an important role in shaping policy debates
on early education. For instance, the Head Start Impact Study (HSIS), a randomized control trial
of Head Start, reported small effect sizes that fade considerably over a few years (Puma et al.,
2010, 2012). These findings have heightened debate among academics over the cost effectiveness
of Head Start (e.g. Barnett, 2011; Gibbs et al., 2013; Kline and Walters, 2016) and have been
frequently cited by critics who argue Head Start is ineffective in achieving its mission and should
be abandoned or seriously reformed.53 Given the policy impact of the findings from early education
interventions, and more broadly any social intervention, accurate evaluation of the total effect of
these programs is crucial.

The standard approach in evaluating social programs is to randomly assign subjects to treatment
and control groups. From there, many analysts simply difference the mean outcomes and report
the monetized treatment effect within a benefit-cost framework. This approach is based on the
assumption that a person's potential outcomes are independent of other participants' treatment
assignment; that is, no spillover effects occur. Yet, if one considers that social capital, in the
Coleman (1988) sense, has value for a young person's development, then group composition and
community structure hold great import in understanding the development of human capital at a
young age. For our purposes, this literature opens up the distinct possibility of key spillovers that
might arise from such interventions, and guides us where to look for such effects.

In this paper, we provide the first empirical evidence on spillover effects from a large-scale early
education intervention by causally estimating neighborhood effects. In doing so, we provide unique
causal evidence on how neighbors influence children's outcomes. By leveraging field experimental
variation that has a novel panel data feature, we are allowed a comparison of child i at time t
having a certain number of treated neighbors with the same child i at time t + 1, where the number
of treated neighbors has changed. Compared to the previous literature, our approach provides a
new glimpse into such effects since we compare the same person at the same location with different
exposure rates while, in the standard literature using residential movers, one compares the same
child at different locations with different exposure rates; thus, it is difficult to disentangle the
location from the exposure effect.

Overall, we find that ignoring spillover effects results in severe underestimation of the total im-
pact. Indeed, we document spillovers that are economically significant and much larger than we
anticipated: on average, the intervention increases cognitive and non-cognitive test scores of a
control child by 0.75 and 1.25 , respectively. Beyond the main spillover effects, we observe in-
    53
     For example, a 2014 report from the House Budget Committee cites the findings of HSIS to conclude Head Start
is "failing to prepare children for school" (see: http://budget.house.gov/uploadedfiles/war on poverty.pdf).



                                                       35
teresting heterogeneities. For example, we find that non-cognitive spillover effects are larger for
African American children than for Hispanics. In addition, our evidence suggests that non-cognitive
spillovers are more likely to operate through children's rather than parents' social networks. We
also find suggestive evidence that cognitive spillover effects are generated through influencing the
parents' decision to enroll their child in an alternative form of treatment­an outside preschool
program.

Given the importance of non-cognitive skills in children's future labor market and educational
outcomes (Heckman et al., 2006; Borghans et al., 2008; Brunello and Schlotter, 2011), our findings
provide practical insights into designing early interventions to better foster such skills. Specifically,
our results suggest that interventions that promote social interactions both within participants and
between participants and non-participants are likely to generate larger positive externalities on
non-cognitive skills.

Our work also speaks to policymakers interested in the science of scaling programs (see, e.g., Al-
Ubaydli et al., 2017a,b; 2020). As experimentalists, we have focused almost exclusively on how best
to generate data to explore intervention effects and disentangle mechanisms. Yet, what has been
lacking is a scientific understanding of how to make best use of the research insights generated. In
particular, in what form should we implement the program for policy purposes? And, should we
expect the small-scale results to generalize to larger settings? Our findings reveal that traditional
measures of early education impacts, which ignore externalities, might be too pessimistic when such
programs are taken to scale. In this way, our findings suggest that ignoring the spillover effects can
lead to fewer programs being taken to scale than is optimal. Of course, this needs not be a general
result, as it is possible that in some cases those treated suppress outcomes of those in the control
group. More work is necessary in order to detail the nature and extent of scale-up effects when
moving from scientific insight to policy. While evidence-based policy is a useful target, our work
highlights that policy-based evidence is necessary to estimate the benefit/cost profile at scale.

More generally, one might wonder if our observed effects are generalizable to other populations of
people and situations. For this consideration, we follow the List (2020) SANS conditions. First, in
terms of selection, our sample includes a pre-K population that had broad coverage across Chicago
Heights (Fryer et al., 2020). Yet, our CHECC program was an opt-in design, so our estimates
might be limited to underserved community members who sign-up for early childhood programs.
Considering naturalness of the choice task, setting, and time frame, our main identification comes
from a natural field experiment, thus our setting is one in which subjects are engaged in a natural
task and are not placed on an artificial margin. Finally, since our key results are WAVE1 insights
(List, 2020), replications need to be completed to understand if the reduced form direct treatment
effect estimates and the spillover estimates manifest in other school districts and over other time
horizons.


                                                   36
References

[1] Agostinelli, F., Doepke, M., Sorrenti, G. and Zilibotti, F. (2020), "It takes a village: The
   economics of parenting with neighborhood and peer effects," NBER Working Paper No. 27050.

[2] Al-Ubaydli, O., List, J.A. and D.L. Suskind (2017a), "What can we learn from experiments?
   Understanding the threats to the scalability of experimental results," American Economic Re-
   view Papers & Proceedings 117(5), 282­86.

[3] Al-Ubaydli, O., List, J.A., LoRe, D. and D.L. Suskind (2017b), "Scaling for economists: Lessons
   from the non-adherence problem in the medical literature," Journal of Economic Perspectives
   31(4), 125­144.

[4] Al-Ubaydli, O., List, J.A. and D.L. Suskind (2020), "The science of using science: Toward an
   understanding of the threats to scalability," International Economic Review 61(4), 1387­1409.

[5] Angelucci, M., and G. De Giorgi (2009), "Indirect effects of an aid program: How do cash
   transfers affect ineligibles' consumption?" American Economic Review 99(1), 486­508.

[6] Angrist, J.D. and J.S. Pischke (2008), Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist's Com-
   panion, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

[7] °           ¨
    Aslund, O., Osth, J. and Y. Zenou (2010), "How crucial is distance to jobs for ethnic minorities?
   Old question ­ Improved answer," Journal of Economic Geography 10, 389­422.

[8] Attanasio, O., Cattan, S., Fitzsimons, E., Meghir, C. and M. Rubio-Codina (2020), "Esti-
   mating the production function for human capital: Results from a randomized control trial in
   Colombia," American Economic Review 110(1), 48­85.

[9] Attanasio, O., Meghir, C. and E. Nix (2015), "Human capital development and parental invest-
   ment in India," NBER Working Paper No. 21740.

[10] Avitabile, C. (2012), "Spillover effects in healthcare programs: Evidence on social norms and
   information sharing," IDB Working Paper Series No. 380.

[11] Barnett, W.S. (2011) "Effectiveness of early educational intervention," Science 333, 975­978.

[12] Bobba, M. and J. Gignoux (2019), "Neighborhood effects in integrated social policies," World
   Bank Economic Review 33(1), 116­139.

[13] Boning, W.C., Guyton, J., Hodge, R.H., Slemrod, J. and U. Troiano (2018), "Heard it through
   the grapevine: Direct and network effects of a tax enforcement field experiment," NBER Work-
   ing Paper No. 24305.

                                                 37
[14] Borghans, L., Duckworth, A.L., Heckman, J.J. and B. ter Weel (2008), "The economics and
   psychology of personality traits," Journal of Human Resources 43, 972­1059.

[15] Boucher, V., Del Bello, C., Panebianco, F. Verdier, T. and Y. Zenou (2020), "Education
   transmission and network formation," CEPR Discussion Paper No. 14997.

[16] Bourdieu, P. (1985), "The social space and the genesis of groups," Theory and Society 14(6),
   723­744.

[17] Brunello, G. and M. Schlotter (2011). "Non-cognitive skills and personality traits: Labour
   market relevance and their development in education and training systems," IZA Discussion
   Papers No. 5743.

[18] Chetty, R. and N. Hendren (2018a), "The impacts of neighborhoods on intergenerational
   mobility I: Childhood exposure effects," Quarterly Journal of Economics 133(3), 1107­1162.

[19] Chetty, R. and N. Hendren (2018b), "The impacts of neighborhoods on intergenerational
   mobility II: County-level estimates," Quarterly Journal of Economics 133(3), 1163-1228.

[20] Chetty, R., Hendren, N. and L.F. Katz (2016), "The effects of exposure to better neighborhoods
   on children: New evidence from the Moving to Opportunity experiment," American Economic
   Review 106(4), 855­902.

[21] Chyn, E. (2018), "Moved to opportunity: The long-run effects of public housing demolition
   on children,"American Economic Review 108(10), 3028­56.

[22] Cochran, M.M. and J.A. Brassard (1979), "Child development and personal social net-
   works,"Child Development 50(3), 601­616.

[23] Coleman, J.S. (1988), "Social capital in the creation of human capital,"American Journal of
   Sociology 94, S95­S120.

[24] Corsaro, W.A. (2005), The Sociology of Childhood, 2nd edition, London: Pine Forge Press.

[25] Cotton, C., Hickman, B., List, J.A., Price, J. and S. Roy (2020), "Productivity versus mo-
   tivation in adolescent human capital production: Evidence from a structurally-motivated field
   experiment, " NBER Working Paper No. 27995.

[26] Cr´
       epon, B., Duflo, E., Gurgand, M., Rathelot, R. and P. Zamora (2013), "Do labor mar-
   ket policies have displacement effects? Evidence from a clustered randomized experiment,"
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(2), 531­580.

[27] Cunha, F. and J.J. Heckman (2007), "The technology of skill formation," American Economic
   Review 97(2), 31­47.

                                                38
[28] Cunha, F., Heckman, J.J. and S.M. Schennach (2010), "Estimating the technology of cognitive
   and noncognitive skill formation," Econometrica 78, 883­931.

[29] Damm, A.P. and C. Dustmann (2014), "Does growing up in a high crime neighborhood affect
   youth criminal behavior?" American Economic Review 104(6), 1806­32.

[30] Doepke, M. and F. Zilibotti (2017), "Parenting with style: Altruism and paternalism in inter-
   generational preference transmission," Econometrica 85(5), 1331­1371.

[31] Doepke, M. and F. Zilibotti (2019), Love, Money, and Parenting: How Economics Explains
   the Way We Raise Our Kids, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

[32] Deaton, A. and N. Cartwright (2018), "Understanding and misunderstanding randomized
   controlled trials," Social Science & Medicine 210, 2­21.

[33] Duflo, E. and E. Saez (2003), "The role of information and social interactions in retirement plan
   decisions: Evidence from a randomized experiment," Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(3),
   815­842.

[34] Dunn, L.M., Dunn, L.M., Bulheller, S. and H. H¨
                                                   acker (1965), Peabody Picture Vocabulary
   Test, Circle Pines, MN: American Guidance Service.

[35] Durlauf, S.N. (2004), "Neighborhood effects," In: J.V. Henderson and J-F. Thisse (Eds.),
   Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Vol. 4, Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 2173­
   2242.

[36] Edin, P.-A., Fredriksson, P. and O. °
                                         Aslund (2003), "Ethnic enclaves and the economic success
   of immigrants. Evidence from a natural experiment," Quarterly Journal of Economics 118,
   329­357.

[37] Entwisle, D.R., Alexander, K.L. and L.S. Olson (1994), "The gender gap in math: Its possible
   origins in neighborhood effects,"American Sociological Review 59(6), 822­838.

[38] Epple, D. and R.E. Romano (2011), "Peer effects in education: A survey of the theory and
   evidence," In: A. Bisin, J. Benhabib and M.O. Jackson (Eds.), Handbook of Social Economics,
   Vol. 1, Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 1053­1163.

[39] Ferracci, M., Jolivet, G. and G.J. van den Berg (2014), "Evidence of treatment spillovers
   within markets,"Review of Economics and Statistics 96, 812­823

[40] Fryer Jr, R.G., Levitt, S.D. and J.A. List (2015), "Parental incentives and early childhood
   achievement: A field experiment in Chicago heights," NBER Working Paper No. 21477.



                                                 39
[41] Fryer, R., Levitt, S., List, J., and A. Samek (2020), "Introducing CogX: A New Preschool
   Education Program Combining Parent and Child Interventions"University of Chicago,
   Becker Friedman Institute for Economics, Working Paper No. 2020-149, Available at SSRN:
   https://ssrn.com/abstract=3714022.

[42] Gautier, P., Muller, P., van der Klaauw, B., Rosholm, M. and M. Svarer (2018), "Estimating
   equilibrium effects of job search assistance,"Journal of Labor Economics 36(4), 1073­1125.

[43] Gibbs, C., Ludwig, J. and D. Miller (2013), "Does Head Start do any lasting good?" In:
   M.J. Bailey and S. Danziger (Eds.), Legacies of the War on Poverty, New York: Russell Sage
   Foundation Press, pp. 39­65.

[44] Gin´
        e, X. and G. Mansuri (2018), "Together we will: Experimental evidence on female voting
   behavior in Pakistan," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 10(1), 207­235.

[45] Graham, B.S. (2018), "Identifying and estimating neighborhood effects," Journal of Economic
   Literature 56(2), 450­500.

[46] Halpern-Felsher, B.L., Connell, J.P., Spencer, M.B., Aber, J.L., Duncan, G.J., Clifford, E.,
   Crichlow, W.E., Usinger, P.A., Cole, S.P., Allen, L. and E. Seidman (1997), "Neighborhood
   and family factors predicting educational risk and attainment in African American and White
   children and adolescents," Neighborhood Poverty 1, 146­173.

[47] Hanushek, E.A. (2020), "Education production functions," In: S. Bradley and C. Green (Eds.),
   The Economics of Education, Second Edition, New York: Academic Press, pp. 161­170.

[48] Heckman, J.J. (2008), "Schools, skills, and synapses," Economic Inquiry 46, 289­324.

[49] Heckman, J.J., Stixrud, J. and S. Urzua (2006), "The effects of cognitive and noncognitive
   abilities on labor-market outcomes and social behavior," Journal of Labor Economics 24, 411­
   482.

[50] Ioannides, Y.M. (2011), "Neighborhood effects and housing," In: J. Benhabib, A. Bisin, and
   M.O. Jackson (Eds.), Handbook of Social Economics, Vol. 1B, Amsterdam: Elsevier Science,
   1281­1340.

[51] Ioannides, Y.M. and G. Topa (2010), "Neighborhood effects: Accomplishments and looking
   beyond them," Journal of Regional Science 50, 343­362.

[52] Janssen, W. (2011), "Externalities in program evaluation: The impact of a women's em-
   powerment program on immunization," Journal of the European Economic Association 9(6),
   1082­1113.



                                               40
[53] Jonassen, D.H. (2004), Learning to Solve Problem. An Instructional Design Guide, San Fran-
   sisco: John Wiley Son, Inc.

[54] Kalil, A. (2015), "Inequality begins at home: The role of parenting in the diverging destinies
   of rich and poor children," In: P.R. Amato, A. Booth, S.M. McHale and J. Van Hook (Eds.),
   National Symposium on Family Issues. Families in an Era of Increasing Inequality: Diverging
   Destinies, Cham, Switzerland: Springer International Publishing, pp. 63­82.

[55] Katz, L.F., Kling, J.R. and J.B. Liebman (2001), "Moving to opportunity in Boston: Early
   results of a randomized mobility experiment," Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 607­654.

[56] Kautz, T., Heckman, J.J., Diris, R., Ter Weel, B. and L. Borghans (2014), "Fostering and
   measuring skills: Improving cognitive and non-cognitive skills to promote lifetime success,"
   NBER Working Paper No. 20749.

[57] Kline, P. and C.R. Walters (2016), "Evaluating public programs with close substitutes: The
   case of Head Start," Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(4), 1795­1848.

[58] Kling, J.R., Ludwig, J. and L.F. Katz (2005), "Neighborhood effects on crime for female and
   male youth: Evidence from a randomized housing voucher experiment," Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 120, 87­130.

[59] Lalive, R., Landais, C., and J. Zweim¨
                                          uller (2015), "Market externalities of large unemployment
   insurance extension programs," American Economic Review 105(12), 3564­96.

[60] Leventhal, T. and J. Brooks-Gunn (2000), "The neighborhoods they live in: The effects of
   neighborhood residence on child and adolescent outcomes," Psychological Bulletin 126(2), 309­
   337.

[61] List, J.A. (2020), "Non est disputandum de generalizability? A glimpse into the external
   validity trial," NBER Working Paper No. 27535.

[62] Miguel, E. and M. Kremer (2004), "Worms: Identifying impacts on education and health in
   the presence of treatment externalities," Econometrica 72, 159­217.

[63] Mincer, J. (1958), "Investment in human capital and personal income distribution," Journal
   of Political Economy 66(4), 281­302.

[64] Minh, A., Muhajarine, N., Janus, M., Brownell, M. and M. Guhn (2017), "A review of neigh-
   borhood effects and early child development: How, where, and for whom, do neighborhoods
   matter?"Health and Place 46, 155­174.




                                                41
[65] Muralidharan, K., Niehaus, P. and S. Sukhtankar (2017), "General equilibrium effects of (im-
   proving) public employment programs: Experimental evidence from India," NBER Working
   Paper No. 23838.

[66] Puma, M., Bell, S., Cook, R. and C. Heid (2010), "Head Start Impact Study: Final Report,"
   Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Services, Administration for Children and
   Families,

[67] Puma, M., Bell, S., Cook, R., Heid, C., Broene, P., Jenkins, F., Mashburn, A. and J. Downer
   (2012), "Third Grade Follow-up to the Head Start Impact Study Final Report," OPRE Report
   # 2012-45, Washington, DC: Office of Planning, Research and Evaluation, Administration for
   Children and Families, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

[68] Putnam, R.D. (1993), "The prosperous community: Social capital and public life," The Amer-
   ican Prospect 13, 35­42.

[69] Rincke, J. and C. Traxler (2011), "Enforcement spillovers," Review of Economics and Statistics
   93(4), 1224­1234.

[70] Sacerdote, B. (2011), "Peer effects in education: How might they work, how big are they and
   how much do we know thus far?" In: E.A. Hanushek, S. Machin and L. Woessmann (Eds.),
   Handbook of the Economics of Education, Vol. 3, Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 249­277.

[71] Schuller, T. (2000), "Social and human capital: The search for appropriate techno methodol-
   ogy," Policy Studies 21(1), 1­13.

[72] Schunk, D.H. (2020), Learning Theories: An Educational Perspective, 8th Edition, New York:
   Pearson.

[73] Sheldon, S.B. (2002), "Parents' social networks and beliefs as predictors of parent involve-
   ment," The Elementary School Journal 102(4), 301­316.

[74] Sinclair, B., McConnell, M. and D.P. Green (2012), "Detecting spillover effects: Design and
   analysis of multilevel experiments," American Journal of Political Science 56(4), 1055­1069.

[75] Smith-Donald, R., Raver, C. C., Hayes, T., Richardson, B. (2007), "Preliminary construct
   and concurrent validity of the Preschool Self-regulation Assessment (PSRA) for field-based
   research," Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 22(2), 173­187.

[76] Todd, P.E. and K.I. Wolpin (2007), "The production of cognitive achievement in children:
   Home, school, and racial test score gaps," Journal of Human Capital 1(1), 91­136.




                                                42
[77] Topa, G. and Y. Zenou (2015), "Neighborhood and network effects," In: G. Duranton, V.
   Henderson and W. Strange (Eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Vol. 5A, Am-
   sterdam: Elsevier Publisher, pp. 561­624.

[78] Waldfogel, J. and E. Washbrook (2011), "Early years policy," Child Development Research
   1­12.

[79] Willoughby, M.T., Wirth, R. J. and C.B. Blair (2012), "Executive function in early childhood:
   Longitudinal measurement invariance and developmental change," Psychological Assessment
   24(2), 418­431.

[80] Woodcock, R.W., McGrew, K. S. and N. Mather (2001), Woodcock-Johnson Tests of Achieve-
   ment, Itasca, IL: Riverside Publishing.




                                               43
The Social Side of Early Human Capital Formation: Using a Field
  Experiment to Estimate the Causal Impact of Neighborhoods
                         Online Appendix

                       By John A. List1 , Fatemeh Momeni2 and Yves Zenou3




  1
     Department of Economics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. Email: jlist@uchicago.edu.
  2
     Department of Economics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. Email: fmomeni@uchicago.edu.
   3
     Department of Economics, Monash University, Caulfield, VIC, Australia, and IFN.                  Email:
yves.zenou@monash.edu.




                                                    A1
A   Maps




           Figure A.1: Map of Home Locations

                          A2
Figure A.2: Map of Home Locations, Zoomed in




                    A3
B     Assessment schedule

                                 Table B.1: Assessment Calendar

                              Winter        Early Spring    Late Spring    Late Summer
                              (Jan-Feb)     (Apr)           (May)          (Jul-Sep)
                 2010                                                      P re2010
                                                            P ost2010
                 2011         M id2010                                     SL2010
                                                            P re2011
                                                            P ost2011
                 2012         M id2011      AO12010                        SL2011
                                                            P re2012
                                            AO12011         P ost2012
                 2013         M id2012                                     SL2012
                                            AO22010         P re2013
                                            AO12012
                 2014         M id2013      AO22011         P ost2013      SL2013
                                            AO32010
                                            AO12013
                                            AO22012
                 2015
                                            AO32011
                                            AO42010
                                            AO22013
                                            AO32012
                 2016
                                            AO42011
                                            AO52010
                 Notes: Superscripts are cohort identifiers (randomization years).
                 Pre= pre assessment; Mid= mid assessment; Post= post assessment; SL=
                summer loss assessment; AOx= age-out assessment x years after the treat-
                ment ended



C      Details on constructing the samples

Here we present how we treat observations from children who were randomized in multiple years
in constructing our panel data set for the control, treatment, and pooled samples.

We follow two rules in constructing the control sample: (i) For those control children who were
randomized into treatments in later years, we only keep the observations that took place before
their treatment started; (ii) for those who were randomized into the control group in more than
one year, we only keep the observations corresponding to their first randomization.

In construction of our treatment sample, we follow two rules: (i) For those treatment children
who were first randomized into the control and later into a treatment group, we only keep the
observations after their treatment started; (ii) for those who were randomized twice and both times
into a treatment group, we only keep the observations corresponding to the first randomization.



                                                    A4
Finally, we use the following three rules in constructing our pooled sample: (i) For children who
were randomized twice and both times into the control group, we only keep the observations that
correspond to the first randomization; (ii) for children who were randomized twice and both times
into a treatment group, we only keep the observations corresponding to their first randomization;
and (iii) for those who were randomized twice, the first time into the control group and the second
time into a treatment group, we only keep the observations corresponding to the second random-
ization.

Three factors can result in missing an observation for a child in our control sample: (i) The child was
absent on the assessment day; (ii) the child was moved to a treatment group in a later randomization
and thus her outcomes (for the times after she had entered the treatment groups) are not included
in the sample; or (iii) the child belongs to later cohorts for which the assessment is taking place
at a later date (April 2018 or after). Similarly, an observation from the treatment sample would
be missing if (i) the child was absent on that assessment day; (ii) the child was previously in the
control group and thus her outcomes (for the times before she entered the treatment group) are
not included in the sample; or (iii) corresponding assessment is taking place at a later date (April
2018 or later).



D       Gradual addition of controls

In this section, we explore the robustness of our estimated spillover effects to the choice of controls
included in our models. In doing so, we study how our estimated spillover effects change as we
gradually add controls in our models for the pooled study samples used in the individual fixed-effects
and LDV analysis.

Tables D.1 and D.2 present the spillover effects from an additional treated neighbor on the standard-
ized cognitive and non-cognitive scores of a child, as we vary the set of control variables included
in the regression, estimated for the sample we used in our LDV analysis. Similarly, Tables D.3 and
D.4 present the spillover effects from an additional treated neighbor on the standardized cognitive
and non-cognitive scores of a child, as we vary the set of control variables included in the regression,
estimated for the sample we used in our individual fixed-effects analysis.4

The results presented in Table D.1 suggest that our estimated spillover effects on cognitive scores
from our LDV sample become stable as soon as we include neighborhood (block-group) fixed effects
(column 2) and remain stable as we continue adding controls to reach our most complete model
(column 7). Our estimated effects on non-cognitive scores for our LDV sample, presented in Table
D.2, from the most basic model, which does not include any controls (column 1), are very close to
    4
    Note that the sample used in our LDV analysis is a subset of the one used in our fixed effects analysis as
observations are included in the LDV sample only if we can observe a lagged outcome for the same child.


                                                     A5
the ones we get from our preferred model (column 7), suggesting that we can rely exclusively on the
experimentally induced variation in exposure to treated neighbors to estimate the non-cognitive
spillover effects.

In Tables D.3 and D.4, we perform a similar exercise with the sample we use in our individual-
fixed effects analysis. We start with a stripped-down specification in column (1), which includes no
controls, and we gradually add controls as we move to column (6), which includes block-group fixed
effects, time fixed effects, cohort fixed effects, race fixed effects and gender fixed effects. In column
(7), we present the estimated effects from our fixed effects model for the same sample. Note that
our individual fixed-effect model only includes individual- and time-fixed effects as the remaining
covariates do not vary within observations from the same child.

The results from the fixed effects sample presented in Table D.3 suggest that the estimated coeffi-
cients of cognitive spillover effects become positive and significant as soon as we add block-group
fixed effect (column 2) and remain stable as we include additional controls (columns 2-6). These
estimates are very similar to the ones we get from our individual fixed effects model presented in
column (7).

The findings from our fixed effects sample presented in Table D.4 suggest that the estimated
coefficients of non-cognitive spillover effects become significant at one percent level in column (4),
when we include block-group, time, and cohort fixed effects and remain stable afterwards. Together,
these findings suggest that even for the sample used for our individual fixed effects analysis, our
results do not solely rely on the inclusion of individual-fixed effects.



E       Sub-tests

The cognitive index was constructed by taking the average of a child's percentile scores on five
subtests of the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT), WJ Letter-Word, WJ Spelling, WJ
Applied Problems, and WJ Quantitative Concepts (the four subtests from the Woodcock Johnson
III Test of Achievement). These scores were then standardized by assessment type (pre, mid, post,
etc.), including the entire study population. The non-cognitive index was constructed by taking
the average of a child's percent-correct scores in the three subtests of the Blair and Willoughby
(Spatial Conflict, Operation Span, and Same Game) and the Preschool Self-Regulation Assessment
(PSRA) and standardizing with respect to the assessment type.5

To explore which components of the cognitive and non-cognitive measures are more important in
generating the spillover effects, we estimate the following fixed-effects model:
    5
    For children in kindergarten or older, the Same Game test of Blair and Willoughby was replaced with a variant
of Wisconsin Card Sort game.



                                                      A6
Table D.1: Mean Effect Sizes on Cognitive Scores, LDV Estimates, Pooled Sample: Gradual Ad-
dition of Controls

                                  (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)
                              -0.0066        0.00651      0.00487      0.00538     0.00545     0.00557      0.00419
           r = 3 km
                               (0.00192)     (0.00198)    (0.00202)    (0.00200)   (0.00196)   (0.00192)    (0.00124)
                              -0.0041 0.00508 0.00363 0.00347 0.00353 0.00360 0.00331
           r = 5 km
                               (0.00113)     (0.00102)    (0.00128)    (0.00126)   (0.00122)   (0.00118) (0.000850)
                               -0.0021      0.00424 0.00287            0.00243     0.00231     0.00236      0.00271
           r = 7 km
                               (0.00095)    (0.000809) (0.00110)       (0.00109)   (0.00107)   (0.00105) (0.000712)
           Blockgroup FEs         No            Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
           Time FEs               No            No           Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
           Cohort FEs             No            No           No           Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
           Race FEs               No            No           No           No         Yes         Yes          Yes
           Gender FEs             No            No           No           No          No         Yes          Yes
           Age at baseline        No            No           No           No          No          No          Yes
           LDVs                   No            No           No           No          No          No          Yes
           Adj. R2 at 3km       0.0375        0.1811       0.1888       0.1907      0.2053      0.2084       0.6359
           Adj. R2 at 5km       0.0290        0.1825       0.1889       0.1916      0.2062      0.2093       0.6367
           Adj. R2 at 7km       0.0141        0.1818       0.1886       0.1924      0.2070      0.2100       0.6369
           Observations          3403          3403         3403         3403        3403        3403         3403
                                         
             p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,     p < 0.001. All regressions include a constant.
           Standard errors in parentheses and clustered at the blockgroup level.



Table D.2: Mean Effect Sizes on Non-Cognitive Scores, LDV Estimates, Pooled Sample: Gradual
Addition of Controls

                                (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)          (6)           (7)
                             0.00700 0.00992             0.0126        0.0111      0.0108       0.0109       0.00704
        r = 3 km
                             (0.00201)     (0.00166)     (0.00213)     (0.00210)   (0.00203)    (0.00199)     (0.00152)
                             0.00522 0.00631 0.00943 0.00860 0.00823 0.00827 0.00592
        r = 5 km
                             (0.00111)     (0.000872)    (0.00132)     (0.00139)   (0.00137)    (0.00135)     (0.00141)
                             0.0044        0.00513 0.00795 0.00751 0.00741 0.00744 0.00538
        r = 7 km
                             (0.000982) (0.000829)       (0.00134)     (0.00150)   (0.00146)    (0.00144)     (0.00144)
        Blockgroup FEs          No            Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
        Time FEs                No            No           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
        Cohort FEs              No            No            No           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
        Race FEs                No            No            No            No          Yes          Yes           Yes
        Gender FEs              No            No            No            No          No           Yes           Yes
        Age at baseline         No            No            No            No          No           No            Yes
        LDVs                    No            No            No            No          No           No            Yes
        Adj. R2 at 3km        0.0064        0.0692        0.0733        0.0900       0.1052       0.1061       0.3417
        Adj. R2 at 5km        0.0093        0.0701        0.0759        0.0086       0.1070       0.1079       0.3447
        Adj. R2 at 7km        0.0092        0.0704        0.0762        0.0922       0.1080       0.1088       0.3453
        Observations           3403          3403          3403          3403        3403         3403          3403
                                      
          p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,     p < 0.001. All regressions include a constant.
        Standard errors in parentheses and clustered at the blockgroup level.



                                                                  A7
Table D.3: Mean Effect Sizes on Cognitive Scores, Fixed-Effects Estimates, Pooled Sample: Gradual
Addition of Controls

                             (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)
        r = 3 km          -0.00530 0.00513         0.00443       0.00470 0.00474 0.00482             0.00334
                          (0.00155)    (0.00144)   (0.00137)     (0.00129)   (0.00121)   (0.00119)   (0.00101)
        r = 5 km          -0.00320     0.00373     0.00280       0.00263     0.00265     0.00271     0.00209
                          (0.000999)   (0.000792) (0.000874) (0.000822) (0.000782) (0.000764) (0.000638)
        r = 7 km           -0.00130    0.00307     0.00212        0.00173    0.00164     0.00170 0.00177
                          (0.000830)   (0.000662) (0.000752) (0.000690) (0.000667) (0.000667) (0.000529)
        Blockgroup FEs       No           Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         No
        Time FEs             No           No          Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
        Cohort FEs           No           No          No            Yes         Yes         Yes         No
        Race FEs             No           No          No            No          Yes         Yes         No
        Gender FEs           No           No          No            No          No          Yes         No
        Individual FEs       No           No          No            No          No          No          Yes
        Adj. R2 at 3km     0.0246       0.1734       0.1823        0.1833      0.1960      0.2014      0.1121
        Adj. R2 at 5km     0.0173       0.1740       0.1821        0.1835      0.1963      0.2017      0.1136
        Adj. R2 at 7km     0.0067       0.1734       0.1816        0.1836      0.1963      0.2017      0.1138
        Observations        5208         5208        5208          5208        5208        5208        5208
        
          p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001. All regressions include a constant.
        Standard errors in parentheses and clustered at the blockgroup level.




Table D.4: Mean Effect Sizes on Non-Cognitive Scores, Fixed-Effects Estimates, Pooled Sample:
Gradual Addition of Controls

                             (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)
         r = 3 km          0.000793    0.00248     0.00222       0.00510     0.00485     0.00490     0.00780
                          (0.00157)    (0.00154)   (0.00167)     (0.00156)   (0.00154)   (0.00152)   (0.00126)
         r = 5 km          0.00123     0.00156     0.00106       0.00342 0.00317 0.00321 0.00428
                          (0.000807) (0.000688) (0.000794) (0.000842) (0.000829) (0.000829) (0.000778)
         r = 7 km          0.00125     0.00144     0.000883      0.00319 0.00311 0.00314 0.00331
                          (0.000698) (0.000560) (0.000690) (0.000790) (0.000768) (0.000764) (0.000667)
         Blockgroup FEs      No          Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes          No
         Time FEs            No           No         Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
         Cohort FEs          No           No          No           Yes         Yes         Yes          No
         Race FEs            No           No          No            No         Yes         Yes          No
         Gender FEs          No           No          No            No          No         Yes          No
         Individual FEs      No           No          No            No          No          No         Yes
         Adj. R2 at 3km     0.0002      0.0520      0.0518        0.0757      0.0869      0.0887      0.0283
         Adj. R2 at 5km     0.0003      0.0519      0.0523        0.0745      0.0858      0.0877      0.0243
         Adj. R2 at 7km     0.0006      0.0522      0.0530        0.0744      0.0863      0.0881      0.0220
         Observations       5208         5208        5208          5208        5208        5208        5208
                                   
           p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,     p < 0.001. All regressions include a constant.
         Standard errors in parentheses and clustered at the blockgroup level.




                                                            A8
                                 k           treated      total
                               Yi,t = 0 + 1 Ni,t |r  + 2 Ni,t |r + i + t +                                i,t ,                     (E.1)

        k is the standardized score of a child i at time t on subtest k , and N treated and N total
where Yi,t                                                                     i,t|r         i,t|r
represent the number of treated neighbors and total number of neighbors, as previously defined.
We include the time and individual fixed effects, and cluster standard errors at the census-block-
group level. Under this specification, 1 represents the average spillover effect from an additional
treated neighbor who resides within a radius r of a child.

                                      Table E.1: Spillover Effects by Subtests

                                          Cognitive Sub-scores                             Non-cognitive Sub-scores
                r (meters) PPVT        WJL        WJA        WJS       WJQ        OSP      SPAT      PSRA      SAME      CARD

                            .0025* .0044*** -.0057*** .0044***         .0018     .0093*** .0142***   .0002     -.0052    .0082***
                3000
                            (.0014)    (.001)     (.0011)   (.0011)    (.0019)   (.0026)   (.0031)   (.0021) (.0128)     (.0023)


                             .0014    .0026***   -.003***   .0031***   .0009     .0055*** .0089***   .0003     -.0105    .0051***
                5000
                            (.0009)   (.0007)     (.0009)   (.0007)    (.001)    (.0014)   (.0019)   (.0013)   (.009)    (.0013)


                            .0012*    .002***    -.0026*** .0025***    .0007     .0041*** .0071***   .0001     -.0077    .0045***
                 7000
                            (.0007)   (.0006)     (.0008)   (.0006)    (.0009)   (.0011)   (.0015)   (.001)    (.0078)   (.0011)



                 Notes: This table presents point estimates for the spillover effects from an additional treated neighbor
                on a child's standardized scores on each subtest, estimated from equation (E.1). Robust standard
                errors, clustered at the census-block-group level, are in parentheses;
                 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




As point estimates for 1 presented in Table E.1 suggest, the spillovers on cognitive skills are mainly
driven by the effects on receptive vocabulary (PPVT), spelling ability (WJS), and the ability to
identify letters and words (WJL). The spillovers on non-cognitive skills are driven by the effects on
attention (Spatial Conflict), working memory (Operation Span), and attention shifting in children
who are kindergarten age or older.



F    Estimated effects on the restricted sample

Sections 4 and 5 present the estimated spillover effects using all observations. One potential concern
is the role of sorting and whether selection into taking assessments is the factor deriving our findings.
We address this concern by estimating the main effects from equations 1 and 2 for a subset of our
sample who attended at least five out of the eight possible assessments. Our data includes 1,792
observations from 313 children who attend a minimum of five assessments. Note these children
represent under 20% of of the total number of children in our pooled sample. Table F.1 presents
the point estimates. Our estimates are similar in magnitude to the ones from the whole sample.
The estimates on non-cognitive spillover effects are especially close to the ones presented in Tables

                                                                       A9
4 and 6. The fixed-effects estimates of 1 on cognitive spillover effects from the whole sample for
neighborhood radii of 3, 5, and 7 kilometers are 0.0033 , 0.0021 , and 0.0018 , respectively, whereas
the corresponding estimates from the restricted sample are 0.0040 , 0.0021 , and 0.0018 . Likewise,
the LDV estimates of 1 on cognitive spillover effects from the whole sample for neighborhood radii
of 3, 5, and 7 kilometers are 0.0042 , 0.0033 , and 0.0027 . The corresponding estimates for
the restricted subsample are 0.0029 , 0.0017 , and 0.0010 . The fixed effects estimates on non-
cognitive spillover effects from the whole sample for neighborhood radii of 3, 5 and 7 kilometers
were 0.0069 , 0.0043 , and 0.0033 , whereas the fixed-effects estimates from the restricted sample
are 0.0070 , 0.0036 , and 0.0027 . Similarly, the LDV estimates on non-cognitive spillover effects
from the whole sample for neighborhood radii of 3, 5, and 7 kilometers are 0.0070 , 0.0059 , and
0.0054 , whereas the corresponding fixed-effects estimates from the restricted sample are 0.0064 ,
0.0050 , and 0.0045 .

                Table F.1: Estimates of Spillover Effects for the Restricted Sample

                                             Fixed Effects                   LDV
                                       Cognitive Non-cognitive Cognitive Non-cognitive
                          r =3 km      0.0040**     0.0070***     0.0029**     0.0064***
                                        (0.0011)     (0.0018)     (0.0012)      (0.0019)
                          r = 5 km     0.0021***    0.0036***      0.0017*     0.0050***
                                        (0.0007)     (0.0013)     (0.0009)      (0.0015)
                          r =7 km      0.0018***    0.0027***      0.0010      0.0045***
                                        (0.0006)     (0.0010)     (0.0007)      (0.0013)
                            Obs.         1,792        1,792         1400           1400
                        Unique child      313          313           313           313

                         Notes: Estimated spillover effects from equations (1) and (2) for a
                        subsample of observations from children who attended a minimum
                        of five out of eight assessments. Robust standard errors, clustered
                        at the census-block-group level, are in parentheses; *** p<0.01, **
                        p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                       A10
G   Spatial fade-out

Table G.1: Mean Effect Sizes on Cognitive and Non-cognitive Scores, Fixed-Effects Estimates

                                      Cognitive Scores                        Non-cognitive Scores
                             Pooled       Control     Treatment       Pooled        Control    Treatment
                               (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)

                            0.0050***    0.0049**        0.0021     0.0120*** 0.0077*** 0.0107***
               r= 2 km
                            (0.0019)      (0.0024)     (0.0016)      (0.0025)      (0.0030)     (0.0023)
                            0.0033*** 0.0038***          0.0016     0.0078*** 0.0069*** 0.0064***
               r= 3 km
                            (0.0010)      (0.0012)     (0.0010)      (0.0013)      (0.0015)     (0.0013)
                            0.0026*** 0.0032***         0.0010*     0.0053*** 0.0045*** 0.0042***
               r= 4 km
                            (0.0007)      (0.0011)     (0.0006)      (0.0009)      (0.0013)     (0.0010)
                            0.0021*** 0.0023***         0.0010*     0.0043*** 0.0037*** 0.0034***
               r= 5 km
                            (0.0006)      (0.0008)     (0.0006)      (0.0008)      (0.0011)     (0.0008)
                            0.0019*** 0.0022***         0.0010*     0.0038*** 0.0031*** 0.0032***
               r= 6 km
                            (0.0006)      (0.0008)     (0.0005)      (0.0007)      (0.0010)     (0.0008)
                            0.0018*** 0.0021***         0.0008*     0.0033*** 0.0025*** 0.0028***
               r= 7 km
                            (0.0005)      (0.0007)     (0.0005)      (0.0007)      (0.0010)     (0.0007)
                            0.0017*** 0.0020***         0.0008*     0.0031***      0.0021**    0.0028***
               r= 8 km
                            (0.0005)      (0.0007)     (0.0005)      (0.0006)      (0.0009)     (0.0007)
                            0.0015*** 0.0018***          0.0007     0.0029***      0.0021**    0.0025***
               r= 9 km
                            (0.0005)      (0.0007)     (0.0005)     (0.00060)      (0.0009)     (0.0007)
                            0.0014*** 0.0019***          0.0006     0.0027***      0.0020**    0.0023***
               r= 10 km
                            (0.0005)      (0.0006)     (0.0005)      (0.0006)      (0.0009)     (0.0006)
                              5,208        2,442         3,074         5,208         2,442        3,074

               Notes: Columns 1-3 (4-6) represent the effect of an additional treated neighbor on a child's
              standardized cognitive (non-cognitive) score. Robust standard errors, clustered at the census-
              block-group level, are in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                          A11
        Table G.2: Mean Effect Sizes on Cognitive and Non-cognitive Scores, LDV Estimates

                                                Cognitive Scores                       Non-cognitive Scores
                       r               Pooled       Control    Treatment       Pooled        Control    Treatment
                       (meters)          (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)

                                      0.0034**      0.0026         0.0015    0.0095***      0.0061**     0.0102**
                       r = 2 km
                                      (0.0017)     (0.0039)     (0.0028)      (0.0030)      (0.0031)     (0.0044)
                                      0.0042***    0.0052**        0.0019    0.0070*** 0.0059***         0.0067**
                       r = 3 km
                                      (0.0012)     (0.0025)     (0.0020)      (0.0015)      (0.0018)     (0.0026)
                                      0.0030***    0.0039**        0.0014    0.0059*** 0.0037*** 0.0062***
                       r = 4 km
                                      (0.0007)     (0.0018)     (0.0012)      (0.0013)      (0.0011)     (0.0023)
                                      0.0033***    0.0038**      0.0021*     0.0059*** 0.0040*** 0.0060***
                       r = 5 km
                                      (0.0009)     (0.0016)     (0.0011)      (0.0014)      (0.0013)     (0.0023)
                                      0.0030***    0.0033**        0.0017    0.0060*** 0.0035***         0.0058**
                       r = 6 km
                                      (0.0007)     (0.0013)     (0.0011)      (0.0016)      (0.0013)     (0.0023)
                                      0.0027*** 0.0034***          0.0015    0.0054*** 0.0038***         0.0053**
                       r = 7 km
                                      (0.0007)     (0.0013)     (0.0010)      (0.0014)      (0.0012)     (0.0022)
                                      0.0022***    0.0027**        0.0010    0.0052*** 0.0035***         0.0050**
                       r = 8 km
                                      (0.0006)     (0.0011)     (0.0010)      (0.0014)      (0.0012)     (0.0020)
                                      0.0021***    0.0028**        0.0010    0.0045*** 0.0035***         0.0042**
                       r = 9 km
                                      (0.0006)     (0.0011)     (0.0008)      (0.0013)      (0.0011)     (0.0019)
                                      0.0021***    0.0026**        0.0011    0.0043*** 0.0031***         0.0039**
                       r = 10 km
                                      (0.0006)     (0.0010)     (0.0008)      (0.0012)      (0.0011)     (0.0018)
                       Obs.             3,403        1,495         2,093        3,403         1,495        2,093

                       Notes: Columns 1-3 (4-6) represent the effect from an additional treated neighbor on a child's
                      standardized cognitive (non-cognitive) score. Robust standard errors, clustered at the census-
                      block-group, are level in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




H       Spillovers from Parent Academy, Preschool, and Cog-X treat-
        ments

In section 6, we compared the spillover effects from the Parent Academy treatments, which exclu-
sively offered education program for parents, to the four Pre-K treatments, which offered pre-school
programs to children. Two of the four Pre-K treatment groups (Preschool-Plus and Kinderprep),
also included parental components, which, compared to Parent Academies, were shorter and not
as heavily incentivized. We refer to these two treatments as Cog-X treatments. In this section,
instead of estimating the overall spillover effects from Pre-K treatments, we separately estimate the
effects from Cog-X to the ones from the preschool treatments, which exclusively targeted children,
using the following specification:
                    P arent                             Cogx           P reschool   total
  Yi,t = 0 +parent Ni,t |r  +parent              child Ni,t|r + child Ni,t|r      +Ni,t |r + Yi,t-1 + Xi  + b + µc + t + i,t ,
                                                                                                                        (H.1)
         P arent ,    Cogx             P reschool
where   Ni,t,r       Ni,t,r ,   and   Ni,t,r          represent the number of neighbors residing within distance r
of a child i who were assigned to Parent Academy, Cog-X , and the two preschool treatments that

                                                                   A12
exclusively targeted children. All other arguments are defined as in section 6. Under the above
specifications, parent , parent child , and child represent the spillover effects from an additional
treated neighbor who was assigned to Parent Academies, Cog-X, or the two preschool treatments
with no parental components. Table H.1 presents the estimates of ^parent , ^parent child and ^child .

                  Table H.1: Mean Effect Sizes on Cognitive and Non-cognitive Scores

                                              Cognitive Scores                       Non-cognitive Scores
                                     parent     parent     child    child    parent     parent    child    child
                                       (1)           (2)             (3)       (4)          (5)              (6)

                                    0.0045**      0.0040***        0.0040    -0.0010     0.0105***        0.0132***
                         r = 3 km
                                    (0.0022)      (0.0013)         (0.0026) (0.0035)      (0.0023)        (0.0029)
                                    0.0074***     0.0034***        0.0005    0.0007      0.0067***         0.0079*
                         r = 5 km
                                    (0.0024)      (0.0009)         (0.0024) (0.0045)      (0.0015)        (0.0044)
                                    0.0074***     0.0029***        -0.0006   0.0006      0.0056***         0.0074
                         r = 7 km
                                    (0.0026)      (0.0007)         (0.0025) (0.0040)      (0.0013)        (0.0045)
                         Obs.         3,403         3,403           3,403    3,403         3,403            3,403

                         Notes: Columns 1-3 (4-6) represent the effect of an additional treated neighbor
                        of each type, on a child's standardized cognitive (non-cognitive) score. Robust
                        standard errors, clustered at the census-block-group level, are in parentheses; ***
                        p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



Our estimates suggest the programs that included parental-education components are likely to
generate larger cognitive spillovers than those that exclusively targeted children.6 Focusing on non-
cognitive spillovers, our estimates confirm our previous findings that programs that directly targeted
children (Cog-X and preschool treatments) generate significantly larger non-cognitive spillovers than
the ones that exclusively targeted parents (p < 0.10).



I       Total impact evaluation and neighborhood radius

In section 7, we estimated the impact of the intervention under the neighborhood radius of 3
kilometers. Table I.1 presents the corresponding effects for two other neighborhood radii: r=5
and r=7 kilometers. Our estimates of the direct program effects on treatment children (^) are not
significantly different across various neighborhood radii.7

As we broaden the definition of the neighborhood, the estimated total spillover effect on both
the control (SC N ) and treatment (ST N ) children increases. This finding is intuitive, because
broadening the neighborhood would allow for neighbors who live farther away to also impact a
    6
     The differences in spillover effects are insignificant for r = 3 km, but as we broaden neighborhood radii to 5 and
7 kilometers, the difference in spillovers on cognitive skills from Cog-X and Parent Academy to the ones from the
preschool treatments become significant (p < 0.10).
   7
     P-values from the Wald tests of   ^Cog =   ^Cog against  ^Cog =  ^Cog for r1=3K and r2=5K; r1=3K and r2=7K; and
                                        r1       r2            r1      r2
r1=5K and r2=7K are 0.28, 0.12, and 0.08. The corresponding p-values for non-cognitive scores (        ^N cog ) are 0.75,
0.85, and 1.00.


                                                                   A13
          Table I.1: Total Program Impact under r=3, 5, and 7 kilometers, LDV Estimates

                     r                            5 km                        5 km                        7 km
                      treated
                     Nd                          178.13                      325.63                      422.81
                                      Cognitive Non-cognitive Cognitive Non-cognitive Cognitive Non-cognitive
                     ^ (Direct)
                                      0.108***           0.0456   0.126***           0.0540   0.150***           0.0541
                                      (0.0393)       (0.0642)     (0.0458)       (0.0731)     (0.0528)       (0.0837)
                     ^
                                      0.0042***     0.0070***     0.0034***     0.0058***     0.0028***     0.0053***
                                      (0.0017)       (0.0015)     (0.0009)       (0.0014)     (0.0007)       (0.0014)
                     ^
                                      -0.0002*           0.0001   -0.0002*           0.0001   -0.0002*           0.0000
                                      (0.0001)       (0.0002)     (0.0001)       (0.0002)     (0.0001)       (0.0002)
                     SC N              0.75***       1.25***       1.09***       1.90***       1.17***       2.25***
                                       (0.22)            (0.27)    (0.28)            (0.46)    (0.31)            (0.61)
                     ST N              0.71***       1.27***       1.03***       1.91***       1.09***       2.27***
                                       (0.22)            (0.27)    (0.27)            (0.46)    (0.30)            (0.61)
                     T otal            0.82***       1.32***       1.16***       1.97***       1.24***       2.32***
                                       (0.23)            (0.27)    (0.28)            (0.45)    (0.31)            (0.60)
                     T otalStandard    0.06***           0.07**    0.06***           0.07**    0.07***           0.07**
                                       (0.02)            (0.03)    (0.02)            (0.03)    (0.02)            (0.03)
                     Observations       3,403            3,403      3,403            3,403      3,403            3,403
                     R-squared          0.659            0.384      0.660            0.387      0.660            0.387

                     Notes: Estimated coefficients from equation (7) are presented;. N includes all the observations
                                                                                                            treated =
                    for which we have the lagged cognitive and non-cognitive scores, and other regressors. N3 km
                    178.13; N5treated = 325.63; N treated = 422.81; Robust standard errors, clustered at the census-
                               km                  7km
                    block-group level, are in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



child's outcomes. The increases in the total spillover effects result in larger estimates of the total
impacts (T otal) as we increase the neighborhood radius. The average estimated total impact of
the intervention (T otal) on a treatment child's cognitive scores is 0.82 for r = 3 km and increases
to 1.16 and 1.24 for r = 5 km and r = 7 km. Likewise, the average estimated total impact of
the intervention (T otal) on the non-cognitive score of a child increases from 1.32 to 1.97 and
2.32 as we increase the radius from 3 to 5 and 7 kilometers. Finally, our estimates for program
impacts if we were to ignore spillovers to control children (T otalStandard ) are very similar and not
significantly different across various radii.8



J       Exploring non-linearities in measuring the total spillover effects

We calculated our estimation of the total spillover effects under the assumption of linearity. In this
section, we explore whether and how allowing for nonlinearities affects our estimates. We explore
                                                       -Cog                    -Cog                          -Cog
    8
    P-values from the Wald tests of T otal ^ Standard
                                              r1
                                                                    ^ Standard
                                                              = T otal  r2
                                                                                               ^ Standard
                                                                                     against T otal r1               =
             -Cog
  ^ Standard
T otal r2         for r1=3 km and  r2=5 km; r1=3   km  and r2=7  km;   and r1=5  km and r2=7 km  are   0.71, 0.35, and
0.18. The corresponding p-values for non-cognitive scores are 0.99, 0.93, and 0.85.




                                                                   A14
non-linearities by considering polynomial functional forms of up to degree 3.

                     treated       treated 2
  Yi,t = 0 + Ti + 1 Ni,t |r  + 2 (Ni,t |r ) + ...+
                                                                                                           (J.1)
           treated            treated 2           total
   1 Ti × Ni,t |r  + 2 Ti × (Ni,t |r ) + ... + 2 Ni,t |r + Yi,t-1 + Xi  + b + t + µc +               i,t


While under the linear specification, the marginal spillover effect from the j-th treated neighbor is
given by 1 for a control child and by 1 + 1 for a treated child, the corresponding effects under
polynomials of degrees 2 and 3 are given by 1 + 22 j and 1 + 22 j + 33 j 2 for a control child,
and 1 + 1 + 2(2 + 2 )j and 1 + 2(2 + 2 )j + 3(3 + 3 )j 2 for a treated child. Therefore, the
average spillover effects on a control child from all neighbors, using polynomials of degrees 1, 2,
and 3, can be calculated as follows:9
  N =  N tr
SC1   1

  N =  N tr + 2           N tr
SC2   1         2         j =1 j   = 1 N tr + 2 N tr (N tr + 1)
  N =  N tr + 2           N tr             N tr 2
SC3   1         2         j =1 j   + 33    j =1 j   = 1 N tr + 2 N tr (N tr + 1) + 0.53 (N tr + 1)(2N tr + 1).

Table J.1 presents the estimated coefficients from equation J.1 for neighborhood radius of r = 3 km.
Note the coefficients of the quadratic and cubic terms are all insignificant, suggesting our linear
specification is an appropriate representation. Our estimates of the average cognitive spillover
effects from all treated neighbors become slightly smaller as we add quadratic and cubic terms, but
the changes are small. The estimated non-cognitive spillover effects become larger as we move away
from the linear specification. However, these increases are small. Overall, we find no strong evidence
suggesting the spillover effect from an additional treated neighbor has a non-linear relationship with
the number of treated neighbors.




  9
    Replacing i with i + i (i  {1,2,3}) would give us the corresponding average spillover effects on a treatment
child.


                                                        A15
Table J.1: Estimates of Spillover Effects under Non-linear Specifications

                                  Cognitive                           Non-cognitive
                      (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)
  Ti                  0.11***    0.08         0.05         0.05        0.12        0.08
                      (0.04)     (0.06)       (0.07)       (0.06)      (0.08)      (0.11)
   treated
  Ni,t                0.0042*** 0.0031        0.0023       0.0070*** 0.0080*** 0.0096***
       |r
                      (0.0013)   (0.0019)     (0.0019)     (0.0015)    (0.0021)    (0.0028)
    treated )2
  (Ni,t                          1.58e-06     6.10e-06                 -1.42e-06   -1.08e-05
        |r
                                 (1.52e-06) (7.42e-06)                 (1.39e-06) (9.33e-06)
    treated )3
  (Ni,t                                       -5.44e-09                            1.04e-08
        |r
                                              (9.01e-09)                           (1.07e-08)
        treated
  Ti × Ni,t           -0.0002*   0.0001       0.0007       0.0001      -0.0008     0.0004
            |r
                      (0.0001)   (0.0006)     (0.0014)     (0.0002)    (0.0007)    (0.0021)
         treated )2
  Ti × (Ni,t                     -7.08e-07    -3.34e-06                1.89e-06    -4.41e-06
             |r
                                 (1.12e-06) (6.72e-06)                 (1.33e-06) (1.04e-05)
         treated )3
  Ti × (Ni,t                                  3.36e-09                             8.57e-09
             |r
                                              (8.53e-09)                           (1.34e-08)
  SC N                0.75***    0.60*        0.56**       1.24***     1.37***     1.41***
                      (0.22)     (0.31)       (0.29)       (0.27)      (0.35)      (0.37)
  ST N                0.71***    0.55*        0.60**       1.27***     1.34***     1.39***
                      (0.22)     (0.32)       (0.29)       (0.27)      (0.38)      (0.38)
  Total               0.82***    0.63*        0.65**       1.32***     1.45***     1.47***
                      (0.23)     (0.34)       (0.28)       (0.27)      (0.38)      (0.37)
  Constant            0.469***   0.478***     0.491***     -2.431*** -2.500***     -2.449***
                      (0.113)    (0.114)      (0.123)      (0.180)     (0.186)     (0.188)
  Observations        3,403      3,403        3,403        3,403       3,403       3,403
  R-squared           0.659      0.659        0.660        0.384       0.384       0.385

   Notes: Estimated coefficients from equation (J.1) for neighborhood radius of r = 3
  km. Columns 1 and 4 correspond to the linear specification; 2 and 5 correspond to
  polynomials of degree 2; columns 3 and 6 correspond to polynomials of degree 3. Robust
  standard errors, clustered at the census-block-group level, are in parentheses; *** p<0.01,
  ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                              A16
