                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             WAGE RISK AND GOVERNMENT AND SPOUSAL INSURANCE

                                    Mariacristina De Nardi
                                         Giulio Fella
                                     Gonzalo Paz-Pardo

                                     Working Paper 28294
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28294


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




We thank Richard Blundell, Mike Daly, Robert Joyce, Peter Levell and Hamish Low for useful
comments and suggestions, and Barra Roantree for generously sharing his knowledge of the
NESPD dataset. The project has been funded by the Nuffield Foundation
(www.nuffiedfoundation.org), but the views expressed are those of the authors and not
necessarily the Foundation, or the NBER, CEPR, any agency of the federal government, the
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the European Central Bank, or the IFS.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Mariacristina De Nardi, Giulio Fella, and Gonzalo Paz-Pardo. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Wage Risk and Government and Spousal Insurance
Mariacristina De Nardi, Giulio Fella, and Gonzalo Paz-Pardo
NBER Working Paper No. 28294
December 2020
JEL No. D1,D12,D14,D15,H11,H2

                                         ABSTRACT

The extent to which households can self-insure and the government can help them to do so
depends on the wage risk that they face and their family structure. We study wage risk in the UK
and show that the persistence and riskiness of wages depends on one's age and position in the
wage distribution. We also calibrate a model of couples and singles with two alternative
processes for wages: a canonical one and a flexible one that allows for the much richer dynamics
that we document in the data. We use our model to show that allowing for rich wage dynamics is
important to properly evaluate the effects of benefit reform: relative to the richer process, the
canonical process underestimates wage persistence for women and generates a more important
role for in-work benefits relative to income support. The optimal benefit configuration under the
richer wage process, instead, is similar to that in place in the benchmark UK economy before the
Universal Credit reform. The Universal Credit reform generates additional welfare gains by
introducing an income disregard for families with children. While families with children are
better off, households without children, and particularly single women, are worse off.


Mariacristina De Nardi                          Gonzalo Paz-Pardo
University of Minnesota                         European Central Bank
1925 S 4th St                                   Sonnemannstrasse 20
Minneapolis, MN 55455                           60314
and Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis         Frankfurt am Main
and also NBER and CEPR                          Germany
denardim@nber.org                               gonzalo.paz_pardo@ecb.europa.eu

Giulio Fella
Queen Mary University of London
Mile End Road
London E1 4NS
United Kingdom
and Centre for Macroeconomics
and also Institute for Fiscal Studies
g.fella@qmul.ac.uk
1     Introduction
    The necessity, efficacy, and cost-effectiveness of government welfare policies depends
on the risks that households face and the actions that they can take to self-insure, for
instance by adjusting their saving and labor supply. Wage risk is a key driver of household
risk and being single rather than in a couple is an important factor affecting both a
household's sources of risk and tools for self-insurance. This is because single people are
solely exposed to their own wage risk and can only use their own savings and labor supply
to smooth consumption and welfare fluctuations. In contrast, couples face the wage risk
of both household members but can use their joint savings and the labor supply of both
partners to at least partly counteract wage fluctuations. In addition, couples benefit
economies of scale in the consumption.
    Better understanding the dynamics of wage and earnings risk is key to study the
ability of households to self-insure and to properly design an efficient benefit system. In
addition, explicitly modeling couples and singles, as well the dynamics of fertility and
saving over the life-cycle, is crucial to understand how wage and earnings risks interact
with self-insurance depending on family structure.
    We begin our analysis by studying both UK survey data from the British House-
hold Panel Study (BHPS), at the household level, and UK administrative data from the
New Earnings Survey Panel Dataset (NESPD), at the individual level. We find that
the individual-level earnings and wage dynamics that we observe in these data sets are
remarkably similar and display dynamics that are substantially richer than those implied
by the canonical linear model previously used for policy evaluation. Thus, we propose a
much richer model for wage risk that, unlike the canonical model, allows for the distribu-
tion of wage shocks to be non-normal and for wage risk to vary by age and by the position
of a worker in the wage distribution. This richer process can capture, for instance, that
shocks are less persistent for younger and lower-income workers.
    Our analysis shows that the canonical process, which imposes more restrictive as-
sumptions that are at odds with the UK data, overestimates wage persistence for men,
and underestimates it for women. Compared to the previous literature, our contribution
in this part of our analysis is to estimate wage, rather than earnings, dynamics and to
estimate both canonical and richer processes, for both men and women. Looking at wage
dynamics is important because earnings are endogenous to the choice of hours worked.

                                            2
Allowing for heterogeneity in gender and family structure is important as single and
married men and women have different labor supply behaviors.1
       We then develop a dynamic structural life-cycle model of married and single men
and women under these two alternative wage processes and use our calibrated model to
evaluate the optimal provision of two important types of government transfers, an income
floor and in-work benefits. We allow these benefits to differ in their levels and phase-out
rates as a function of income. We calibrate our model to match key aspects of the data
that include government policy and household labor market outcomes over the life cycle
during the time period preceding the 2016 Universal Credit benefit reform in the UK.
       We find that, while both wage processes fit key aspects of the observed data, their
optimal policy implications are starkly different. In particular, the optimal benefit config-
uration under the richer wage process is very similar to the one that was in place during
the period preceding the Universal Credit reform. In contrast, if one were to assume a
canonical wage process, one would conclude that optimal benefits during the same period
should have been very different. In particular, that optimal policy would incorrectly pre-
scribe a trebling of in-work benefits and a much faster (from 40 to 100 per cent) phase-out
rate of benefits. The intuition for the difference in optimal benefits is that the canonical
wage process underestimates the persistence of shocks to women's wages relative to the
richer process, and thus implies that it is less costly to induce women to participate in the
labor market by lowering their out-of-work benefits and increasing their in-work benefits.
In reality, women's wages are more persistent and thus such a reform would have negative
impact on the welfare of a subset of persistently low-income women with high costs of
labor market participation (which could be related, for example, to health issues), who
would be pushed into low-paid work by the reform.
       We also use the model to study the Universal Credit benefit reform that was subse-
quently introduced in the UK in 2016 and completed by the end of 2018. Our model
with endogenous savings is particularly well suited to study this reform, which, in addi-
tion to introducing an earnings disregard for households with children, generalised asset
   1
    Guvenen, Karahan, Ozkan and Song (2016) document rich dynamics for pre-tax individual earnings
in the US, Arellano, Blundell and Bonhomme (2017) for household pre-tax earnings in the US and
Norway, De Nardi, Fella and Paz-Pardo (2019) for household disposable earnings in the US and Ozkan,
Storesletten, Holter and Halvorsen (2017) for household earnings in Norway both before and after taxes.
De Nardi, Fella, Knoef, Paz-Pardo and Van Ooijen (2021) study the relative contributions of wages and
hours to male earnings dynamics.



                                                  3
means testing for benefit eligibility in the UK. We find that, irrespective of the wage pro-
cess, the move to Universal Credit implies overall welfare gains. However, this average
improvement masks very heterogeneous effects. The main beneficiaries are households
with children, who constitute the majority of households and benefit from the earnings
disregard. Singles without children, particularly women, lose out.
    Our work builds on the important, but still relatively small, literature that studies
the effects of taxation and welfare policies taking into account household composition. A
robust finding of this literature is the importance of the response of female labor supply
to understand these effects. Keane and Wolpin (2010) study the effect of the US welfare
system on women's welfare participation, labor supply, marriage, fertility, and schooling.
Blundell, Costa Dias, Meghir and Shaw (2016) study how the UK tax and welfare system
affects the career choices of women. Guner, Kaygusuz and Ventura (2012) and Bick
and Fuchs-Schündeln (2017) investigate the effect of taxation on household labor supply,
Guner, Kaygusuz and Ventura (2011) evaluate gender-based taxes, Nishiyama (2019) and
Groneck and Wallenius (2017) evaluate Social Security spousal provisions, and Borella,
De Nardi and Yang (2016) study the effects of marriage-related taxes and Social Security
rules for different cohorts of women whose labor supply behavior has been changing.
Importantly, none of these papers allows for the richer wage dynamics that we observe in
the data.



2     Earnings and wage risks
    For tractability, and because most men work full time and display very small labor
supply elasticities, we take men's labor supply as exogenous while we model women's
labor supply (and household's savings). Thus, in our empirical analysis, we study men's
earnings and women's wages.
    Our main data source is the British Household Panel Survey (BHPS). The BHPS is a
household survey of the UK population that started in 1991 and sampled initially 5,500
households and 10,300 individuals and then followed them and their children over time.
Its design suggests that its measurement error in self-reported earnings is likely to be lower
than in other surveys, like the PSID in the US, because instead of being asked about their
total labor earnings in the last twelve months, respondents were asked to check their last


                                              4
pay slip and report about it. Furthermore, in a relevant proportion of the observations
(around 30%), the interviewer himself saw the pay slip. An important advantage of
the BHPS is that, in addition to income data, it includes a wide variety of information
(such as off-sample labor market histories). Furthermore, it collects information on all
household members, and is thus suited forthe study of family and government insurance.
This is important because even though taxation in the UK is at the individual level, most
subsidies and benefits are at the household level.
   To ease potential concerns about measurement error in the BHPS, we compare our
findings with the implications of the New Earnings Survey Panel Dataset (NESPD),
an administrative data set with individual data from the UK Social Security. We pro-
vide more information about both data sources and their differences in Appendix A.1.
Appendix A.2 details our requirements for sample construction, the most important of
which is dropping observations below 5% median earnings (roughly £1,300 a year), which
is usual practice in the literature. Our earnings/wage measure is the residual obtained by
regressing the logarithm of earnings on year and age dummies. Most of the moments that
we present refer to changes in residual log-earnings/wages. This leaves us with 57,659
usable observations (pairs of earnings in t and t + 1) for men and 63,014 for women.
   We document the properties of male, pre-tax earnings in the UK by using a set of
moments that has become rather standard in the literature. Our first finding is that, for
the case of the UK, the NESPD generates very similar implications in both quantitative
and qualitative terms to the BHPS. Thus, we report the comparison in Appendix A.3
and in what follows we focus on the BHPS.
   The top left panel of Figure 1 plots the standard deviation of earnings changes against
the percentile of the last period's earnings. In both data sets, the standard deviation
follows a U-shaped pattern which is inconsistent with the assumption of linearity which
underpins the canonical model.
   The top right and bottom left panels plot the skewness and kurtosis of earnings
changes in the two datasets, respectively. Skewness is positive for low realization of
previous earnings and falls as one moves to the right in the distribution of previous
earnings. Kurtosis is somewhat higher than its value of 3 for the normal distribution,
but, overall, UK male earnings display substantially smaller deviations from normality
than those found in the studies for other countries that we quote in footnote 1.


                                            5
   The bottom right panel plots the persistence of earnings as a function of age and per-
centile of the previous earnings realization. As the moments discussed above, persistence
is not independent of previous earnings levels (or age) which again is inconsistent with the
linearity of the canonical model. More specifically, the picture shows that the persistence
of male earnings is lowest at young ages and low earnings levels, with a persistence of
about 0.55.
   Turning to female wages, the first three panels of Figure 2 plot the variance, skewness
and kurtosis of female wage changes as a function of the rank of the previous period's
realization. Their properties are remarkably similar to those of male earnings changes:
the variance has a U-shaped pattern, skewness is positive below the median and declines
with the rank of previous earnings and kurtosis is higher than for the normal distribution,
but not too much so.
   The bottom right panel of the same picture, instead, plots the persistence of female
wages as a function of age and the percentile of the previous wage realization. Similarly
to male earnings, the pattern of persistence is inconsistent with the standard, linear
canonical model. Persistence is hump shaped as a function of a previous wage realization,
though it displays much less variability with respect to age than in the case of male wages.
   These pictures make it apparent that both male earnings and female wages display
strong deviations from the assumption of linearity underpinning the canonical model.


2.1    Estimating processes for earnings and wages

   Our structural model of household behavior requires that we estimate the stochastic
processes that households face for earnings (for men) and wages (for women). In this
section, we describe our assumptions about these processes and how we estimate them.
   Consider a cohort of individuals indexed by i and denote by g the individual's gender,
                                                                                       g
p marital status and t their age. We assume that the logarithm of the potential wage w
                                                                                     ~it ,
                                                                   gp
net of time fixed-effects, can be decomposed into a deterministic (t  ) and a stochastic
  g
(yit ) component
                                         gp   gp    g
                                    log wit = t  + yit .                                (1)

   For men, the potential wage in equation (1) above is actual measured earnings because
we abstract from the labor supply margin and restrict attention to individuals with



                                             6
                         1.25
                                                                                                       1.0

                         1.00                                                                                                          Age group
                                                                                                       0.5                                  25-34
Standard deviation




                                                                                  Kelley's skewness
                                                                                                                                            35-49
                         0.75
                                                                                                                                            50-59
                                                                                                       0.0
                         0.50

                                                                                                      -0.5
                         0.25


                         0.00                                                                         -1.0
                             0    20            40         60          80   100                           0   20            40         60          80   100
                                       Percentile of previous earnings                                             Percentile of previous earnings

                         20
Crow-Siddiqui kurtosis




                         15



                         10



                          5



                          0
                           0     20           40           60         80    100
                                      Percentile of previous earnings




                                  Figure 1: Moments of male earnings changes in BHPS data

                         1.25
                                                                                                       1.0

                         1.00                                                                                                          Age group
                                                                                                       0.5                                  25-34
Standard deviation




                                                                                  Kelley's skewness




                                                                                                                                            35-49
                         0.75
                                                                                                                                            50-59
                                                                                                       0.0
                         0.50

                                                                                                      -0.5
                         0.25


                         0.00                                                                         -1.0
                             0    20           40           60       80     100                           0   20           40           60       80     100
                                        Percentile of previous wages                                                Percentile of previous wages

                         20
Crow-Siddiqui kurtosis




                         15



                         10



                          5



                          0
                           0     20          40            60       80      100
                                       Percentile of previous wages




                                      Figure 2: Moments of female wage changes in BHPS data


                                                                              7
substantial attachment to the labor market (which make up for the vast majority of the
data). For women we impute potential wages for the years when they are not working.
See Appendix A.4 for details.
      We estimate two alternative processes for the stochastic wage component2 yit from
equation (1). Both assume that it can be decomposed as a persistent shock that follows
a first-order Markov process, zit , and a transitory shock that is independently distributed
over time,     it

                                              yit = zit +        it.                     (2)

      The canonical (linear) model assumes that the persistent component of the shock
evolves as


                         zi,t = zi,t-1 + it ,                                            (3)
                             id                   iid                       iid
                         zi1  N (0, z1 ), it  N (0,  ),                it    N (0,  ).


      Our flexible, or nonlinear (NL), process comes from Arellano et al. (2017), which we
will denote as ABB from now on: let Qz (q |·), the conditional quantile function for the
variable z = z, , denote the q th conditional quantile of z. The process generalizes (3) to


                                    zi,t = Qz (vit |zi,t-1 , t)                          (4)

                                    zi1 = Qz1 (uit ),       it   = Q (eit ).


      Comparing equations (3) and (4) makes clear that the canonical process imposes con-
stant persistence (linearity) and age-independent conditional distribution. The standard
assumption of normality implies a further restriction on the quantile function Qz for
the innovation in equation (3). As we have discussed in Section 2 all these additional
assumptions are inconsistent with earnings and wage data in the BHPS and NESPD.
Instead, the methodology proposed by ABB does not impose any strong functional form
assumption on the quantile functions Qz (q |·). In particular, the first line of (4) does not
restrict the dependence of zit on zi,t-1 to be linear.
      We take out time effects before estimating our processes. We estimate the canoni-
cal earnings process following the procedure described in Storesletten, Telmer and Yaron
  2
      We omit the gender superscript in what follows to streamline notation.



                                                        8
(2004), which implies fitting the parameters of interest (persistence of the persistent com-
ponent , variance of the persistent shocks  , variance of the initial realization z1 , and
variance of the transitory component  ) to the profile of variances and autocovariances
of log earnings over the life cycle. Table 1 represents the estimated parameters for male
earnings and women wages for the canonical process. To estimate the flexible, non-linear
process we follow Arellano et al. (2017) and De Nardi et al. (2019). Appendix B.1 shows
how the persistent component preserves the non-normal and non-linear features of interest
of the earnings and wage data that we have described in Section 2.

                   Group                 2      z2
                                                  1
                                                         2
                                                                        
                   Men earnings       0.11664 0.1971 0.0032          0.9999
                   Women's wages      0.01323 0.1354 0.05128         0.886

                       Table 1: Estimates for the canonical processes



   Figure 3 shows that both processes fit the profile of variances of log earnings for
men and log wages for women over the life cycle in the BHPS data. The canonical
process does so by construction, while the NL process achieves this result by matching the
conditional distribution of yt+1 given yt at every age and thus more realistically capturing
the dynamics of earnings. As a result, the two processes have economically meaningful
differences that are driven by the restrictive assumptions of the canonical process and
which can affect policy evaluation in a structural model. In the case of male earnings, the
canonical process generates an increase in variance later in life by assuming that earnings
have an (almost) unit root; the NL process, instead, captures this increase through the
observed rise in the persistence and variance of earnings later in life (Figure 4, left panels).
In the case of women's wages, the hump-shape in the variance of wages is driven by the
combination of high persistence and low and decreasing variance of shocks, features of the
data that the NL process captures (Figure 4, right panels). The canonical process cannot,
by construction, generate a decreasing age profile in the variance of shocks, so it fits the
profile as best as it can by assuming that persistence is low (which helps to generate a
relatively flat profile) and that the variance of shocks is high. Thus, the canonical process
not only does not replicate the set of important facts about earnings risk that we have
described, such as non-normalities or non-linearities, but also, as a result of its restrictive
assumptions, generates implications in terms of persistences and variances over the life


                                               9
cycle that are at odds with the data.
                       0.5                                                                0.35
                                                                                                                                  Data
                                                                                                                                  NL process
                                                                                           0.3                                    Canonical
                      0.45
    Variance of log




                                                                        Variance of log
                                                                                          0.25
                       0.4
                                                                                           0.2

                      0.35
                                                                                          0.15


                       0.3                                                                 0.1
                          25   30   35   40         45   50   55   60                         25   30   35   40         45   50      55        60
                                              Age                                                                 Age



                       Figure 3: Variance of log earnings for men (left) and log wages for women (right).


            The differences in the estimated persistence of shocks implied by the two methods are
potentially important, not only from a statistical, but also from an economic perspective.
More persistent shocks are more difficult to self-insure through household borrowing
and therefore imply a bigger role for complementary forms of insurance, such as public
insurance. Our findings suggest that the canonical process overestimates labor income
risk for men and underestimates it for women. This raises the question of the extent
to which these differences are important for the evaluation of welfare policies aimed at
insurances against income risk. It is this question that we address in the second part of
the paper.



3                      Our model
            We develop a partial-equilibrium, life-cycle, dynamic, incomplete-markets model in
the tradition of Bewley (1977). Time is discrete. Individuals start their economic life at
age 25, with no assets and a given gender, marital status, initial number of children, and
initial wage shock. Men face earnings shocks and women face wage shocks. There are
two alternative processes describing the dynamics of earnings and wage shocks, which we
have described in the previous section.
            Children are born stochastically to households except in single-male households. The
probability that children arrive and leave a household depends on their mother's age,
marital status, and the number of children already in the household. Children increase


                                                                    10
                                1.00

                                0.95                                                      1.0




            Persistence




                                                                      Persistence
                                0.90
                                                                                          0.9
                                0.85

                                0.80                                                      0.8

                                0.75
                                       30        40            50                               30        40           50
                                                   Age                                                      Age

                                            NL process   Canonical                                   NL process   Canonical




                                0.3                                                       0.3
            SD of pers. shock




                                                                      SD of pers. shock




                                0.2                                                       0.2



                                0.1                                                       0.1



                                0.0                                                       0.0
                                       30        40           50                                30        40           50
                                                   Age                                                      Age

                                            NL process   Canonical                                   NL process   Canonical




Figure 4: Persistence by age (top), by earnings and quantile of the shock (middle), and stan-
          dard deviation of shocks (bottom), for male earnings (left) and women's wages
          (right), NL process vs canonical process, persistent component. Dotted lines and
          transparent surfaces represent 95% confidence intervals computed by bootstrapping


household consumption needs, entail child care costs if their mother works, and matter
for benefit eligibility.
   Retired people face mortality risk that depends on gender and age. Age 95 is the
maximum possible age one can reach. For simplicity, we assume that people in a given
couple have the same age, retire exogenously at age 60, and that marital status is fixed
throughout one's lifetime, except for loss of a spouse due to death shocks.
   There are no annuity markets to insure against mortality risk. The term t denotes
age, g = f, m denotes gender, and p = s, c indicates marital status (single or couple).
   Each period, households choose how much to consume and save in a risk-free asset
subject to a borrowing limit. Available time is normalized to 1. Men of working age supply


                                                                     11
¯ hours of work inelastically, where this amount corresponds to full time work. Women,
h
                                                                           ¯ 2, h
instead, optimally choose among three possible levels of working hours {0, h/   ¯ } and

bear a fixed time-cost of working which is meant to capture getting the children ready
for daycare, commuting time, and time spent getting ready for work.3


3.1       Preferences and wages

       Preferences are time-separable and  is the household's discount factor. The utility
function for each person is given by

                                                     ((c/µ)l1-
                                      u(c/µ, l) =              ,
                                                        1-

where c denotes total household consumption, l is leisure and µ denotes the equivalence
scale, which depends on marital status and number of children. Couples maximize the
sum of their utilities in a unitary fashion

                                            ((c/µ)¯
                                                  l)1- ((c/µ)lf )1-
                             U (c, lf ) =             +             .
                                               1-         1-

       The fixed time cost of working for men is normalized to zero. The fixed time cost of
working for women, p (ht , t; ), depends on age t, marital status, labor supply l as well
as permanent, unobserved, individual heterogeneity  = {1 , 2 }. Ih>0 is a 0-1 indicator
function equal to 1 when hours worked are positive:
                                                                                 
                                                      l,h     l,h        l,h 2
                                                  exp(0   + 1     t + 2     t) 
                    p (ht , t; ) = Ih>0  +               l,h      l,h       l,h 2 .              (5)
                                                1+   exp(0   + 1      t + 2    t)

       Leisure for women is given by


                                      lt = 1 - ht - p (ht , t).


       The wage process for an individual of gender g and marital status p follows Equations 1
and 2, without the purely transitory shock           it ,   which we assume to also reflect measure-
ment error. The first-order Markov stochastic component follows either the canonical
   3
    As noted in French (2005), the fixed cost of working implies that, consistently with the observed
data, most people will not choose to work just a few hours.



                                                  12
or the NL process. To reflect assortative mating, innovations to the stochastic wage
components for people in couples are correlated at age 25.


3.2    Child care costs

   The function CCt (p, hf
                         t , n) captures child care costs for a mother of age t, marital

status p, working hf
                   t hours when n children are living in the household. To take into

account the fact that children older than 5 are in school but require child care outside
of school hours at least until age 11 and that children younger than age 5 are not yet in
school, we specify the following child care cost function


            CCt (p, hf                       f                       f
                     t , n) = [n04 (p, t, n)ht + n511 (p, t, n) max(ht - sch , 0)] × f   (6)


where the numbers of children aged 0 to four, n04 (p, t, n), and 5 to 11, n511 (p, t, n), are
a deterministic function of age, marital status, and the total number of children in the
household, f is the hourly cost of child care and sch is the length of the school day.


3.3    The government

   The government taxes individuals according to Gouveia and Strauss's (1994) tax
schedule
                                  T (y )                -1
                                         =  -  (sy  + 1)  ,                              (7)
                                    y
where y = wh is taxable individual labor earnings and  , s and  are parameters.
   The government provides benefits that depend on household labor income. In our
benchmark economy, they are composed of an income floor or income support (IS), which
is not conditional on working, and in-work benefits (IW). Both are unified in the Universal
Credit (UC) system.
   Let X  {IS, IW, U C }. We model the amount that a household with marital status p
and children n gets for benefit X as the sum of a component that accrues to all households
X                         X                     X
0 , a per-child component 1 up to a child cap km , and a component that accrues

only to couples X
                2 :



                      ¯ X (p, n) = X
                      Y                X          X    X
                                   0 + 1 min{n, km } + 2 I(p = c)                        (8)


                                               13
   All three benefits are tapered away as labor income increases according to a propor-
tionality factor  X . Before the Universal Credit reform, disposable income after taxes
and benefits is given by


            ~(y h ) + max{0, Y¯
 M (y h ) = y                                                ¯ IW (p, n) -  IW y h }I(ht > 0), (9)
                              IS (p, n) -  IS y h } + max{0, Y




where y h represents pre-tax household labor income and y
                                                        ~(y h ) represents post-tax house-
hold labor income. With the Universal Credit (UC) system, benefits are means-tested
(households with more than a
                           ¯ assets do not receive any benefits), there is an initial
earnings disregard y DR (n) for families with children, and tapering is based on post-tax
income. Thus, the flow of disposable income under this system M U C is:


  M U C (y h ) = y                ¯ U C (p, n) -  U C (max{y
                 ~(y h ) + max{0, Y                        ~(y h ) - y DR (n), 0}}I(at < a
                                                                                         ¯) (10)


   Finally the government provides old-age Social Security payments to retirees and
wasteful government expenditure. When choosing optimal policy or evaluate the intro-
duction of Universal Credit, we impose that these policies are revenue-neutral for the
government.


3.4    Recursive representation

   During the working period. Let Wtj (·) denote the value function for a household
of working age t, with j = f, m for respectively single woman and man, and j = c for
couples. The state variables for a single woman during this stage are age t, assets, at ,
                           g
the persistent wage shock zt , the number of children n, and her disutility of work type
, and her recursive problem is


 Wtf (at , zt
            f
              , nt , ) = max u(ct , 1 - ht - 1 (ht , t; )) + Et Wtf           f
                                                                  +1 (at+1 , zt+1 , nt+1 ,  ) (11)
                      ct ,at+1 ,ht

                                                f
                 s.t. at+1 = (1 + r)at + M (ht wt ) - CCt (f, ht , nt ) - ct ,   at+1  0,


where the expectation is taken with respect to the conditional distributions for wages
and the number of children.
   The problem of a single man is similar, except that he works a fixed number of hours



                                                14
     ¯ , has no children and  is normalized to zero:
ht = h

                             m
                  Wtm (at , zt                    ¯ ) + Et W m (at+1 , z m ),
                               ) = max u(ct , 1 - h                                                 (12)
                                          ct ,at+1          t+1         t+1

                                                           ¯ m ) - ct ,
                                s.t. at+1 = (1 + r)at + M (hw               at+1  0.
                                                              t



    Working couples choose consumption and the labor supply of the wife to solve

           f
Wtc (at , zt    m
             , zt , nt , ) = max f U (ct , 1 - hf   2 f           ¯          p           f      m
                                                t -  (ht , t;  ), l ) + Et Wt+1 (at+1 , zt+1 , zt+1 , nt+1 ,  )
                           ct ,at+1 ,ht

                                                                                                    (13)
                                                ¯ m + hf
                     s.t. at+1 = (1 + r)at + M (hw        f              f
                                                       t wt ) - CCt (p, ht , nt ) - ct ,         at+1  0.
                                                   t



    During retirement. People younger than age 95 die with positive probability that
depends on both age and gender. We assume that children leave the household before
their parents retire. Singles--j = f, m--solve the recursive problem

                     j
                    Rt (at ) = max u(ct , 1) + sg  j
                                                t Rt+1 (at+1 )                                      (14)
                                 ct ,at+1

                          s.t. ct + at+1 = (1 + r)at + Yr - T (Yr ),       at+1  0.


where Yr is the old-age Social Security payment from the government.
    For couples, we assume that the death of each spouse is independent from that of the
other one. Therefore the recursive problem of a retired couple can be written as

           c
          Rt (at ) = max U (ct , 1, 1) +  sf  m c               f       m   f
                                           t st Rt+1 (at+1 ) + st (1 - st )Rt+1 (at+1 )+            (15)
                     ct ,at+1

                              f
                     sm           m
                      t (1 - st )Rt+1 (at+1 )


                s.t. ct + at+1 = (1 + r)at + 2Yr - T (2Yr ),        at+1  0.



4     Calibration

4.1     Externally calibrated parameters

Demographics. We use BHPS data to obtain the proportions of households by gender,
marital status, and number of children, and the to estimate the first-order Markov chain


                                                     15
governing the evolution of the number of children as a function of mother's age and marital
status. The number of children n can take values {0, 1, 2, 3}, where 3 is associated with
three or more children. We equivalise consumption using an OECD-modified equivalence
scale µt , where the first adult counts as 1, the second as 0.5 and all children as 0.3. Survival
                    f
probabilities sm
               t , st are obtained from the UK life tables in the Human Mortality Database

for the period 1980-2010. We use BHPS data to compute n04 (p, t, n) and n511 (p, t, n). We
plot all of these variables in Appendix C.


Preferences and interest rate. We set the felicity function parameter to  = 2.5
and the after-tax interest rate r = 0.02.


Earnings and wages. We compute the deterministic profile for male earnings and
             gp
female wages t  and the stochastic process for the persistent components of the canon-
                      f      m
ical and NL process (zt and zt ) using the BHPS and Understanding Society data (See
Appendix C for details). For tractability, we discard the transitory components that we
estimate, which also includes measurement error.4 The estimated persistent component
is discretized following the procedure in De Nardi et al. (2019).
       To take into account that the labor markets of the two partners in a couple might be
correlated, we use the correlation at age 25 between husband's earnings and wife's wages
at age 25.


Taxes and government expenditure We estimate the tax function T (y ) in equation
(7) by using BHPS data on pre-tax and net household income (we obtain the latter
from the Derived Current and Annual Net Household Income Variables). Our measure
of taxes includes income taxes, National Insurance, and (state) pension contributions of
all household members (see Section 4.1). Because income taxation is at individual level
in the UK (even for married couples), we separately apply the tax schedule T (y ) to the
earnings of husbands and wives. Our estimates tax parameters are  = 0.31, s = 0.00004,
and  = 5.38

   4
    In the case of women, the existence of an active labor supply margin would have required the
transitory shock to enter the state space. Given that transitory shocks are typically well insured in the
class of models considered omitting them should not affect our findings significantly.




                                                   16
                             Parameter IW    IS   UC
                             0         1960 4574 3856
                             1           0  1366 2210
                             2         2010 907 1733
                                       0.41 0.7  0.63
                             km          1   NA    2
                             y DR       NA NA 2304
                             ¯
                             a          NA NA 16000


Table 2: Parametrization of benefit functions for benchmark in-work benefits (IW), benchmark
         income support (IS), and Universal Credit (UC), 2016 pounds.


Benefit system. We use data from benefit programmes and benefit receipts to parametrize
the benefit functions 8, 9, and 10. We show the resulting parameters in Table 2.
   For in-work benefits in our benchmark benefit system, we follow the statutory rules
of the Working Tax Credit. The child component of WTC is independent of the number
of children, which is equivalent to setting kmIW = 1.
   Our income-support programme is meant to replicate many benefits available to low-
income households. These programs that have differential take-up rates and eligibility
criteria which would be very complicated to explicitly model individually. Therefore, we
use benefit data available in the BHPS and in the BHPS Derived Net Household Income
Variables to estimate IS  IS      IS
                      0 , 1 , and 2 based on the observed data.

   More specifically, we look at average benefit receipts for households whose labor in-
come in a given year is close to zero (below £2,000, although results are robust to changing
the threshold to £1,000 or £3,000). This approach allows us to average across various
types of benefits and weighting by the cross-sectional distribution of benefit receipts
within this subset of the population. However, we cannot use the same approach to di-
rectly compute the tapering rate  IS from benefit data because most benefits have weekly
or monthly eligibility criteria, while our data are annual, so the actual relationship be-
tween income and benefits received gets attenuated in the data due to time aggregation.
For this reason, we estimate  IS as a weighted average of the statutory tapering rates
of the relevant benefits taking into account cross-eligibility criteria and legal thresholds.
For this programme, there is no limit on how many children the child component can be
claimed for. Appendix D provides a more detailed description of the benefit programmes
that we replicate and how we perform these computations.



                                             17
    Finally, we take the parameters for Universal Credit from their statutory values, given
that we do not have sufficient years of benefit data to check actual benefit receipts. We
scale all the fixed allowances U C UC  UC
                               0 , 1 , 2  proportionally by a factor 0.86 so that the
change to Universal Credit is revenue-neutral from the perspective of the government
under our structural model and under the NL wage process. Table 2 reports the values
after the scaling. The £2304 earnings disregard only applies to families with at least one
child in the household.


Remaining government policy parameters. We replicate the UK (New) State Pen-
sion System. In 2016, all retired workers get a maximum amount of £156 per week,
which amounts to about 28 percent of average male earnings, which is the numeraire in
our model. The length of a school week sch is assumed to be 20 hours as in Blundell
et al. (2016).


4.2     Internally calibrated parameters

    We require that each version of our model, whether with the canonical or nonlinear
model for male earnings and female wages, fits our target data as well as possible. Thus,
the remaining seventeen parameters are calibrated inside the model, given each earnings
and wage processes. These parameters include the fixed cost of working for women
                  lh   ih   ih
(three parameters 0  , 1  , 2  for each marital status p = s, c and full-time/part-time
                      ¯ 2, h
employment status h = h/   ¯ , and thus a total of twelve parameters), the discount factor

 , the hourly child care costs f , the disutility of work for the high-cost-of-work group 1 ,
and the proportions of single and married women of each  type. We normalize 2 , the
value of the disutility of work for the low-cost-of-work women, to its value for men (zero).
    These parameters are calibrated to target the following 145 moments. A wealth/income
ratio of 2.9 (thus which corresponds to the average wealth measure for the 1995 BHPS
constructed by Banks, Blundell and Smith (2004) divided by average household income
in the same BHPS wave) and the profiles of female labor market participation by age,
marital status and full-time/part-time status, for a total of 144 (36 × 4) targets.5 .
   5
     We target the 1991-2008 BHPS profile, which is similar to that implied by the longer panel that also
includes the Understanding Society data until 2016




                                                   18
                                  Full-time, married                      Full-time, singles
                           0.4                                     0.4
                                                                                       NL process
                                                                                       Canonical
                           0.3                                     0.3




                    Cost




                                                            Cost
                           0.2                                     0.2


                           0.1                                     0.1


                            0                                       0
                                  30    40     50      60                30     40       50         60
                                         Age                                     Age
                                  Part-time, married                     Part-time, singles
                           0.4                                     0.4


                           0.3                                     0.3
                    Cost




                                                            Cost
                           0.2                                     0.2


                           0.1                                     0.1


                            0                                       0
                                  30    40     50      60                30     40       50         60
                                         Age                                     Age




Figure 5: Calibrated fixed costs of working. The units are expressed as fractions of total day


5     Model calibrations and fits

                   Parameter                                        NL process          Canonical
                   Discount rate                                      0.98                0.99
                   Cost of child care f                               0.05                0.06
                   Disutility of work type 1                          0.53                0.48
                   Share of 1 , singles                               0.25                0.23
                   Share of 1 , couples                               0.22                0.25

                                 Table 3: Internally calibrated parameters



    Table 3 reports the calibrated preference parameters and child care costs (as a share of
the average male wage) for both processes. Figure 5 plots the calibrated fixed time costs
(reported as fractions of a day) of part- and full-time work in red for the NL process and
in black for the canonical process. Figure 6 compares the targeted participation rates in
the data and in the model. In both calibrations the wealth-income ratio equals its target
value.




                                                        19
                            Full-time, married                       Full-time, singles
                       1                                       1
                                                                                  Data
                      0.8                                     0.8                 NL process
                                                                                  Canonical
                      0.6                                     0.6
              Share




                                                      Share
                      0.4                                     0.4

                      0.2                                     0.2

                       0                                       0
                            30    40     50      60                 30     40       50         60
                                   Age                                      Age
                            Part-time, married                      Part-time, singles
                       1                                       1

                      0.8                                     0.8

                      0.6                                     0.6
              Share




                                                      Share


                      0.4                                     0.4

                      0.2                                     0.2

                       0                                       0
                            30    40     50      60                 30     40       50         60
                                   Age                                      Age



Figure 6: Fit of labor market participation, by marital status and working hours for the NL
          and canonical processes compared with the actual data


6     Policy evaluation
    To evaluate whether benefit reforms have different implications under the canonical
and nonlinear processes for earnings and wages, we look at both outcomes and welfare.
Our welfare criterion is given by the utilitarian, un-weighted, average of the lifetime
utilities of newborns. We report results both behind the full veil of ignorance and after
the realization of gender, marital status and number of children.


6.1    Optimal benefit system

    We start by evaluating the provision of government insurance by optimizing over the
parameters of the welfare system for the income floor and the in-work benefit that were
in place before Universal Credit. That is, we optimize over the intercepts IS  IW
                                                                           0 , 0

and slopes (tapering rates)  IS ,  IW of functions (8) and (9) to find the system that


                                                      20
         Parameters               Benchmark      Optimum (NL)      Optimum (Ca)
         Income floor, level         4574            4504              3106
         Income floor, tapering      0.70            0.62              0.56
         In work, level              1960            2550              7500
         In work, tapering           0.41            0.44              1.00


Table 4: Income floors and in-work benefits: benchmark vs optimum under NL and canonical
         processes.


maximizes ex ante welfare (under the veil of ignorance) while maintaining the tax function
unchanged and keeping total tax revenues minus total benefit outlays constant. Hence,
this change is budget neutral for the government.
   Table 4 shows the results of this optimization. Column 2 reports the parameter values
for the two benefit functions in the benchmark economy, while columns 3 and 4 report
the optimal values under, respectively, the NL and canonical wage process. Under the NL
wage process, the optimal benefit system is close to the one in the benchmark economy.
The main difference is that it features a 30 per cent higher level of in-work benefits and
slightly higher tapering rate for in-work benefits and lower tapering for the income floor.
The difference between the optimal and the benchmark benefit policies is possibly best
appreciated with the help of Figure 7, which plots the relationship between benefit levels
and after-tax labor income for single men, women and couples in the benchmark (blue
lines) and under the optimal system under the NL (red lines) and canonical (yellow lines)
wage processes. The continuous lines plot benefit levels for working individuals, while the
circles in the top two panels denote benefits for non-working individuals (single women in
the model). Under the NL wage process, benefits for working households are marginally
higher than in the benchmark and are exhausted at a slightly higher level of disposable
income due to the fall in the tapering rate for income-support. Single, working women
with one child between the 10th and 30th percentile of labor income are the only group
for which the switch to the optimal policy implies a significant increase in total benefits.
Under the canonical wage process, instead, the optimal benefit system is substantially
different from the one in the benchmark. In particular, the optimal system implies a
30 per cent reduction in benefit levels for non-working individuals, from 15 to 10 per
cent of average earnings, accompanied by a more than three-fold increase in the level
of in-work benefits. As a result, the net return to the first pound of labor income--the



                                            21
                                                       Single, no kid                                                 Single, one kid
                                             0.6                                                            0.6
                                                                                                                                       Benchmark
                                             0.5                                                            0.5                        Optimal NL
                                                                                                                                       Optimal canonical
                                             0.4                                                            0.4




                                  Benefits




                                                                                                 Benefits
                                             0.3                                                            0.3

                                             0.2                                                            0.2

                                             0.1                                                            0.1

                                              0                                                              0
                                                   0           0.5                         1                      0              0.5                       1
                                                         Earnings                                                          Earnings
                                Couples, no kid                                        Couples, one kid                                          Couples, two kids
                      0.6                                                   0.6                                                        0.6

                      0.5                                                   0.5                                                        0.5

                      0.4                                                   0.4                                                        0.4
           Benefits




                                                                 Benefits




                                                                                                                            Benefits
                      0.3                                                   0.3                                                        0.3

                      0.2                                                   0.2                                                        0.2

                      0.1                                                   0.1                                                        0.1

                       0                                                     0                                                           0
                            0                 0.5          1                      0              0.5                   1                     0             0.5       1
                                     Earnings                                                  Earnings                                               Earnings



Figure 7: Implied total level of benefits, by income levels, marital status, and number of
          children. For singles, circles represent benefits for households where everyone is out
          of work, while lines represent benefits for households in which at least one member
          works. Earnings and benefits are expressed as the share of average male earnings


difference between the vertical intercept of the straight line and of the corresponding
circle in Figure 7--is three times as large than in the benchmark and optimal systems
under the NL process. Similarly, the reduction in the tapering rate for the income floor
and its increase for in-work benefits are faster compared the NL case. In particular, the
tapering rate for in-work benefits increases from 41 to 100 per cent. The net effect is a
substantial increase in benefits for working individuals.
   Increasing in-work benefits and reducing income support is welfare-improving because
it increases incentives to participate in the labor market, which in turn increase tax
revenues to be spent in the insurance system, but is welfare-decreasing because it reduces
insurance provision for low-wage households and, in particular, single women. Under the
canonical process, the benefits outweigh the costs, but the opposite is true for the NL
process. The key reason for this difference is that the canonical process underestimates
wage persistence for women. Thus, the cost of reducing insurance to low-wage women is
lower under the canonical process, because it is a more transitory state, against which
it is easier to self-insure. On the other hand, the NL process replicates the fact that



                                                                                      22
                Group        Average 0 kids 1 kid            2 kids   3+ kids
                                    NL process
                Overall       0.15
                Single men    0.17
                Single women  0.42    0.34     0.59          0.55      0.47
                Couples       0.06     0.05    0.06          0.07      0.07
                                 Canonical process
                Overall       0.19
                Single men    0.11
                Single women  0.52    -0.16 2.32             1.48      0.85
                Couples       0.10     0.08    0.11          0.12      0.12

    Table 5: Welfare change, by gender and marital status, for switch to optimal system.


low-wage status is a relatively persistent state for a group of women and reducing their
income support to encourage them to work would drastically reduce their welfare, while
a possible increase in-work benefits would not be enough to compensate the welfare cost
of foregone leisure. As a result, the optimal welfare system under the more realistic NL
process does not introduce these major changes and is much closer to the system that
was in place before 2016.
   Figures 8 and 9 show how, under either wage process, the optimal policy mix results
in higher part-time and lower full-time labor market participation by single women, and
a significant increase in participation overall. The rise in overall participation is driven by
the increase in the relative return to work, as measured by the difference between the level
of in-work benefits (the circles) and of total benefits (the corresponding lines) in Figure
7. This increase is particularly large under the canonical wage process and accounts for
the larger rise in participation. The switch from full-time to part-time is due to the fact
that the higher withdrawal rate for in-work benefits increases the effective tax rate and
reduces the benefits of working full-time rather than part-time. The effect is, again, more
pronounced under the canonical process, which features much larger increases in benefit
phase-out rate compared to the NL process.
   Table 5 reports the welfare change associated with the switch to the optimal bene-
fit system. The welfare change is expressed as the percentage change in consumption
(constant across ages and states) that would make a newborn agent in the benchmark
economy indifferent to being born in the counterfactual economy. The first column re-
ports the welfare change before the draw of the initial number of children. The "overall"
measure in the first row is under the full veil of ignorance, including the realization of

                                              23
                            Full-time, married                       Full-time, singles
                       1                                       1
                                                                                  Data
                      0.8                                     0.8                 NL process
                                                                                  Optimum
                      0.6                                     0.6
              Share




                                                      Share
                      0.4                                     0.4

                      0.2                                     0.2

                       0                                       0
                            30    40     50      60                 30     40       50         60
                                   Age                                      Age
                            Part-time, married                      Part-time, singles
                       1                                       1

                      0.8                                     0.8

                      0.6                                     0.6
              Share




                                                      Share


                      0.4                                     0.4

                      0.2                                     0.2

                       0                                       0
                            30    40     50      60                 30     40       50         60
                                   Age                                      Age



      Figure 8: Labor force participation under NL process: optimal benefit system.


the gender and marital status draw.
   Despite the substantial differences in the optimal benefit policies across the two wage
processes, the overall welfare gains associated with moving from the benchmark to the
optimal system are similar under the two wage processes. In both cases, the switch to
the optimal benefit system implies an increase in welfare of approximately 0.2 percentage
points. Under both wage processes, the main beneficiaries of the reform are single women,
whose welfare gain is more that twice the overall one, while couples are hardly affected.
   Among single women, though, the two wage processes imply a very different distribu-
tion of welfare gains and losses. Under the NL process, the gains are distributed rather
evenly, while under the canonical process they accrue to single women with children, at
the expense of single women without. The intuition is the following. Under the canonical
process the benefit reform involves a substantial shift from income support to in-work
benefits. In-work benefits entail an additional £2,010 for households with children, which
accounts for the substantially bigger gap between the yellow and the blue line in the top-


                                                      24
                                Full-time, married                       Full-time, singles
                           1                                       1
                                                                                      Data
                          0.8                                     0.8                 Canonical
                                                                                      Optimum
                          0.6                                     0.6
                  Share




                                                          Share
                          0.4                                     0.4

                          0.2                                     0.2

                           0                                       0
                                30    40     50      60                 30     40      50         60
                                       Age                                      Age
                                Part-time, married                      Part-time, singles
                           1                                       1

                          0.8                                     0.8

                          0.6                                     0.6
                  Share




                                                          Share


                          0.4                                     0.4

                          0.2                                     0.2

                           0                                       0
                                30    40     50      60                 30     40      50         60
                                       Age                                      Age



       Figure 9: Labor force participation under canonical process: optimal benefit system.


right panel of Figure 7 compared to the top-left one. As women respond to the higher
incentives to work, the child-related component of in-work benefits more than compen-
sates, on average, single women with children switch to working under the reform. On the
other hand, for single women without children the lower utility of leisure associated with
post-reform labor market participation is not compensated by the child-related transfer.


6.2       Universal Credit

       The aim of this section is to compare the allocations and welfare implied by the benefit
system before and after Universal Credit.6 Universal Credit replaced many key benefits
(Income-Based JSA, Income-Related Employment and Support Allowance, Income Sup-
port, Working Tax Credit, Child Tax Credit and Housing Benefits, but not Chid Benefits)
   6
    It is worth pointing out that, as we have shown in the previous section, the benchmark benefit system
that was in place pre-Universal Credit is close to the optimal one that we compute by optimizing over
the same set of policy instruments.



                                                          25
                                                       Single, no kid                                                 Single, one kid
                                             0.6                                                            0.6
                                                                                                                                                 Benchmark
                                             0.5                                                            0.5                                  UC

                                             0.4                                                            0.4




                                  Benefits




                                                                                                 Benefits
                                             0.3                                                            0.3

                                             0.2                                                            0.2

                                             0.1                                                            0.1

                                              0                                                              0
                                                   0           0.5                         1                      0              0.5                         1
                                                         Earnings                                                          Earnings
                                Couples, no kid                                        Couples, one kid                                            Couples, two kids
                      0.6                                                   0.6                                                        0.4

                      0.5                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                       0.3
                      0.4                                                   0.4
           Benefits




                                                                 Benefits




                                                                                                                            Benefits
                      0.3                                                   0.3                                                        0.2

                      0.2                                                   0.2
                                                                                                                                       0.1
                      0.1                                                   0.1

                       0                                                     0                                                          0
                            0                 0.5          1                      0              0.5                   1                     0               0.5       1
                                     Earnings                                                  Earnings                                                 Earnings



Figure 10: Implied total level of benefits, by income levels, comparing benchmark vs. Uni-
           versal Credit. For singles, circles represent benefit entitlement for non-working
           individuals under our benchmark. Earnings and benefits are expressed as the
           share of average male earnings.


that we have modelled in our benchmark economy (described in Section 4) with a unified
benefit system. Two features of Universal credit are worth pointing out. First, it features
a £2304 earnings disregard for families with children. Second, benefits are withdrawn
as a function of after-tax income, rather than pre-tax income in the pre-reform system.
Universal Credit was first piloted in 2013 in a few areas and then gradually rolled out to
all of Great Britain from May 2016 to December 2018.
   Figure 10 reports benefits levels as a fraction of pre-tax income in our benchmark
economy and under Universal Credit. The main takeaway is that, compared to our
benchmark, Universal Credit entails lower benefits for households without children and
for very low-income couples with children, and higher benefits for the rest of households
with children.
   Given that we find that the policy implications of the canonical and NL process
can be different, and given that we show that the NL processes provide a much better
representation of the dynamics of male earnings and female wages, we evaluate the effects
of the introduction of the Universal Credit benefit reform under the NL process and show



                                                                                      26
                            Full-time, married                       Full-time, singles
                       1                                       1
                                                                                  Benchmark
                      0.8                                     0.8                 UC


                      0.6                                     0.6
              Share




                                                      Share
                      0.4                                     0.4

                      0.2                                     0.2

                       0                                       0
                            30    40     50      60                 30     40       50        60
                                   Age                                      Age
                            Part-time, married                      Part-time, singles
                       1                                       1

                      0.8                                     0.8

                      0.6                                     0.6
              Share




                                                      Share


                      0.4                                     0.4

                      0.2                                     0.2

                       0                                       0
                            30    40     50      60                 30     40       50        60
                                   Age                                      Age



Figure 11: Labor force participation under NL process: Universal Credit vs optimal benefits.


the corresponding outcomes for the canonical process in Appendix E.
   Figure 11 compares labor force participation under Universal Credit and in the bench-
mark, pre-UC, benefit system. Universal Credit substantially reduces benefits for single
women with no children. This results in higher (part-time) labor force participation from
middle age onward, when children have left the household. As a result, part-time labor
force participation at older ages is higher than in the optimal formulation of the pre-
vious system. In contrast, participation is lower for single women between age 35 and
45, compared to the optimal system, because a significant number of them have children
and receive higher benefits independently from labor force participation under Universal
Credit than in our benchmark system.
   Table 6 reports the steady-state changes in welfare associated with switching from the
benchmark pre-UC benefit configuration to Universal Credit. The switch to Universal
Credit entails an increase in average (overall) welfare of 0.45 percentage points. Looking
into the distribution of the overall gains, though, reveals that the main beneficiaries are


                                                      27
                Group        Average       0 kids   1 kid   2 kids   3+ kids
                Overall       0.45
                Single men    -0.07
                Single women -0.15         -1.65    2.44    3.98      3.44
                Couples       0.69         0.44     0.75    0.97      1.02

            Table 6: Welfare change for switch to Universal Credit. NL process.


households with children, who benefit from the disregard, the fact that only earnings
above the first £2304 result in benefit withdrawal. On the other hand, singles without
children are worse off. In particular, while the welfare loss for single men is relatively
low, single women with children experience a very sizeable welfare loss of 1.65 percentage
points. It may seem surprising that, unlike singles, couples with no children benefit from
the reform. In fact, one has to realize that welfare in Table 6 is from the perspective
of individuals at age 25. So the difference between couples and single women with no
children is that the former have a much higher probability than the latter of having
children, and therefore benefit from the earnings disregard, later in life. This drives their
higher welfare, in ex ante, expected terms.
   It is instructive to compare these welfare changes with those associated with a switch
to the optimal pre-UC benefit system in Table 5. Relative to the benchmark, the opti-
mal pre-UC system redistributes more towards singles, particularly single women, while
Universal Credit mostly benefits couples. Since couples constitute the majority of the
population, Universal Credit entails a two-to-three times larger welfare increase under
the utilitarian (i.e. unweighted) social welfare criterion. Contrary to the optimal benefit
reform, though, Universal Credit reduces overall benefits for singles without children at
every level of income (top left panel in Figure 10) relative to the benchmark. This implies
a negative income effect which induces higher labor force participation, and lower welfare,
for single working women on low income.
   The reason why Universal Credit can achieve higher average welfare than the optimal
pre-UC benefit system is that possible because the reform in Section 6 is optimal within
the class of linear in-work and income-floor benefit functions. The non-linear Universal
Credit benefit function is therefore not nested in that class because it also adopts income
disregards and asset testing.




                                              28
7     Conclusion
    A growing body of empirical work that takes advantage of large, administrative
datasets and new statistical techniques provides evidence that households' labor income
dynamics are substantially richer than those implied by the canonical income process ­
with constant variance and persistence ­ that are typically used in studies that evaluate
welfare policies.
    This paper is the first to establish that the rich dynamics of labor income documented
for other countries also applies to the UK. Rather than being constant, the variance and
persistence of labor earnings display substantial differences by age and labor income
history. These rich dynamics are a feature not only of earnings, but also of wages.
Hence, they reflect genuine labor income risk rather than being merely the byproduct of
the adjustment of hours to wage shocks.
    We show that ignoring such richer dynamics when estimating stochastic labor income
processes implies biased estimates of important moments on the data. In particular, the
canonical model underestimates the persistence of shocks to female wages and overesti-
mates the persistence of shocks to male earnings relative to a richer, flexible earnings
process which does not impose the constancy of variance and persistence.
    Correctly estimating the persistence of labor income shocks is important to capture
labor income risk, because persistence crucially affects agents' ability to insulate consump-
tion from income shocks through dissaving (self-insurance). This is why we investigate
how allowing for a richer labor income dynamics affects the evaluation of welfare policies
compared to the standard, canonical income process. To do so, we build and estimate
a structural life-cycle model with heterogeneity in family structure, which allows us to
capture the following important channels. First, both the need for resources and the
level of welfare benefits in the UK depend on the presence of a spouse and the number of
dependent children. Second, allowing for both single and married households is crucial
because labor income pooling within families and the possibility of adjusting the labor
supply of the secondary earner are important margins of insurance at the household level.
    We use our model to evaluate to evaluate alternative benefit reforms under richer
and canonical labor income processes. Our findings confirm that correctly capturing
the dynamics of labor income is important to evaluate the costs and benefits of welfare
policies. In particular, we analyse a hypothetical reform that chooses the structure of

                                             29
the two main benefits ­ income support and in-work benefits ­ to maximize (utilitarian)
welfare in the economy. This reform entails small welfare gains compared to the pre-2016,
benchmark UK benefit configuration. Although the welfare results are robust to the way
the earnings process is modelled, the optimal benefit configuration is very different under
both canonical and flexible and nonlinear risks. Under the flexible earnings process, the
optimal benefit configuration is very similar to the pre-reform one. In contrast, if one
were to ignore the rich wage dynamics that we estimate from the data and simply assume
a canonical wage process, one would find an optimal policy which incorrectly prescribes a
trebling of in-work benefits and a much faster (from 40 to 100 per cent) withdrawal rate
for benefits. The intuition is that the canonical wage process underestimates the average
persistence of shocks to female wages, relative to the richer process. Since more transitory
shocks are easier to self-insure through borrowing, the optimal policy under the canonical
process is skewed towards providing incentives to work rather than insurance against low
labor income realisations.
   We also consider a reform that mimics the switch to Universal Credit which was in-
troduced in 2016 and completed in 2018. Universal Credit includes an earnings disregard
for households with children and thus does not belong to the class of linear benefit func-
tions that we consider for optimality. We find that, thanks to the use of these additional
instruments, the move to Universal Credit implies overall welfare gains which are larger
than those under the optimal benefit system. However, this average improvement masks
heterogeneous effects. The main beneficiaries are households with children, who benefit
from the earnings disregard, while singles without children lose out.



References
Arellano, Manuel, Blundell, Richard and Bonhomme, Stéphane (2017), `Earnings and
  consumption dynamics: A non-linear panel data framework', Econometrica 85(3), 693­
  734.

Banks, James, Blundell, Richard and Smith, James (2004), Wealth portfolios in the
  united kingdom and the united states, in `Perspectives on the Economics of Aging',
  University of Chicago Press, pp. 205­246.



                                            30
Bewley, Truman (1977), `The permanent income hypothesis: A theoretical formulation',
  Journal of Economic Theory 16(2), 252­292.

Bick, Alexander and Fuchs-Schündeln, Nicola (2017), `Taxation and Labour Supply of
  Married Couples across Countries: A Macroeconomic Analysis', The Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies 85(3), 1543­1576.

Blundell, Richard, Costa Dias, Monica, Meghir, Costas and Shaw, Jonathan (2016),
  `Female labor supply, human capital, and welfare reform', Econometrica 84(5), 1705­
  1753.

Borella, Margherita, De Nardi, Mariacristina and Yang, Fang (2016), `Marriage-related
  policies in an estimated life-cycle model of households' labor supply and savings for
  two cohorts', Working paper.

De Nardi, Mariacristina, Fella, Giulio, Knoef, Marike, Paz-Pardo, Gonzalo and Van Ooi-
  jen, Ran (2021), `Family and government insurance: Wage, earnings, and income risks
  in the netherlands and the U.S.', Journal of Public Economics . Forthcoming.

De Nardi, Mariacristina, Fella, Giulio and Paz-Pardo, Gonzalo (2019), `Nonlinear house-
  hold earnings dynamics, self-insurance, and welfare', Journal of the European Economic
  Association . Forthcoming.

French, Eric (2005), `The effects of health, wealth, and wages on labour supply and
  retirement behaviour', The Review of Economic Studies 72(2), 395­427.

Gouveia, Miguel and Strauss, Robert P (1994), `Effective federal individual income tax
  functions: An exploratory empirical analysis', National Tax Journal pp. 317­339.

Groneck, Max and Wallenius, Johanna (2017), `It sucks to be single! marital status and
  redistribution of social security', SSE Working Papaer Series in Economics 1.

Guner, Nezih, Kaygusuz, Remzi and Ventura, Gustavo (2011), `Taxation and household
  labour supply', The Review of economic studies 79(3), 1113­1149.

Guner, Nezih, Kaygusuz, Remzi and Ventura, Gustavo (2012), `Taxation and Household
  Labour Supply', The Review of Economic Studies 79(3), 1113­1149.



                                          31
Guvenen, Fatih, Karahan, Fatih, Ozkan, Serdar and Song, Jae (2016), What do data
  on millions of U.S. workers reveal about life-cycle earnings risk?         Working paper,
  University of Minnesota.

Hood, Andrew and Norris Keiller, Agnes (2016), `A survey of the uk benefit system',
  London: Institute for Fiscal Studies .

Keane, Michael P. and Wolpin, Kenneth I. (2010), `The role of labor and marriage mar-
  kets, preference heterogeneity, and the welfare system in the life cycle decisions of black,
  hispanic, and white women', International Economic Review 51(3), 851­892.

Nishiyama, Shinichi (2019), `The joint labor supply decision of married couples and the
  us social security pension system', Review of Economic Dynamics 31, 277­304.

Ozkan, Serdar, Storesletten, Kjetil, Holter, Hans and Halvorsen, Elin (2017), Dissecting
  Idiosyncratic Income Risk, 2017 meeting papers, Society for Economic Dynamics.

Storesletten, Kjetil, Telmer, Christopher I. and Yaron, Amir (2004), `Consumption and
  risk sharing over the life cycle', Journal of Monetary Economics 51(3), 609­633.




                                             32
A       Data and features of earnings and wages

A.1     Data sources

A.1.1    NESPD

    Individuals whose National Insurance Number (NIN) ends in a certain set of two digits
are automatically selected for the sample. The NIN number is randomly issued to all UK
residents at age 16, and kept constant throughout the lifetime of an individual. Data is
currently available for all years between 1975 and 2015.
    Every April, all employers whose employees qualify for the sample receive a form
(currently online, although in the early years of the sample it was on paper) where they
must provide payroll data about those employees.
    This implies that, for individuals included in the survey, the New Earnings Survey
Panel Dataset (NESPD) contains complete information on their working life from the
first year they started working (or 1975 if later) until retirement age (or 2015 if earlier),
for all years in which the individual was working with the last recorded employer in April
and the employer returned the questionnaire.
    The most important limitation of the NESPD is that it is has a 25-30% employer
nonresponse rate, implying that it only gathers 0.7% of all UK workers rather than 1%.
Moreover, valid responses fell from 75% in the 1980s to 60% in 2012 (Adam, Phillips,
Roantree 2016). This generates two main problems. First, endogenous non-responses
might affect the randomness of the sample. Second, we cannot distinguish individuals
who are not working from individuals whose employers does not respond to the survey.


A.1.2    BHPS

    Starting in 1991 and continuing until 2010, when it was discontinued to be included
within the wider survey Understanding Society, the BHPS sampled initially 5,500 house-
holds and 10,300 individuals. All individuals that formed part of the initial sample were
followed whenever contact was possible, thus generating a long panel. If an individual in
the initial sample separated from his/her original household, all members of his/her new
household were also interviewed. Children were interviewed once they reached the age of
16. All of these features imply that this survey should remain representative of the UK
population even as it evolved over the 1990s and 2000s.

                                             33
      As a household survey, it has the limitation that all answers are self-reported and thus
potentially subject to measurement error. However, the design of the survey suggests that
measurement error in earnings is likely to be lower than in other surveys, like the PSID
in the US, because instead of being asked about their total labor earnings in the last
twelve months, respondents were asked to check their last pay slip and report about it.
Furthermore, in a relevant proportion of the observations (around 30%), the interviewer
himself saw the pay slip.


A.2       Sample construction

      The earnings sample is based on the "annual earnings" variable (NESPD) and on
a reconstructed annual earnings measure in the BHPS. The latter is necessary because
individuals are not asked about the total amount of earnings in the past year, but about
their usual payments derived from all of the jobs they held. The derivation of annual
earnings from these payments is straightforward - the only assumption we make is that
we only consider jobs that have been held at least at some point in two calendar months.7
      When reconstructing BHPS earnings, we take into account what the employee reports
to be their "usual" payment in case the last payment they received was not the usual one.
We drop individuals who say the last payment was not the usual one but did not report
how much the usual amount is.
      In both cases, we only consider people who have received at least 5% of median
earnings (around £1,300 (2015)) in the year up to the moment when they are observed.
Therefore, long-term unemployed and people permanently out of the labor force are not
present in either of the samples. We drop self-employed people.
      The population covered by the BHPS measure of earnings is wider than the population
covered by the NESPD survey. This is due to the fact that the latter is filled by the
employer, so individuals who happen to be unemployed or out of the labor force in the
week of reference will not appear in the sample. On the other hand, the BHPS, being a
household survey, can capture those individuals who are non-employed but have worked
at some point during the previous year.
      The NESPD only considers the highest-paid job for each individual, so we limit our-
  7
    Many individuals report not to remember the precise dates they started or finished an employment
or unemployment spell.



                                                34
selves to the main job in the BHPS too. In the NESPD, annual earnings go from 7th
April to 6th April (tax year), while in the BHPS they go from 1st September to 31st Au-
gust (by sample construction). We consider individuals between 25 and 60 years of age.
To increase the sample size, we perform a rolling-sample transformation in the BHPS
(similar to what De Nardi et al. (2019) do for the PSID case). We deflate earnings and
wages with the CPI (2015=100).
   In both samples, we reconstruct ages whenever the change of date in the interview
may imply that the individual is reported to be the same age in two consecutive years. We
only do so when there is enough information to safely assume so (namely, that reported
age does not differ by more than 1 with the expected age). In the NESPD, we drop cases
where there are two records with the same (identifier, year) pair. We also drop individuals
for whom ages evolve unexpectedly, which can reflect, in the case of the NESPD, errors
in recoding NINOs (as stated in the documentation for the data).
   We also eliminate outliers that most likely reflect recoding errors and missing values.
We drop individuals whose total working hours exceed 80 per week and individuals that
display negative values in earnings or hourly wages. In the NESPD, we do not consider
individuals whose hours worked or weekly pay are missing. In the BHPS, where wages
are implied from earnings and hours of work, we eliminate extreme changes (| log wt -
log wt-1 | > 2) that probably represent errors in recording hours of work.
   To compute all statistics related to wages, we also drop individuals whose wage is zero
(i.e., that were not working in the week of reference). Hourly wages are directly available
in the NESPD, while they can be inferred from weekly earnings and working hours in the
BHPS.
                                      gp
   To compute age-efficiency profiles a  by gender g and marital status p, we extract
year fixed effects from our wage sample (earnings for men). To estimate them more
precisely, we expand our sample to include the Understanding Society years (2010-2016).


                                         gp
                                   ~it = a
                                   w        + t +    it                               (16)


A.3     Comparing the BHPS and NESPD data

   For the purposes of comparing moments from the two data sets, we use data from 1996
to 2006 because of three considerations. First, annual earnings only start being available


                                            35
in the NESPD after 1996. Second, up to the mid-90s there were many changes in the UK
labor market (e.g. de-unionization) that could confound the analysis. Third, in the years
2007 and 2008 the New Earnings Survey suffered a budget cut that implied non-random
attrition of part of the sample (those in smaller businesses which were still filling paper-
based forms), and this was immediately followed by the financial crisis, whose specific
effects are not the object of our study.
   Figures 12 and 13 show that the implications of the BHPS and NESPD data are
very similar in terms of all of the measures. The most salient difference is that average
persistence is higher in the NESPD, which could reflect the presence of larger measurment
error in the BHPS. However, the econometric procedure we describe in Section 2.1 allows
us to separate the persistent and transitory components of earnings and wage changes;
if present, most measurement error will be captured by the transitory component, which
we do not include in our structural model.




                                             36
                                                                                  NESPD                                                                                                          BHPS

                                  1.2                                                                                                         1.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Age group
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      25-29
         Standard deviation




                                                                                                                         Standard deviation
                                  0.8                                                                                                         0.8                                                                                                     30-34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      35-39
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      40-44
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      45-49
                                  0.4                                                                                                         0.4                                                                                                     50-54
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      55-59


                                  0.0                                                                                                         0.0
                                     0                   20            40          60         80             100                                 0                                   20       40        60      80                           100
                                                              Percentile of previous earnings                                                                                       Percentile of previous earnings




                                                                                                    Standard deviation
                                   1.0                                                                                                                                        1.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Age group
                                   0.5                                                                                                                                        0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 25-29
         Kelley's skewness




                                                                                                                                              Kelley's skewness
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 30-34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 35-39
                                   0.0                                                                                                                                        0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 40-44
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 45-49
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 50-54
                                  -0.5                                                                                                                            -0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 55-59


                                  -1.0                                                                                                                            -1.0
                                      0                   20         40         60         80                100                                                      0               20       40      60     80                         100
                                                            Percentile of previous earnings                                                                                         Percentile of previous earnings




                                                                                                            Kelly's skewness

                                  20                                                                                                                                          20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Age group
         Crow-Siddiqui kurtosis




                                                                                                                                                     Crow-Siddiqui kurtosis




                                  15                                                                                                                                          15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 25-29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 30-34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 35-39
                                  10                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 40-44
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 45-49
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 50-54
                                   5                                                                                                                                           5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 55-59


                                   0                                                                                                                                           0
                                    0                    20            40          60         80             100                                                                0     20       40      60     80                       100
                                                              Percentile of previous earnings                                                                                       Percentile of previous earnings




                                                                                              Crow-Siddiqui kurtosis

                                                                                                                   1.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.90




                                                                                                                   0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.85


                                         1.0                                                                                                                                        1.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.80
                                                                                                                   0.8

                                         0.8                                                                                                                                        0.8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.75

                                                                                                                   0.7
                                         0.6                                                                                                                                        0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.70



                                         0.4                                                                       0.6                                                              0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.65

                                                                                                    55-59
                                                                                                  50-54                                                                                                                                     55-59
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          50-54
                                           100                                                 45-49                                                                                  100                                              45-49
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     40-44
                                                    80        60                             40-44
                                                                                          35-39                                                                                                80      60                         35-39
                                                                    40                 30-34                                                                                                                   40      20      30-34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            25-29
                                                                             20     25-29
                                                                                                 Age               0.5                                                                                                                   Age            0.60
                                               Percentile of previous earnings                                                                                                            Percentile of previous earnings



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.55




                                                                                                               Persistence

Figure 12: Moments of male earnings changes in the BHPS and NESPD. Top three panels:
           by previous earnings. Bottom panel, by previous earnings and age

                                                                                                                                                                          37
                                                                          NESPD                                                                                                                       BHPS

                                  1.2                                                                                                                                 1.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Age group
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                25-29
         Standard deviation




                                                                                                                                                 Standard deviation
                                  0.8                                                                                                                                 0.8                                                                       30-34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                35-39
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                40-44
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                45-49
                                  0.4                                                                                                                                 0.4                                                                       50-54
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                55-59


                                  0.0                                                                                                                                 0.0
                                     0                   20           40           60       80             100                                                           0    20       40       60      80                             100
                                                               Percentile of previous wages                                                                                   Percentile of previous wages




                                                                                                     Standard deviation
                                   1.0                                                                                                                  1.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Age group
                                   0.5                                                                                                                  0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  25-29
         Kelley's skewness




                                                                                                                        Kelley's skewness


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  30-34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  35-39
                                   0.0                                                                                                                  0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  40-44
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  45-49
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  50-54
                                  -0.5                                                                                                      -0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  55-59


                                  -1.0                                                                                                      -1.0
                                      0                   20          40           60       80             100                                  0                            20       40         60      80                                   100
                                                               Percentile of previous wages                                                                                   Percentile of previous wages




                                                                                                          Kelly's skewness

                                  20                                                                                                                    20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Age group
         Crow-Siddiqui kurtosis




                                                                                                                               Crow-Siddiqui kurtosis




                                  15                                                                                                                    15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 25-29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 30-34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 35-39
                                  10                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 40-44
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 45-49
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 50-54
                                   5                                                                                                                           5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 55-59


                                   0                                                                                                                           0
                                    0                    20          40            60       80             100                                                  0            20       40         60      80                               100
                                                               Percentile of previous wages                                                                                   Percentile of previous wages




                                                                                             Crow-Siddiqui kurtosis

                                                                                                                 1.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.95




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.90
                                                                                                                 0.95

                                         1.0                                                                                                                                  1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.85



                                         0.8                                                                                                                                  0.8
                                                                                                                 0.90                                                                                                                               0.80



                                         0.6                                                                                                                                  0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.75

                                                                                                                 0.85

                                         0.4                                                                                                                                  0.4                                                                   0.70


                                                                                                  55-59
                                                                                                50-54                                                                                                                                 55-59
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    50-54
                                           100                                               45-49
                                                                                           40-44                                                                                100                                              45-49
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               40-44
                                                    80        60                        35-39                                                                                            80      60                         35-39
                                                                    40      20       30-34
                                                                                  25-29                                                                                                                  40      20      30-34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      25-29                         0.65
                                                                                                                 0.80
                                                                                               Age                                                                                                                                 Age
                                               Percentile of previous earnings                                                                                                      Percentile of previous earnings

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.60




                                                                                                             Persistence

Figure 13: Moments of female wage changes in the BHPS and NESPD. Top three panels: by
           previous earnings. Bottom panel, by previous earnings and age

                                                                                                                                                                        38
A.4     Women's wages imputation

    We construct potential wages for women who do not work by using, whenever the age
is missing, the predicted value from the regression

                                      f
                                 log wit = i + Xit + uit ,                             (17)


which we estimated on all observations with a positive wage, where i is an individual
fixed effect and Xit is a vector of demographic variables, including the first four powers
of age, the first three powers of the number of years of work experience, the number of
children, the age of the youngest child, marital status and whether the partner is currently
working.



B      Estimation and features of the earnings processes

B.1     Features of the persistent component

    In this section, we compare the non-linear and non-normal features of the BHPS data
and the persistent and transitory components that result from the Arellano et al. (2017)
decomposition.
    Starting with male earnings, persistence is lowest for the young and for the lowest
earners both for the BHPS data and the persistent component (Figure 15). However, as
expected, the persistent component displays a larger overall persistence than the data.
    Figure 16 shows the standard deviation, skewness and kurtosis of earnings changes
for BHPS data and the persistent component. The latter preserves most of the features
regarding non-normality that are present in the data, and also the dependence on previous
earnings realizations. The main exception is Crow-Siddiqui kurtosis, which is significantly
larger for the persistent component than it is in the data.
    Transitory shocks, that we consider to be measurement error, are very leptokurtic, in
particular for male earnings, and display negative skewness (see Figure 17).
    Women wages display similar patterns (see Figures 19, 21, 20, and 22).
    Finally, in Figures 23 and 24 we show that most of the differences in dynamics be-
tween men's earnings and women's wages are also present if we compare male and female
earnings. However, some salient features, in particular non-linear persistence, are sig-

                                            39
nificantly different between the earnings and the wage data for women, which suggests
that labor supply decisions play an important role in explaining the non-linear features
of earnings persistence.

                                                                                                                                                                                           1.05

                                                                                                        0.90




                                                                                                        0.85                                                                               1.00


                   1.0                                                                                                 1.0

                                                                                                        0.80

                                                                                                                                                                                           0.95
                   0.8                                                                                                 0.8

                                                                                                        0.75


                   0.6                                                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                        0.70                                                                               0.90



                   0.4                                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                                        0.65

                                                                                            55-59
                                                                                          50-54                                                                                       55   0.85
                     100                                                               45-49
                                                                                     40-44                                                                                    45 50
                              80                 60                               35-39
                                                                               30-34
                                                                                                                                  80      60                          35 40
                                                          40     20         25-29                                                                 40      20    25 30
                                                                                         Age            0.60                                                                  Age
                         Percentile of previous earnings                                                                     Percentile of previous earnings


                                                                                                                                                                                           0.80
                                                                                                        0.55




Figure 14: Non-linear persistence of male earnings by age and previous earnings in the BHPS.
           Left, data; right, persistent component




                                                  1.2

                                                      1
                                   persistence




                                                  0.8

                                                  0.6

                                                  0.4

                                                  0.2

                                                      0
                                                      1
                                                               0.8                                                                                                             1
                                                                      0.6                                                                                      0.8
                                                                                  0.4                                                                   0.6
                                                                                                                                          0.4
                                                                                             0.2                         0.2
                                                                                                    0          0
                                                                                                                   Quantile of earnings shock
                                                      Quantile of previous earnings



Figure 15: Non-linear persistence of male earnings by earnings and quantile of the shock:
           persistent component




                                                                                                          40
                                                           1.25                                                                                                                          1.25



                                                           1.00                                                                                                                          1.00
                                  Standard deviation




                                                                                                                                                                Standard deviation
                                                           0.75                                                                                Age group                                 0.75                                                                             Age group
                                                                                                                                                  25-34                                                                                                                      25-34
                                                                                                                                                  35-49                                                                                                                      35-49
                                                           0.50                                                                                                                          0.50
                                                                                                                                                  50-59                                                                                                                      50-59


                                                           0.25                                                                                                                          0.25



                                                           0.00                                                                                                                          0.00
                                                                    0   20         40         60         80                              100                                                      0        20         40         60         80                      100
                                                                          Percentile of previous earnings                                                                                                    Percentile of previous earnings

                                                            1.0                                                                                                                           1.0




                                                            0.5                                                                                                                           0.5
                                  Kelley's skewness




                                                                                                                                                                Kelley's skewness
                                                                                                                                               Age group                                                                                                                  Age group
                                                                                                                                                  25-34                                                                                                                      25-34
                                                            0.0                                                                                                                           0.0
                                                                                                                                                  35-49                                                                                                                      35-49
                                                                                                                                                  50-59                                                                                                                      50-59

                                                           -0.5                                                                                                                          -0.5




                                                           -1.0                                                                                                                          -1.0
                                                                    0    20         40         60         80                             100                                                      0         20         40         60         80                     100
                                                                           Percentile of previous earnings                                                                                                    Percentile of previous earnings

                                                           20                                                                                                                            20




                                                           15                                                                                                                            15
                                  Crow-Siddiqui kurtosis




                                                                                                                                                                Crow-Siddiqui kurtosis




                                                                                                                                               Age group                                                                                                                  Age group
                                                                                                                                                  25-34                                                                                                                      25-34
                                                           10                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                                                  35-49                                                                                                                      35-49
                                                                                                                                                  50-59                                                                                                                      50-59

                                                            5                                                                                                                             5




                                                            0                                                                                                                             0
                                                                0       20            40          60         80                          100                                                  0            20            40          60         80                  100
                                                                             Percentile of previous earnings                                                                                                    Percentile of previous earnings




Figure 16: Standard deviation (top), skewness (middle) and kurtosis (bottom) of male earn-
           ings changes in the BHPS. Left, data; right, persistent component




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     30
                                                                                                                                   0.0



                           0.32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Crow-Siddiqui kurtosis
      Standard deviation




                                                                                                              Kelley's skewness




                                                                                                                                  -0.2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     24
                           0.30


                                                                                                                                  -0.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     21

                           0.28

                                                                                                                                  -0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     18
                                          30                            40                50                                               30              40                                         50                                                  30   40               50
                                                                             Age                                                                                Age                                                                                                 Age




Figure 17: Transitory shock to male earnings: standard deviation, skewness and kurtosis by
           age




                                                                                                                                                           41
                              1.25                                                                                               1.25



                              1.00                                                                                               1.00
     Standard deviation




                                                                                                        Standard deviation
                              0.75                                                         Age group                             0.75                                                         Age group
                                                                                              25-34                                                                                              25-34
                                                                                              35-49                                                                                              35-49
                              0.50                                                                                               0.50
                                                                                              50-59                                                                                              50-59

                              0.25                                                                                               0.25



                              0.00                                                                                               0.00
                                       0   20         40         60         80       100                                                  0    20         40         60         80      100
                                             Percentile of previous earnings                                                                     Percentile of previous earnings

                               1.0                                                                                                1.0




                               0.5                                                                                                0.5
     Kelley's skewness




                                                                                                        Kelley's skewness




                                                                                           Age group                                                                                          Age group
                                                                                              25-34                                                                                              25-34
                               0.0                                                                                                0.0
                                                                                              35-49                                                                                              35-49
                                                                                              50-59                                                                                              50-59

                              -0.5                                                                                               -0.5




                              -1.0                                                                                               -1.0
                                       0    20         40         60         80      100                                                  0    20         40         60         80      100
                                              Percentile of previous earnings                                                                    Percentile of previous earnings

                              20                                                                                                 20




                              15                                                                                                 15
     Crow-Siddiqui kurtosis




                                                                                                        Crow-Siddiqui kurtosis




                                                                                           Age group                                                                                          Age group
                                                                                              25-34                                                                                              25-34
                              10                                                                                                 10
                                                                                              35-49                                                                                              35-49
                                                                                              50-59                                                                                              50-59

                               5                                                                                                  5




                               0                                                                                                  0
                                   0       20            40          60         80   100                                              0       20            40          60         80   100
                                                Percentile of previous earnings                                                                    Percentile of previous earnings




Figure 18: Standard deviation (top), skewness (middle) and kurtosis (bottom) of male earn-
           ings changes in the BHPS. Left, data; right, sum of persistent and transitory
           components




                                                                                                       42
                                                                                                        0.95                                                                             1.02



                                                                                                        0.90                                                                             1.00
                                                                                                                       1.1

                   1.0
                                                                                                        0.85           1.0                                                               0.98


                                                                                                                       0.9
                   0.8
                                                                                                        0.80                                                                             0.96

                                                                                                                       0.8

                   0.6                                                                                                                                                                   0.94
                                                                                                        0.75           0.7


                                                                                                                       0.6                                                               0.92
                   0.4                                                                                  0.70

                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                            55-59
                                                                                          50-54                                                                                  50 55
                     100                                                               45-49
                                                                                     40-44                                                                                  45           0.90
                              80                 60                               35-39
                                                                               30-34
                                                                                                                                 80     60                          35 40
                                                          40     20         25-29                       0.65                                    40      20    25 30
                                                                                         Age                                                                                Age
                         Percentile of previous earnings                                                                     Percentile of previous wages
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.88
                                                                                                        0.60




Figure 19: Non-linear persistence of female wages by age and previous earnings in the BHPS.
           Left, data; right, persistent component




                                                  1.2

                                                      1
                                   persistence




                                                  0.8

                                                  0.6

                                                  0.4

                                                  0.2

                                                      0
                                                      1
                                                               0.8                                                                                                           1
                                                                      0.6                                                                                    0.8
                                                                                  0.4                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                                                        0.4
                                                                                             0.2                         0.2
                                                                                                    0          0
                                                                                                                   Quantile of earnings shock
                                                      Quantile of previous earnings



Figure 20: Non-linear persistence of female wages by earnings and quantile of the shock: per-
           sistent component




                                                                                                          43
                                                                                                                                                                                  1.25
                                 1.2

                                                                                                                                                                                  1.00
     Standard deviation




                                                                                                                                                         Standard deviation
                                 0.8                                                                                                    Age group                                 0.75                                                                             Age group
                                                                                                                                           25-34                                                                                                                      25-34
                                                                                                                                           35-49                                                                                                                      35-49
                                                                                                                                                                                  0.50
                                                                                                                                           50-59                                                                                                                      50-59
                                 0.4

                                                                                                                                                                                  0.25



                                 0.0                                                                                                                                              0.00
                                                 0            20          40           60       80                                100                                                      0        20           40           60       80                    100
                                                                   Percentile of previous wages                                                                                                           Percentile of previous wages

                                             1.0                                                                                                                                   1.0




                                             0.5                                                                                                                                   0.5
     Kelley's skewness




                                                                                                                                                         Kelley's skewness
                                                                                                                                        Age group                                                                                                                  Age group
                                                                                                                                           25-34                                                                                                                      25-34
                                             0.0                                                                                                                                   0.0
                                                                                                                                           35-49                                                                                                                      35-49
                                                                                                                                           50-59                                                                                                                      50-59

                                      -0.5                                                                                                                                        -0.5




                                      -1.0                                                                                                                                        -1.0
                                                     0         20          40           60       80                               100                                                      0         20          40           60       80                    100
                                                                    Percentile of previous wages                                                                                                          Percentile of previous wages

                                      20                                                                                                                                          20




                                      15                                                                                                                                          15
     Crow-Siddiqui kurtosis




                                                                                                                                                         Crow-Siddiqui kurtosis




                                                                                                                                        Age group                                                                                                                  Age group
                                                                                                                                           25-34                                                                                                                      25-34
                                      10                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                                                           35-49                                                                                                                      35-49
                                                                                                                                           50-59                                                                                                                      50-59

                                             5                                                                                                                                     5




                                             0                                                                                                                                     0
                                                 0            20          40           60       80                                100                                                  0            20          40           60       80                     100
                                                                   Percentile of previous wages                                                                                                          Percentile of previous wages



Figure 21: Standard deviation (top), skewness (middle) and kurtosis (bottom) of female wage
           changes in the BHPS. Left, data; right, persistent component



                                            0.21                                                                                                                                                                                        11
                                                                                                                          -0.35
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Crow-Siddiqui kurtosis




                                                                                                                          -0.40
                                            0.20
                       Standard deviation




                                                                                                      Kelley's skewness




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10



                                                                                                                          -0.45

                                            0.19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         9
                                                                                                                          -0.50



                                            0.18
                                                                                                                          -0.55
                                                         30             40           50                                                  30         40                                         50                                            30   40           50
                                                                             Age                                                                         Age                                                                                           Age




Figure 22: Transitory shock to female wages: standard deviation, skewness and kurtosis by
           age


                                                                                                                                                    44
                             1.25
                                                                                                                                            1.2                                                                                                                          1.2

                             1.00
    Standard deviation




                                                                                                                   Standard deviation




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Standard deviation
                             0.75                                                                     Age group                             0.8                                                                                  Age group                               0.8                                                                        Age group
                                                                                                         25-34                                                                                                                      25-34                                                                                                              25-34
                                                                                                         35-49                                                                                                                      35-49                                                                                                              35-49
                             0.50
                                                                                                         50-59                                                                                                                      50-59                                                                                                              50-59
                                                                                                                                            0.4                                                                                                                          0.4

                             0.25



                             0.00                                                                                                           0.0                                                                                                                          0.0
                                       0        20         40         60         80             100                                               0                 20            40          60         80            100                                                     0                 20           40           60       80        100
                                                  Percentile of previous earnings                                                                                        Percentile of previous earnings                                                                                               Percentile of previous wages

                               1.0                                                                                                           1.0                                                                                                                          1.0




                               0.5                                                                                                           0.5                                                                                                                          0.5
    Kelley's skewness




                                                                                                                   Kelley's skewness




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Kelley's skewness
                                                                                                      Age group                                                                                                                  Age group                                                                                                          Age group
                                                                                                         25-34                                                                                                                      25-34                                                                                                              25-34
                               0.0                                                                                                           0.0                                                                                                                          0.0
                                                                                                         35-49                                                                                                                      35-49                                                                                                              35-49
                                                                                                         50-59                                                                                                                      50-59                                                                                                              50-59

                             -0.5                                                                                                           -0.5                                                                                                                         -0.5




                             -1.0                                                                                                           -1.0                                                                                                                         -1.0
                                       0         20         40         60         80            100                                                   0              20         40         60         80               100                                                         0              20          40           60       80        100
                                                   Percentile of previous earnings                                                                                     Percentile of previous earnings                                                                                                 Percentile of previous wages

                             20                                                                                                             20                                                                                                                           20




                             15                                                                                                             15                                                                                                                           15
    Crow-Siddiqui kurtosis




                                                                                                                   Crow-Siddiqui kurtosis




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Crow-Siddiqui kurtosis
                                                                                                      Age group                                                                                                                  Age group                                                                                                          Age group
                                                                                                         25-34                                                                                                                      25-34                                                                                                              25-34
                             10                                                                                                             10                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                         35-49                                                                                                                      35-49                                                                                                              35-49
                                                                                                         50-59                                                                                                                      50-59                                                                                                              50-59

                               5                                                                                                             5                                                                                                                            5




                               0                                                                                                             0                                                                                                                            0
                                   0            20            40          60         80         100                                              0                  20            40          60         80            100                                                    0                 20            40           60       80        100
                                                     Percentile of previous earnings                                                                                     Percentile of previous earnings                                                                                               Percentile of previous wages




Figure 23: Standard deviation (top), skewness (middle) and kurtosis (bottom). Left: male
           earnings; middle: women earnings; right: women wages




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1.00


                                                                                                            0.90                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.95

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.95

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.90
                                                                                                            0.85

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.90
                             1.0                                                                                                                  1.0                                                                                                                                  1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.85
                                                                                                            0.80

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.85
                             0.8                                                                                                                  0.8                                                                                                                                  0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.80
                                                                                                            0.75

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.80
                             0.6                                                                                                                  0.6                                                                                                                                  0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.75
                                                                                                            0.70

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.75
                             0.4                                                                                                                  0.4                                                                                                                                  0.4                                                                      0.70
                                                                                                            0.65

                                                                                             55-59
                                                                                           50-54                                                                                                                            55                                                                                                                     55-59
                               100                                                      45-49
                                                                                      40-44                                                                                                                         45 50                0.70                                            100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 50-54
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              45-49
                                           80    60                                35-39
                                                                                30-34
                                                                                                                                                               80          60                               35 40                                                                                 80       60                               40-44
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         35-39
                                                           40     20         25-29                                                                                                40     20           25 30                                                                                                       40      20          30-34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   25-29                        0.65
                                                                                          Age               0.60                                                                                                    Age                                                                                                                         Age
                                   Percentile of previous earnings                                                                                        Percentile of previous earnings                                                                                                    Percentile of previous earnings
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.60
                                                                                                            0.55




Figure 24: Non-linear persistence of male earnings (top left), female earnings (top right) and
           female wages (bottom) in the data




                                                                                                                                                                                          45
C     Other model inputs
                  1.00                                                                       1.00




                  0.75                                                                       0.75
          Share




                                                                                     Share
                                                                            0                                                          0
                  0.50                                                      1                0.50                                      1
                                                                            2                                                          2
                                                                            3+                                                         3+


                  0.25                                                                       0.25




                  0.00                                                                       0.00
                         30     40                           50        60                                30        40        50   60
                                     Age                                                                            Age



Figure 25: Distribution of number of kids in the household, by age of the mother. Left:
           married mothers; right: single mothers.




                                                       10
                                 Avg age of youngest




                                                        5




                                                        0
                                                        25        30        35                     40         45        50
                                                                                     Age

                                                                                 1    2       3+




 Figure 26: Average age of youngest cohabiting child by age of mother and number of kids.




                              Single men                           Single women                         Married couples
                                 11%                                    19%                                  70 %


       Table 7: Proportion of households by gender and marital status, BHPS data


                                                                                 46
                                                                        1.0




                                                 Survival probability
                                                                        0.9




                                                                        0.8




                                                                          60            70                                 80        90
                                                                                               Age

                                                                                             Men                        Women




                                          Figure 27: Survival probabilities by age and gender


                                                                                                                        1.02
                              1.04
         Efficiency profile




                                                                                                   Efficiency profile
                                                                                                                        1.00
                              1.00



                              0.96                                                                                      0.98




                              0.92                                                                                      0.96



                              0.88                                                                                      0.94
                                     30         40                                 50                                           30           40               50
                                                 Age                                                                                          Age

                                             Single                      Married                                                          Single    Married




Figure 28: Age-efficiency profiles for wages, left: men; right: women. For this representation,
           both are individually normalized so that their average is 1


D                             UK Benefit system, details
       Table 9 provides a brief overview of the main benefits for the working age population
in the United Kingdom, before the introduction of Universal Credit in 2016.8
       In the model, in-work benefits are intended to replicate the Working Tax Credit, while
income support replicates a variety of benefits that low-income people receive under dif-
ferent circumstances, in particular Income-based Jobseeker's Allowance, Income Support,
Housing Benefits, Child Benefits, and Child Tax Credits.
       To obtain the tapering rate  for the income support program in the model, we com-
pute the benefit entitlement Bik of single men, single women and couples by number of
children (k represents a group of gender/marital status and number of kids) and house-
                   hk
hold labor income yi  , jointly considering Income Support, Housing Benefits, Child Tax
   8
    Given the gradual and too recent phase-in of Universal Credit, it would not have been appropriate
to calibrate our steady-state benchmark economy to the post-2016 period.


                                                                                             47
Credits, and Child Benefits. We do not include disability benefits for this computation
because they only accrue to a particular subset of workers, and we take into account that
for our purposes Income-based Jobseeker's Allowance and Income Support are identical.
We additionally assume that the household would be getting Working Tax Credit when-
ever eligible, which affects their eligiblity criteria for other benefits (namely, CTC and
WTC are considered as income for purposes of computing eligibility for IS and HB).
                         k     k
        We then find the 0 and 1 that minimize:


                                       (Bik - max(0
                                                  k   k hk
                                                    - 1 yi , 0))2                                (18)
                                   i

        where the sum i is taking over all possible income levels between 0 and £100,000. We
                                                       k
then obtain our estimate of  by weighing the different 1 by the relative sizes in the
population of each k group. The average tapering rate is then -1 is 0.70, which also
corresponds to the tapering rate for couples with zero children.



E         Universal Credit, canonical process
        In this section, we compute the welfare effects of the introduction of Universal Credit
under the canonical wage process. As decribed in Section 4, in our main results with
the NL process we kept the change to Universal Credit budget neutral by multiplying all
allowances with a proportional scaling factor of 0.86. For the purposes of this section, we
keep that scaling factor constant, so the effective allowances of Universal Credit are also
those reported in Table 2.9
        Under the canonical wage process, the switch to Universal Credit also generates an
increase in labor force participation amongst particularly older women (Figure 29). Yet,
part-time labor force participation is lower at all ages under Universal Credit than under
the optimal system. This is not surprising as we have seen that, under the canonical wage
process, the optimal system provides very high incentive to labor force participation. The
welfare implications are similar to those under the NL process (Table 8).




    9
    Requiring budget neutrality under the canonical wage process would imply a slightly higher scaling
factor (0.9).


                                                 48
                             Full-time, married                       Full-time, singles
                        1                                       1
                                                                                   Baseline
                       0.8                                     0.8                 Optimum
                                                                                   UC
                       0.6                                     0.6
               Share




                                                       Share
                       0.4                                     0.4

                       0.2                                     0.2

                        0                                       0
                             30    40     50      60                 30     40     50         60
                                    Age                                      Age
                             Part-time, married                      Part-time, singles
                        1                                       1

                       0.8                                     0.8

                       0.6                                     0.6
               Share




                                                       Share




                       0.4                                     0.4

                       0.2                                     0.2

                        0                                       0
                             30    40     50      60                 30     40     50         60
                                    Age                                      Age



Figure 29: Labor force participation under canonical process: Universal Credit vs optimal
           benefits, universal credit.




                                           Canonical process
                         Overall          0.38
                         Single men       -0.01
                         Single women     -0.41 -1.66 1.54                  3.05    2.67
                         Couples           0.65   0.40 0.69                 0.91    1.01

Table 8: Welfare change, by gender and marital status, for switch to Universal Credit. Canon-
         ical process.




                                                       49
Benefit                                Time period         Eligibility (income)            Tapering   Wealth test    £M (2016)
                                             Benefits for the unemployed
Jobseeker's Allowance (Contributory)   1996-today           Work < 16h/week                  100%          No            306
Jobseeker's Allowance (Income-based)   1996-today           Work < 16h/week                  100%          Yes          2000
                                            Benefits for low-income people
Income Support                                              Work < 16h/week                  100%          Yes          2700
Housing benefit                                     Tapering starts after JSA amount         65%           16k         24300
Council Tax Benefit                       -2013           Being on IS, JSA, etc.              No           Yes
                                                  Benefits for families
Child benefit                                                Income < £50k                    No           No          11300
Statutory Maternity Pay                                            None                       No           No           2300
Maternity Allowance (Contributory)                             Min £30 pw                     No           No            443
                                                      Tax credits
Child Tax Credit                          2003-         Taper from £16,105 (2014)            41%           No          21700
Working Tax Credit                        2003-      Working FT, taper from £6,420           41%           No           5900
                                           Benefits for the sick and disabled
ESA                                    2011-today           Work <16h/week                   100%          No          14300
Personal Independence Payment             2013-        Work capability assessment              -           No          3000
Disability Living Allowance               -2013              Unable to work                    -           No          13200
Carer's Allowance                                                    No                       No           No           2600
Industrial Injuries Benefits                           Depends on disablement rate            No           No           869
                      Table 9: Main benefits for working age population in the UK (source: Hood and Norris Keiller (2016))
