                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              POLITICAL PARTIES AS DRIVERS OF U.S. POLARIZATION:
                                   1927-2018

                                      Nathan J. Canen
                                       Chad Kendall
                                      Francesco Trebbi

                                     Working Paper 28296
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28296


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




We thank Matilde Bombardini, Ernesto Dal Bo, Fred Finan, Tasos Kalandrakis, Vadim Marmer,
as well as seminar participants at various institutions for comments. Yihang Zhang provided
excellent research assistance. We are grateful for funding from CIFAR and from the Bank of
Canada. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Nathan J. Canen, Chad Kendall, and Francesco Trebbi. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Political Parties as Drivers of U.S. Polarization: 1927-2018
Nathan J. Canen, Chad Kendall, and Francesco Trebbi
NBER Working Paper No. 28296
December 2020
JEL No. D72,P48

                                          ABSTRACT

The current polarization of elites in the U.S., particularly in Congress, is frequently ascribed to
the emergence of cohorts of ideologically extreme legislators replacing moderate ones.
Politicians, however, do not operate as isolated agents, driven solely by their preferences. They
act within organized parties, whose leaders exert control over the rank-and-file, directing support
for and against policies. This paper shows that the omission of party discipline as a driver of
political polarization is consequential for our understanding of this phenomenon. We present a
multi-dimensional voting model and identification strategy designed to decouple the ideological
preferences of lawmakers from the control exerted by their party leadership. Applying this
structural framework to the U.S. Congress between 1927- 2018, we find that the influence of
leaders over their rank-and-file has been a growing driver of polarization in voting, particularly
since the 1970s. In 2018, party discipline accounts for around 65% of the polarization in roll call
voting. Our findings qualify the interpretation of - and in two important cases subvert -a number
of empirical claims in the literature that measures polarization with models that lack a formal role
for parties.

Nathan J. Canen                                  Francesco Trebbi
Department of Economics                          Haas School of Business
University of Houston                            University of California, Berkeley
3623 Cullen Boulevard                            2220 Piedmont Ave
Houston, TX 77204-5019                           Berkeley, CA 94720
ncanen@uh.edu                                    and CIFAR
                                                 and also NBER
Chad Kendall                                     ftrebbi@berkeley.edu
USC FBE Dept.
HOH Hall 231, MC-1422
BRI-308, MC-0804
Los Angeles, Cali 90089-0001
chad.kendall@marshall.usc.edu
1       Introduction
The sharp increase in political polarization over the last forty years in the United States is an
uncontroversial phenomenon. In terms of political elite polarization, evidence stems from con-
gressional voting records (McCarty, 2016), candidate survey responses (Moskowitz et al., 2017),
congressional speech scores (Gentzkow et al., 2019), and campaign donation measures (Bonica,
2014). In the electorate at large, the picture appears less sharp in terms of the polarization of the
policy preferences of voters (Fiorina et al., 2005), but stark evidence of partisan sorting emerges
more consistently in other dimensions ­ particularly in the affective polarization of citizens (Iyen-
gar and Westwood, 2015; Iyengar et al., 2019; Boxell et al., 2020) and other indicators of culture
(Bertrand and Kamenica, 2018) and beliefs (Alesina et al., 2020). Currently, both the politi-
cal economy and political science literature characterize a context of growing mutual antagonism
across political caucuses, and of increasing animus among voters identifying with different political
parties (Gentzkow, 2016). Growing evidence of the adverse economic consequences of polarization
also exists, arising through delay in fiscal stabilizations, uncompromising obstructionism, political
gridlock, and policy uncertainty due to partisan cycles and electoral shocks (Pastor and Veronesi,
2012; Baker et al., 2014; Mian et al., 2014; Davis, 2019; Binder, 2003).
    To contribute to our understanding of this phenomenon, we study the role of the two main
political parties and their leadership in driving polarization over the last ninety years in the U.S.
Specifically, we attempt to assess the extent of the influence that party leaders exert on the
behavior of rank-and-file members as they drive the passage of laws and create wedges across
lawmakers belonging to different parties.
    Within liberal democracies, political parties are more than just the sum of their individual
members (Aldrich, 1995), having time horizons and strategies that span those of individual politi-
cians. The party leadership devises, coordinates, and enacts the policy agenda (Caillaud and
Tirole, 1999, 2002). In representative bodies, the relative strength, internal cohesion, and mecha-
nisms of discipline utilized by political organizations are determinants of effective (if not efficient)
policy making (Cox and McCubbins, 1993). Tight control exerted by political organizations on
their members, however, may also act as an instrument of division and separation (Evans, 2018)
and such divisions may be tactically valuable.1
    In this context, we ask whether the sharp increase in polarization in congressional voting over
the last forty years is the sole result of more ideologically extreme politicians replacing moderates
(Poole and Rosenthal, 1997; McCarty et al., 2006; Moskowitz et al., 2017), or whether strategic
    1
    E.g. Newt Gingrich, the architect of the 1994 Republican Revolution and former Party Whip, notably stated
in 1984: "The No. 1 fact about the news media is they love fights . . . When you give them confrontations, you get
attention; when you get attention, you can educate."



                                                        2
party discipline also plays a role in the progressive separation between partisan camps (Sinclair,
2014; Stonecash, 2018; Canen et al., 2020). How much pressure do the leaders of the U.S. parties
of today exercise on their rank-and-file, by influencing member behavior and pulling them away
from the middle ground (Snyder and Groseclose, 2000; Forgette, 2004)? How has the role of parties
evolved over time or around structural breaks in political strategies?2
    Because the decisions of politicians are function of both their unobserved individual policy
preferences (their "ideologies") and the (often unobserved) influence exerted by the political or-
ganization to which they belong, quantifying the role of these different drivers of behavior is
nontrivial on grounds of identification (Krehbiel, 1993, 1999, 2000).
    In previous work, Canen et al. (2020) leverage detailed internal party records for identification,
showing that party discipline is an important component of political polarization in the decade
between 1977 and 1986.3 Because these detailed internal records are only available for the House of
Representatives for that specific decade, however, this identification strategy does not generalize.
That is, it cannot be used to systematically study how party discipline has evolved over the long
term, one of the main goals of this work.
    In this paper, we develop a novel, more general identification strategy that requires information
on congressional vote choices ("roll call" votes in the terminology of the U.S. legislative branch)
and on the party leadership positions on each vote.4 We are able to address questions of how
party control drives polarization over the last century.5 Furthermore, because we study party
discipline over periods in which a second dimension of policy preferences (in addition to the
standard liberal-conservative ideological dimension) is relevant (i.e. the Civil Rights era), our
approach incorporates multiple policy dimensions. This extension turns out to be non-trivial from
the perspective of identification relative to the one-dimensional approach of Canen et al. (2020).
    Focusing on congressional roll calls, we show how information about the direction of pressure
implied by leaders' votes can be combined with an economic model of legislative choice to recover
parameters related to the disciplining technology of each party. This technology (occasionally
referred to as "whipping" and here meant to encompass both persuasion and horse trading with
   2
     See Jenkins (2011).
   3
     The use of internal party records (i.e. whip counts by the leadership) in Canen et al. (2020) also allowed us to
identify a rich model of agenda setting to determine which bills are pursued by the party and which are dropped,
and to produce counterfactuals demonstrating how this selection process interacts with the technology of party
discipline. Absent whip counts, we do not have sufficient information to study agenda setting over the last century.
Thus, while we allow for a general form of agenda setting in our empirical model, a quantitative assessment of
policy counterfactuals over the 1927-2019 period is beyond the scope of this paper.
   4
     As such, the method is applicable to any institution for which voting data is available and the direction of
potential influence (via party leadership, special interests, etc.) is known.
   5
     Reassuringly, in the subsample overlapping with Canen et al. (2020), we find very similar measures of party
discipline, validating our identification strategy.




                                                         3
the rank-and-file6 ) can be parameterized by how far the party organization is able reach within
the set of dissident members, to persuade them to vote with the leadership on occasions when
they would not do so otherwise.
    To provide an intuition, suppose that we observe the vote decisions of each member of Congress
and know the direction in the policy space towards which each party leadership is whipping for
each roll call. In standard spatial models of legislative behavior (Poole and Rosenthal, 1997;
Heckman and Snyder, 1997; Clinton et al., 2004), a multidimensonal random utility framework
is applied to individual vote choices, obtaining preference parameters and cutlines that indicate
indifference between support and opposition to each specific bill. Absent party discipline, for each
bill, this cutline is unique, separating Yes and No votes. Empirically, however, one observes two
cutlines for each roll call, one for each party. In our framework, these party-specific cutlines are
determined by how far into the subset of dissidents each party is willing to reach in order to have
some members change their votes to follow party cues. We also observe in which direction the
party leadership votes and from this we infer information (which we probe) on in which direction
they exert pressure. The direction in which party discipline is applied allows us to pin down
whether the observed distance between the party cutlines in each congressional vote is either the
sum or the difference of the party discipline parameters applied to members on the fence. Figures
1 and 2 illustrate an example for a two-dimensional policy space. As the party leadership applies
its pressure selectively on each bill, our spatial model identifies which members are subject to
pressure by the party ­ those nearest to being on the fence on that vote. Although Cox and
McCubbins (1993) discuss leadership votes in their analysis of party organizations and McCarty
et al. (2001) allow for party-specific cutlines in assessing their model's fit7 , the intuition of jointly
using these insights is the key to identifying the model.
    We formally prove that our approach resolves the identification problem of separating politi-
cians' multidimensional preferences from the pressure exercised on them by their parties, and we
then pursue estimation using a likelihood-based estimator. Our approach spells out the identi-
fication requirements of our method and clarifies the role of agenda setting for inference in this
setting.
    We further note that formal identification results in multiple policy dimensions (even absent
a role for parties) are unavailable for what is arguably one of the most influential methods in the
literature, DW-Nominate (Poole and Rosenthal, 1984, 1997), a statistical approach designed to
recover policy preferences of legislators from a random utility framework within a spatial context
similar to ours.8 Because of Nominate's relevance to the literature, in Appendix B we prove the
   6
     For a comprehensive discussion, see Evans (2018).
   7
     The use of party-specific cutlines is in itself insufficient for identification of ideology and discipline parameters,
as demonstrated in our proof of identification.
   8
     The prominent exception is the proof in Rivers (2003) for the special case of a random utility model with


                                                            4
lack of identification of the DW-Nominate two-dimensional case, and clarify the features of our
methodology that allow us to improve upon this established approach.
    Our principal finding is that political party influence bears a substantial weight in driving ob-
served polarization in congressional voting behavior. The leaderships of both parties have played
a similar role in driving an increasing wedge between groups of politicians that appear substan-
tially less ideologically extreme than that inferred from extant methodologies which omit a role
for parties. A misspecified model estimated without a role for parties is statistically rejected at
high confidence levels in every congressional cycle in our sample, and we show that the misspeci-
fication is large from a quantitative perspective. Misattributing these effects solely to individual
ideology misses salient features of the data, and clouds the debate on how to address the effects
of polarization.
    In a second finding, we show that the commonly assumed U-shaped trajectory of ideological
polarization traced over the 20th century by McCarty et al. (2006) disappears when the true
ideological positions of members are decoupled from party discipline. Instead, our estimates of
ideological polarization increase monotonically. Reconciling this discrepancy, we find that the
ability of parties to push the leadership's line and forge internal rules has varied quantitatively
(and non-monotonically) over time both in the House and Senate. The low point of party discipline
appears around the second half of the 1960s, during the Civil Rights Era, and early 1970s. In the
early part of the 1980s an increment in party discipline starts to appear and a sharp increment
is detected after the mid-1990s, the time of Newt Gingrich's speakership and the Republican
Revolution.9 As a result, we do not find support for the theory that the present levels of ideological
polarization have been previously observed. Our results suggest, instead, that the U.S. Congress
is currently in a period of unprecedented ideological polarization and of strong party discipline.
By comparison, in the post-war period, while party discipline was high, ideological polarization
was relatively low.
    Overall, we find party leaders have been responsible for a significant share of polarization in
congressional voting ­ approximately 65% in recent decades in both the Senate and in the House
­ and the phenomenon appears fairly symmetric between the parties. These findings are present
in both the one-dimensional and in the two-dimensional versions of our model.
    We next address the question of how party leaders were able to increase discipline, whipping
members further out in the ideological distribution over time. Having estimates of party discipline
quadratic two-dimensional preferences. This identification result does not apply to the standard DW-Nominate
method, which employs non-convex preferences within a random utility choice framework and multiple policy
dimensions. Rivers (2003) is related to, but also does not apply to, the IDEAL estimator of Clinton et al. (2004),
which employs quadratic preferences, but within a Bayesian, not classical, statistical environment. We expand on
this discussion in Section 2.
   9
     This finding appears in line with extant quantitative, but less systematic evidence, e.g. (Sinclair, 2014).



                                                        5
over time allows us to investigate the technology of internal party organization around known
structural breaks (Theriault, 2013) and how it is affected by majority size and divided government.
We then discuss which theories of party influence are consistent with our estimates (Smith, 2007),
particularly with respect to the correlation of party discipline and time varying within-party
heterogeneity.10 We observe that increases in party discipline appear positively correlated with
within party ideological homogeneity (the variance of ideologies within a party). This result holds
for both parties and it is consistent with the Conditional Party Government theory of Aldrich
(1995) and Rohde (1991).11
    Discipline parameters are highly correlated between parties and over time. Further, they
appear symmetrical, contrary to extant research focused on asymmetric polarization in ideology
(i.e. emerging solely from the conservative end of the spectrum). A conjecture is that technological
innovations may be an important piece of the explanation: when one party favorably innovates in
its internal organization, the other party can follow closely by imitation. This is not inconsistent
with qualitative and quantitative evidence on the spread of technological political innovation, both
within the U.S. system and abroad.12
    This paper relates to several strands of literature. Mayhew (2004) presents U.S. parties as
exerting weak control and the members of Congress as having limited party loyalty. The debate
on decoupling the drivers of political polarization is active (Moskowitz et al., 2017), and explicitly
linked to economically consequential phenomena, such as changes in income inequality over time
(e.g. McCarty et al., 2006, but also Rajan, 2011), the policy response to financial crises (Mian
et al., 2014), and legislative inaction more generally (Binder, 2003).
    As a result of our identification method, we differ in many respects from extant empirical
approaches on the study of parties and political polarization. These approaches include, to cite
just a few prominent examples, the use of historical natural experiments during the American
Civil War (Jenkins, 2000), functional form identification of voting models with heterogeneous
  10
     It is beyond the scope of the paper to explore the motivations behind the actions taken by party leaders and
why they result in party polarization. Polborn and Snyder Jr (2017) offer an example of what mechanisms may be
at play.
  11
     The latter states that as parties become more homogeneous, party members are willing to delegate more
(agenda setting and control) power to party leaders - they will be more likely to get bills approved that are in the
interest of a majority of the party. Our evidence supports this explanation over the past ninety years.
  12
     Examples include the use of coordinated partisan vocabularies by the 1994 Revolution Republicans (e.g.
Gentzkow et al., 2019), a practice also followed by Democrats, and by the simultaneous adoption of focus-group-
tested language and messaging. This may also explain the diffusion of political strategies and tactics across political
systems due to the international visibility of the U.S. system. For example, in 2001 Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi
in Italy hired strategist Frank Luntz, who inspired the 1994 Contract with America, and transposed the Republican
public relations approach to the Italian context (see Luntz, 2007, p.138). President Emmanuel Macron of France
notoriously adopted campaigning techniques form the 2008 Obama campaign. Another example appears to be the
diffusion of certain strategies adopted by the Trump campaign to other populist movements in Europe and Latin
America. These examples suggest a potential mechanism through which U.S. party-driven political polarization
may spread internationally, via imitation of internal organization and branding tactics.


                                                          6
legislators (Levitt, 1996; Poole and Rosenthal, 1997; Heckman and Snyder, 1997; McCarty et al.,
2001; Clinton et al., 2004), the exclusion of lopsided legislative bills from party discipline (Snyder
and Groseclose, 2000), and the use of detailed internal party records (Evans, 2018; Canen et al.,
2020). We provide more detailed comparisons to extant methodologies in Section 2.5.
    This paper also relates to works on the study of political organizations. Parties play a crucial
role in agenda setting and in drafting statutes (Cox and McCubbins, 1993; Aldrich, 1995; Cox
and McCubbins, 2005). Their leadership also systematically organizes and coordinates members'
political behavior (Smith, 2007), from setting policy platforms (Caillaud and Tirole, 2002) to
coordinating internal communication and the whipping of votes (Meinke, 2008; Evans, 2018).
Making explicit the empirical role of these dimensions, which are latent and unobserved relative
to the formal operations of government, has been an open question in political economy and
political science for decades and has resulted in a rich, but far from complete line of inquiry.13 We
contribute with an economic model and a structural estimation approach designed to consistently
infer the extent of party influence over the last century in the U.S., but also likely applicable to
other contexts.
    Providing a measure for the degree of control exercised by one party against the other is
important because it offers evidence of elite organizations driving partisan separation though
political action that is strategic and deliberate (Smith, 2007; Evans, 2011). These actions may
take additional forms that we do not explore here, but our time series evidence in recent times is
consistent with a contemporaneous role for elites in driving systematic wedges in public opinion
(Robison and Mullinix, 2016; Alesina et al., 2020) and using divisive speech (Gentzkow et al.,
2019), which may ultimately manifest in affective polarization of voters.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the econometric model used in the
structural estimation, including an analysis of the issues of selection, agenda setting, and the
derivation of the likelihood function. Section 3 presents the data. For the most part the data is
standard within political economy, but a few details, such as the absence of selective pruning of
roll call votes, are important. Section 4 presents our main estimates of party discipline over time
and our analysis of different mechanisms behind its rise. Section 5 concludes.
  13
    Most prominently, see Snyder and Groseclose (2000), but also see McCarty et al. (2001) for a critique of this
approach. For a detailed discussion of the complexity and identification issues of party influence in the context of
the U.S. Congress see Krehbiel (1993, 1999) and Cox and McCubbins (1993). For related work on the decomposition
of polarization trends, see the analyses in Theriault (2008); Moskowitz et al. (2017).




                                                         7
2      Empirical Model

2.1     Setup
Legislators i = 1, ..., N , where N is large, belong to one of two parties p  {D, R}.14 Each
legislator is characterized by her constant policy preferences: a d  1 dimensional characteristic
of i, which we refer to as her ideology.15 Specifically, each i has a fixed ideology denoted by her
ideal point,  ¯i = (i , ..., i ). In what follows, an upper bar (e.g. x         ¯) denotes a vector.
                    1        d
    Each congressional cycle defines a set  =          ¯1 , ¯2 , ..., ¯i , ..., ¯N where  may change from
one congressional cycle to the next due to the potential replacement of some members of the
legislature. Within each congressional cycle (a two year period), let t = 1, 2, ...., T indicate the
discrete times at which a single bill may be introduced and voted on. We assume T is large for
each congressional cycle. For exposition, we consider the case of a single congressional cycle, but
discuss in Section 4 how our estimation procedure handles multiple cycles.
    Individual i's preferences over policies are represented within a random utility framework. For
any policy k ¯t  Rd , we assume that i's preferences are given by:

                                         ¯t , 
                                       u k    ¯i = u      i
                                                         ¯t
                                                             ¯t + y
                                                            -k    ¯ti
                                                                          ,                                    (1)

with u (·) < 0. . indicates the weighted Euclidean norm with weights w1 , w2 , ..., wd . We indicate
by   i
    ¯t =  ¯i + ¯i                                       i
                                                                                                        ¯i
                 t i's realized ideal point at t.     ¯t  includes i's ideology plus a random shock,     t,
that is independently and identically distributed across individuals i and votes t according to a
continuous CDF, G(¯     ).16
                                     i
   Utility is also a function of y  ¯t , the extent of party influence exerted on politician i on roll call
                   i
t. We refer to y¯t   as `party influence', `party discipline', or `whipping', and specify it in detail in
Section 2.2.2. Party discipline may be exerted in favor of or against the status quo, depending the
preference of the politician's party. Each party can only discipline its own members.
   Absent whipping, a member i votes for a policy x         ¯t  Rd and against the status quo q ¯t  Rd if
                     i                   i
and only if u (    ¯t  -q¯t )  u (      ¯t -x¯t ). Given that u (·) < 0, this inequality is equivalent to
   i             i
  ¯t - q
       ¯t      ¯t - x  ¯t .
   The case of d = 2 is central to our empirical analysis, so we focus on it here. Additional
dimensions could be included analogously, at a cost of higher identification requirements. For the
case of d = 2, the set of members that vote for x      ¯t = (x1,t , x2,t ), Xt , is the set:
  14
     N = 435 for the House and N = 100 for the Senate.
  15
     We focus on the case d = 2 in this section, but we also study and estimate models for the d = 1 case, which is
considered appropriate especially for the period between 1975 and 2018 (McCarty, 2016).
  16
     Assuming ideology shocks instead of utility shocks (as in Canen et al. (2020)) allows us to avoid making an
assumption about the exact shape of the utility function (i.e. quadratic), as shown below.


                                                        8
                           i i     i      w1 (q1,t - x1,t ) w1 (x2      2            2      2
                                                                 1,t - q1,t ) + w2 (x2,t - q2,t )
              Xt =        ¯t |2,t  1 ,t                     +                                       ,          (2)
                                          w2 (x2,t - q2,t )          2w2 (x2,t - q2,t )

when x2,t > q2,t (otherwise, the inequality is reversed).17
    The formulation in (2) is useful because it makes explicit that the set of members that votes
for x
    ¯t is the set of those who lie above a cutline in the two-dimensional space given by

                                              i         i
                                              2 ,t = mt 1,t + bt                                               (3)

where

                                                    w1 (q1,t - x1,t )
                                             mt                       ,
                                                    w2 (x2,t - q2,t )

                                          w1 (x2      2            2      2
                                               1,t - q1,t ) + w2 (x2,t - q2,t )
                                    bt                                          .
                                                   2w2 (x2,t - q2,t )
We make immediate use of (3) to simplify the structure of the shocks. Recall that       ¯i     i
                                                                                                 -¯i . We
                                                                                         t = ¯t
assume that G(¯   ) has the following structure: (i) the vector   ¯i                  i
                                                                   t has magnitude et =     ¯i
                                                                                             t , a scalar
which is assumed to be distributed i.i.d. with distribution, ei  t  N (0, 1); (ii) shocks are assumed
to shift a member's ideal point along the direction orthogonal to the cutline (3) with a positive
                    i
shock increasing 1    ,t .
    This structure ensures that  ¯i
                                  t moves a politician in the direction most likely to change her vote,
a feature which greatly simplifies the construction of the likelihood function and its computation.
Notice further that an unrestricted   ¯i                                             ¯i
                                       t vector shock could move politicians from  in any direction
in R2 , but this vector can be always represented in terms of its projection onto the line orthogonal
to (3), obtaining an identical vote choice in our context.
                                                   i
    Similarly, we assume that party discipline y  ¯t also acts along the direction orthogonal to the
cutline (i.e. in the direction most likely to make politician i change her vote). We discuss further
benefits of the structure induced by these assumptions in Section 2.5 below.


2.2     Timing and Structure
The timing of the legislative process is as follows:
  (I) Each period t, one of two parties is recognized to set the agenda.18
  17                                                                      x   +q
     In the special case in which x2,t = q2,t , we have Xt = it |1,it  1,t 2 1,t for x1,t > q1,t (and otherwise the
inequality is reversed).
  18
     For now, we allow for an arbitrary rule that picks the proposing party in each period. For example, we can let


                                                         9
    (II) The agenda setting party, pt , draws (with replacement) a status quo, q      ¯t , from the distri-
bution of possible policy status quo's W (¯    q ) with support Q  R2 . For each status quo, q      ¯t , the
agenda setter can decide whether or not to propose an alternative, x      ¯t = x(¯
                                                                                 qt ), or not pursue any
alternative.
    (III) If an alternative is proposed, preference shocks realize and then each party whips a subset
of their members.
    (IV) Politicians vote for x ¯t or q
                                      ¯t , payoffs realize, and the chamber moves to t + 1.

2.2.1     Parts (I) and (II): Agenda Setting

A congressional cycle includes a series of recognition draws {p1 , p2 , ..., pT } and status quo draws
{q¯1 , q         ¯T }. Notice that, due to selection, only a subset of {q
       ¯2 , ..., q                                                             ¯1 , q         ¯T } is considered, producing
                                                                                    ¯2 , ..., q
the actual vote data observable to the econometrician. We use Qp  Q and Q0               1
                                                                                                            p  Q to denote
the sets of status quo's that are considered and not considered for a vote by pt , respectively, such
that Q1            0              1
           p  Qp =  and Qp  Qp = {q
                                       0
                                            ¯1 , q         ¯T }.
                                                 ¯2 , ..., q
      Agenda selection defines an optimal partition Q0             p (, y¯max ) and Q1    p (, y ¯max ), which is a function
of the vector of members' ideologies, , and the party discipline technologies represented by the
vector y    ¯max = {yD    max max
                             , yR } where y  ¯ti
                                                    yp   max
                                                               for all i in both parties.
      We assume that the random shocks              ¯ are drawn after the partition Q1                    0
                                                                                                     p , Qp is designed. We
do not need to restrict the game that induces the partition Q0                         p , Qp
                                                                                              1
                                                                                                  in any way, as long the
game includes: i) large N , ii) a random component for the politicians' votes as above, and iii) the
shocks are realized after the agenda is set. The first two conditions are used for the statistical
identification of the model, as we show below, while the third guarantees that the party has
uncertainty about whether a bill gets passed or not. This last condition is empirically relevant, as
not all bills that are brought to the floor pass a vote.
      The optimal choice of dropping an issue q             ¯t from the agenda or challenging it with an optimal
alternative x      ¯t , as well as how the optimal alternative x       ¯t itself may be designed, depend upon the
specific characteristics of the legislative game considered.
      We assume that party p's ideal point coincides with the party median                          ¯p and that preferences
over policy are represented deterministically19 for a policy k               ¯t  R2 as:

                                               ¯t , 
                                             u k    ¯p = u       ¯t - 
                                                                 k    ¯p     .
party D be recognized with probability  and party R with 1 -  , where  can be allowed to vary by Congress or
to depend upon party characteristics.
  19
     The preferences of the party are better represented as deterministic, as opposed to also having a random
component as in the case of politicians, because the former rules out the possibility of an agenda setting party
choosing policy xt ex ante and then preferring qt to it ex post (and thus whipping against its own bill).




                                                            10
2.2.2   Part (III): Whipping

Party discipline is enforced by each party's whips. Whips are a subset of members of each party
that are responsible for the votes of a subset of legislators within the same party. Whips are
rewarded rp > 0 for each member under their oversight who votes with the party at t. The party
is deep-pocketed, in the sense that the rewards rp are not scarce, so that no budget constraint
(either within or across bills) limits the extent of whipping. The cost of whipping is borne by the
whip herself. Each whip bears a private cost, c (       ¯i - ¯ i ) from moving member i from point
¯ i to ¯ i , where . is the same Euclidean norm that enters the utility function (i.e. if members
weight the first dimension more heavily, it costs more to move them along this dimension). We
assume c (·) > 0 and c(0) < rp . These assumptions ensure that any member that already prefers
to vote for the party's preferred policy is not whipped and that a member that prefers to vote
against the party's preferred policy will be whipped only if the distance she must be moved to get
her to change her position is less than c-1 (rp ). Whips have full information about all members
preferences and shocks.
     Consider the case in which a party prefers the alternative x  ¯t to q
                                                                         ¯t (i.e. the party "whips" for
x
¯t ). In the case d = 2, the set of members that are whipped are those outside of Xt (the set that
prefers x ¯t in the absence of whipping) and such that the distance between the member's ideology
to a point within Xt is less than yp  max
                                           c-1 (rp ). Because the boundary of Xt is a line, the set
                                                                              max
of whipped members is the set of members that lie within a distance yp             of the bounding line.
Specifically, using equation (2), if a party p whips for policy x ¯t against q¯t and x2,t > q2,t , we have
that the set of members which vote for x   ¯t is given by


                               whipped         i i        i
                              Xp,t     =      ¯t |2,t  mt 1 ,t + bt - yp,t                            (4)

where


                                              max    w1 + m2t w2
                                       yp,t  yp                  .
                                                        w1 w2
     Let us indicate that a party p whips `up' (for the policy with the largest second dimension)
with the expression Wp,t = 1; Wp,t = -1 , otherwise. Further define It  I (x2 ,t > q2 ,t ), where
I (.) is the indicator function. Then we have:
                                
                                  i i        i
                    whipped
                                 ¯t |2,t  mt 1 ,t + bt - Wp,t × yp,t         if It = 1
                   Xp,t       =
                                  i i        i
                                 ¯t |2,t  mt 1 ,t + bt - Wp,t × yp,t         if It = 0.



                                                    11
2.2.3    Part (IV): Voting

Let Yit be a random variable taking value 1 if politician i votes Yes in favor of x
                                                                                  ¯t , conditional on
                                                      1
q                                               ¯t  Qp ) by party p, and 0 otherwise.
¯t having been selected for consideration (i.e. q
    The probability that i from party p supports alternative x¯t over the status quo q  ¯t is then

                                                               whipped
                       ¯t  Q1
            Pr Yit = 1|q               max
                               ¯t ; , yp
                            p, x                     = Pr  i
                                                          ¯t  Xp,t      ¯t  Q1
                                                                       |q    p, x
                                                                                        max
                                                                                ¯t ; , yp   .

   To calculate this probability, consider that the (signed) minimum distance of a member at ¯i
from the boundary line with slope mt and intercept bt , is given by

                                          w1 w2     i      i
                                                    2 - mt 1 - bt + Wp,t × yp,t .
                                       w1 + m2t w 2

                                     i                               i      i
Given that positive shocks increase 1  ,t , a positive shock implies 2 > mt 1 + bt - Wp,t × yp,t . Since
eit is distributed as a standard normal,20 we have that the probability a member votes for x        ¯t is
given by:

                                                                    ¯t  Q1
                                                         Pr Yit = 1|q    p, x
                                                                                    max
                                                                            ¯t ; , yp             =                 (5)
                
                            w1 w2       i      i                  max
                                       (2 - mt 1 - bt ) + Wp,t × yp          if It = 1
                
                          w1 +m2t w2

                                 w1 w2       i      i                  max
                1 -                         (2 - mt 1 - bt ) + Wp,t × yp          if It = 0,
                
                               w1 +m2t w2




where  indicates the standard normal CDF.21


2.3     Identification
This section discusses the identification proof for the two-dimensional case of our model. A formal
derivation is provided in Appendix A. Identification of a more complex version of the model in
the one-dimensional case is proven in Canen et al. (2020). The analysis can be extended to three
or more dimensions, but the set of identifying assumptions needs to increase with the higher
parametric requirements.
  20
      The use of a standardized distribution is necessary for statistical identification and is a common feature of any
discrete choice model. If we used a different normal distribution, we could simply rescale all parameters by the
distribution's standard deviation and de-mean the model to obtain the same probability of voting Yes, implying a
failure of identification.
   21                                               max
      With the same expressions, but the sign of yp     reversed when the party whips for the status quo q   ¯t , we can
construct a likelihood function, provided the direction, x2,t  q2,t , is known at each t. We address this issue in the
construction of the full likelihood below.




                                                          12
2.3.1   Preliminaries

The Euclidean norm weights are imposed to be w1 = w2 = 1. This is an identifying condition, as
even the case w1 = 1, w2 cannot be identified. We emphasize that these weights cannot be identified
in the DW-Nominate model either. In fact, even under w1 = 1, 0 < w2 < 1 or w1 = w2 = 1,
DW-Nominate is not identified as we show in Appendix B.
    Notice also that members' vote probabilities depend on It ,which is unobserved and must be
identified from the data in conjunction with the other parameters. Once It is identified, we know
each party's whipping direction, Wp,t , based on the direction of the leadership votes, as discussed
in Section 3. We address the estimation of It in Subsection 2.4.

2.3.2   Main Identifying Assumptions

To identify the parameters , {mt , bt , It }T      max
                                            t=1 , yp      p{D,R}
                                                                   , we assume the following:
   Assumptions ID:
                         i   i
  1. The ideal points, {(1 , 2 )}, are not perfectly collinear within at least one party.

  2. (i) There exists a politician 0 such that ¯0 = (0, 0). (ii) There exists a politician k whose
                                 k
     first dimension ideology, 1   , is known.

  3. (i) There exists a bill 0 such that m0 = 0. (ii) There exists a bill s such that the slope of
     the cutline, ms = 0, and is such that if parties whip in the same (opposite) direction on bill
     0, they whip in the same (opposite) direction on s.

  4. Parties D and R whip in the same direction on at least one bill, and in opposite directions
     on at least one other bill.

    In addition, we trivially require that the data include at least two roll calls with cutlines
different from t = 0 (this restriction is satisfied, as the data includes thousands of bills), and at
least one politician with ideology different from i = 0, k (the data include hundreds of politicians).
This set of assumptions does not need to be imposed repeatedly for every congressional cycle, only
once for any set of congressional cycles that are jointly analyzed.
    In terms of intuition, Assumption ID1 is the requirement that two dimensions are in fact
necessary. If ideal points are collinear, then the problem is one-dimensional. ID2(i) is a natural
location choice, equivalent to the normalization of a single individual fixed effect to zero in standard
panel data models. Assumptions ID2(ii) and ID3(i) pin down the rotation of the estimates in the
two-dimensional space. In addition, Assumption ID3(i) facilitates identification of the second
dimension of ideology, as for bill 0 only the second dimension is relevant. Assumption ID3(ii),

                                                  13
together with ID1, ensures sufficient variation in the data to identify more than one dimension.
Assumption ID4 is necessary to identify the party discipline parameters from changes in whipping
directions. It is possible to show, in fact, that party-specific cutlines can be recovered and that by
comparing the relative positions of these cutlines in cases where parties exert their discipline in
opposition to each other versus cases where they exert it in the same direction, party discipline can
be point identified for both p  {D, R}. As is standard in discrete choice models, the underlying
normalization of the variance of the utility shock magnitude (implicit in equation 5) pins down
the scale of the estimates.
    Under these assumptions, Appendix A proves identification of our model in two dimensions.
Note here that several innovations in our structure are crucial for identification in addition to
Assumptions ID1-4. First, shocks to ideology allow us to forgo any complication due to nonlin-
earity in u(.) when comparing vote choices, and to maintain general utility functions (e.g. we
are not restricted to quadratic or Gaussian). Renouncing the additive separability between the
deterministic and stochastic components of the utility function might appear to complicate the
analysis, but, as we show, it greatly simplifies it in this instance. Second, the assumption of the
orthogonality of the shocks to the cutlines allows us to focus on simple univariate probability
functions in describing vote probabilities even when preferences are two-dimensional. Third, the
use of the specific information coming from the inference on whipping directions of both parties
allows us to separate the individual party discipline parameters.


2.4     Likelihood
We derive the likelihood function for the problem presented in Parts (I)-(IV) of Section 2.2.
   Consider the sequences {p1 , p2 , ..., pT } and {q     ¯1 , q         ¯T }, only partially observed by the econo-
                                                               ¯2 , ..., q
metrician. Without loss of generality, order periods so that all {q                            ¯ -1 } belong to Q0 and
                                                                                     ¯1 , ..., q
are therefore unobserved, while {q                 ¯T } belong to Q1 and are potentially estimable by the
                                          ¯ , ..., q
econometrician, as actual votes occurred on these bills.
   For the i-th legislator, we observe T -  vote choices, Yi = {Yi , ..., YiT }. Let us now define a
theoretical sample likelihood constructed assuming we have complete information. Let  denote
the generic probability that party D is recognized as the proposer. Under full knowledge of the
sequence {q¯1 , q         ¯T }, the density for the i-th observation can be theoretically expressed as:
                ¯2 , ..., q




                                                         14
                              -1
                                                     I [pt =D]                                  I [pt =R]
              L (Yi ) =                    qt  Q0
                                        Pr(¯    D)                            qt  Q0
                                                                 × (1 -  ) Pr(¯    R)
                             t=1
                                   T
                                                                                                        Yit
                             ×              qt  Q1
                                         Pr(¯                   ¯t  Q1
                                                 D ) Pr Yit = 1|q    D, x      ¯max
                                                                        ¯t ; , y
                                 t=
                                                                          1-Yit I [pt =D]
                                          ¯t  Q1
                             × Pr Yit = 0|q    D, x      ¯max
                                                  ¯t ; , y
                                                                                                              Yit
                                          qt  Q1
                             × (1 -  ) Pr(¯                   ¯t  Q1
                                               R ) Pr Yit = 1|q    R, x      ¯max
                                                                      ¯t ; , y
                                                                          1-Yit I [pt =R]
                                          ¯t  Q1
                             × Pr Yit = 0|q    R, x      ¯max
                                                  ¯t ; , y                                  .

    Notice, that the terms Pr(qt  Q0  p ) which indicate the status quo policies not pursued by party
p cannot be observed in reality. Notice further that, conditioning the vote probabilities on x      ¯t
implicitly conditions on It , which, given data on leadership votes, determines Wp,t for each party.
In essence, both the parameters pertinent to the recognition and agenda selection components of
the model (Parts (I) and (II) of the structure in Section 2.2) and the parameters pertinent to the
party discipline and voting components (Parts (III) and (IV)) enter the estimation problem.
    As the information concerning Parts (I) and (II) is unobserved, a consistent estimator of
ideology, party discipline and the other voting parameters would seem infeasible. Consistent with
this view, the literature has suggested that such omission may be consequential to the study
of polarization. For instance, Clinton et al. (2014) and others22 point out that agenda setting
may play a key role in producing polarization: politicians may vote more similarly with their
co-partisans not because of ideologies or party discipline, but simply because divisive bills are left
out of the agenda or bills that clearly separate the two parties are brought forth.
    To the contrary, we now show how one can obtain consistent estimates of the vote parameters
independent of the policies that are voted upon.23 As our argument holds independently of how
the proposing party is chosen, for illustrative purposes, consider the simplified case of  = 1 (i.e.
all bills are proposed by the same party D). In this case, the infeasible log likelihood is:
  22
    E.g. McCarty (2019) ch. 5, pp.83-84.
  23
    If one is explicitly interested in the agenda setting parameters, one can explicitly model the agenda setting
process as in Canen et al. (2020).




                                                         15
                                       -1                              T
                         
                 log L      (Yi ) =         log Pr(qt        Q0
                                                              D)   +        log Pr(qt  Q1
                                                                                        D)                        (6)
                                      t=1                              t=
                                            T       N
                                      +                                    ¯t  Q1
                                                        Yit log Pr Yit = 1|q    D, x      ¯max
                                                                                   ¯t ; , y
                                          t= i=1
                                                                  ¯t  Q1
                                      + (1 - Yit ) log Pr Yit = 0|q    D, x      ¯max
                                                                          ¯t ; , y                .

    The log likelihood (6) is separable. The double summation corresponds to the conditional
likelihood of roll call votes based on the selected status quo q ¯t that are brought to the floor for
a vote, and the corresponding selected alternative x ¯t . This likelihood component corresponds to
Parts (III) and (IV) of the structure in Section 2.2.
    Define  = {mt , bt , It }T
                             t=1 .
                                   24
                                      Consider maximizing the (feasible) conditional likelihood L of
individual vote decisions:
                                                T   N
                            log L (Yi ) =                                         ¯max ))
                                                        [Yit log (Pr (Yit = 1|, , y                               (7)
                                            t= i=1

                                                                             ¯max ))] ,
                                       + (1 - Yit ) log (1 - Pr (Yit = 1|, , y

where {, , y  ¯max } is the set of parameters to estimate. Equation (7) can be used to consistently
estimate {, , y   ¯max } based on vote data alone even if (i) the range of party discipline yp          max

influences the selection decisions of status quos (i.e. the sets {Q0            1
                                                                          D , QD }), and (ii) the policy
alternatives x
             ¯t are endogenously set.
    The key reason for this result is that each mt , bt , and It can be consistently estimated from
the vote data alone so that it does not matter how they arise through agenda selection. Each of
these parameters can be estimated because (i) preference shocks realize independently after the
selection of the status quo, q ¯t , and of the alternative, x
                                                            ¯t , have occurred, and (ii) the support of
the preference shocks is unbounded ­ so that no matter the choices of q        ¯t , x
                                                                                    ¯t the probability that
each politician votes for either alternative is non-zero.
    To see the intuition for this result, consider a one-dimensional environment and two politicians
i and j , with i < j . Take a Congress where only one bill is voted upon repeatedly T times so
that we observe only one cutline m. No matter how extreme the cutline, nor how it is selected
by the agenda setter, if one shocks the politicians with full-support shocks, each politician, i, will
cross the cutline with a certain frequency given by the distribution of the shocks and her ideal
  24
     Notice here that for each bill we can characterize vote choices as functions of the three parameters mt , bt ,
and It , rather than the four parameters in q
                                            ¯t , x
                                                 ¯t . We therefore have one less parameter per bill, which facilitates
identification and estimation.


                                                             16
point location relative to m. The politician with j immediately to the right of i will cross the
cutline as well, but with a slightly different frequency. If in the next Congress, the agenda setter
changes the cutline m, then the frequencies will change, but i and j cannot change given the
structure and the nature of the shocks: the vote probabilities will adjust for the different cutline
accordingly. Given unbounded shocks and large T , no two politicians with different ideologies
can have identical voting records, no matter which bills are proposed: the ideal points will be
separated asymptotically.25
    Finally, notice that using the definition (5), It can be simply estimated as selecting for every
bill t, I (x2 ,t < q2 ,t ) = 1 if

                                   N
                                                                              ¯max ))
                                         [Yit log (Pr (Yit = 1|, mt , bt , 1, y
                                   i=1
                                                                          ¯max ))] >
                         + (1 - Yit ) log (1 - Pr (Yit = 1|, mt , bt , 1, y
                                   N
                                                                              ¯max ))
                                         [Yit log (Pr (Yit = 1|, mt , bt , 0, y
                                   i=1
                                                                          ¯max ))]
                         + (1 - Yit ) log (1 - Pr (Yit = 1|, mt , bt , 0, y

and I (x2 ,t < q2 ,t ) = 0 otherwise. By calculating the likelihood for each It , we avoid estimation of
a binary parameter.
   Consistency of the estimator for , {mt , bt }T          ¯max is guaranteed for large T -  and N .
                                                     t=1 , y
The requirement for a large number of bills, which holds in our application, is to estimate each      ¯i
consistently by MLE without nuisance parameter problems (Fern´          andez-Val and Weidner, 2016).
Further, as N is also large, one can also consistently estimate all elements of {mt , bt }T        ¯max .
                                                                                           t=1 and y



2.5     Comparison to Other Established Methodologies
Here we discuss how our methodology contrasts with established methodologies in the literature,
focusing on three main approaches. As a first point of departure, note that none of the approaches
below incorporates a role for party discipline in our current form.
    The first method for comparison is the Bayesian approach of Clinton et al. (2004). This
approach posits quadratic preferences for the deterministic component of utility and normal id-
iosyncratic shocks. We share the use of the latter, but do not need to impose a quadratic utility
function. The authors' use of Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods to estimate posterior densities,
typical of Bayesian methods, is also in sharp contrast to our setup in terms of identification. The
  25
     It follows then that agenda-setting can only potentially affect estimates in finite samples (as demonstrated
in the simulations of Clinton et al. (2014)). Given our very large T , finite sample effects are likely negligible, as
confirmed by our Monte Carlo simulations.


                                                          17
Bayesian approach allows the authors to sidestep classical identification issues, but also requires
the reader to trust the assumed priors. When the authors extend their approach to allow for par-
ties to discipline votes, they assume (as in Snyder and Groseclose (2000)) that lopsided votes are
not whipped in order to be able to identify (only) the net effect (Republican-Democrat) of party
discipline. By incorporating the leadership positions to identify whipping directions, we do not
need to assume some votes are not whipped and can individually identify the discipline exerted
by each party.
    Heckman and Snyder (1997) share our classical approach: their structurally-derived linear
probability model is close in spirit to this paper. Yet their assumptions of quadratic preferences
and additive separable uniform shocks are differ from ours. We introduce non-separable additive
shocks in the argument of the utility functions, an innovation that helps in terms of identification
and estimation of the explicit effects of discipline. The usefulness of our approach comes in
two forms. First, we do not impose restrictive utility functions. Second, it allows for a simple
characterization of the cutline in equation (4), becoming a function of an intercept, slope, and
direction, rather than a function of q   ¯t and x
                                                ¯t . With two dimensions, this simplification reduces
the number of parameters by one for each bill. Finally, for their analysis with an unobservable
number of policy dimensions, the authors implement their linear model as a factor model under
an orthornormality assumption.26
    The most influential and cited approach in the analysis of congressional behavior and political
polarization is arguably DW-Nominate (Dynamic Weighted NOMINAL Three-step Estimation), a
method that has gone through multiple incarnations (Poole and Rosenthal, 1997, 2001; McCarty
et al., 2006) and is at the core of the path-breaking VoteView.com repository. This well-established
methodology relies on somewhat unique assumptions, however. Politicians' preferences are given
by a Gaussian function (which are not globally concave). The model is also often written as if mul-
tiple policy dimensions could be estimated from the vote data without increasing the identification
requirements.
    An unappreciated consequence of the former assumption is that strong nonlinearity in the
preference parameters immensely complicates identification when one tries to map choice data into
the model structure, even absent the weighting of different policy dimensions (the W, for Weighted
in the name) or linear trends in legislator preferences (the D, for Dynamic in the name).27 In fact,
to the best of our knowledge, no formal proof of identification for the Nominate method exists in
  26
     The authors estimate six latent policy factors using 2 and AIC methods. These tests however are known to
produce over-estimates of the number of factors in small and medium samples. More conservative modern tests
for the number of latent factors could be implemented to re-assess their PCA analysis (for instance, the eigenvalue
ratio method of Ahn and Horenstein (2013)).
  27
     Heckman and Snyder (1997) discuss the problem arising from the nonlinearity of the estimator explicitly in
their analysis and point to its consequences for consistency of the MLE estimator.



                                                        18
two dimensions or higher. Indeed, we prove in Appendix B that DW-Nominate in two dimensions
is not identified. We show that a specific nonlinear transformations of the parameters can in fact
change the DW-Nominate ranking of legislators along any dimension. Notice further that this
difficulty is not resolved by imposing additional identifying restrictions, such as that legislators'
ideal points need to be constrained to lie within a unit circle. In fact, this often-emphasized "unit
circle" identification constraint operates as an additional source of distortion: legislators are not
allowed to simultaneously be extreme on both policy dimensions, as they would fall outside the
circle. A substantial share of politicians are located at the artificial boundary of the circle (7%
of our sample from the House, and approximately 8% of our sample from the Senate lie on the
boundary) and all estimates are affected by this restriction through comparisons to the subset of
politicians located on the boundary. We provide further details and discussions in Appendix B.28
     After experimenting with replications of the DW-Nominate approach on our part, we can only
surmise that see the lack of identification of the preference and (therefore bill) parameters is being
disciplined by the addition of external information about the locations of a number of (initial)
politicians. According to Boche et al. (2018) "It has been said that Poole himself was the 'outer
loop' of this estimation process: his judgment and expertise were required in the estimation of the
original values " (p.24). The additional identifying information of this outer loop continues to be
important in estimates for new bills and legislators today. In the current VoteView.com structure,
Boche et al. (2018) avoid any adjustment in ideal point estimates for past members when new
voting information is added (no "back propagating ", p.24).


3      Data
Our data on roll call votes for both the House of Representatives and the Senate comes from
VoteView.com. This standard dataset was originally created by Keith Poole and Howard Rosenthal
(Poole et al., 1997), who collected the roll call votes for each member of Congress over time and
made them widely available.29 We map these votes to the binary variable Yi,t (politician i voting
Yes or No on roll call t) in the model and employ all roll call votes available.
    Figure 3 shows the number of roll call votes over time in each chamber. The number of roll calls
in the Senate increases from just under 200 in Congress 70 to a peak of almost 1,500 by Congress
94, before settling to around 500 in more recent Congresses. For the House, the average number
of roll calls increases from around 200 in Congress 70 to around 1,200 in recent times. Regarding
  28
     For instance, see Figure 22 in Appendix B for an illustration of this problem. In summary, the unit circle limits
the correlation of ideologies across both dimensions as no legislator
                                                                   
                                                                         can be set at (1, 1), for example. The most
extreme legislator in both dimensions would be located at ( 22 , 22 ), implying that they would seem less extreme
in some dimension than legislators (0, 0.8) and (0.8, 0), for example, even though that may not be the case.
  29
     See Boche et al. (2018) for a recent overview.


                                                         19
agenda setting, we present summary statistics for bills in Table 2 in Appendix D, including the
number of bills introduced, approval rates, and the number of bills passed in a congressional cycle,
for both the House and the Senate, from the mid 1940's until the early 2010's. This data is drawn
from the Vital Statistics on Congress by the Brooking Institute. In both chambers, the approval
rate of bills has dropped sharply: for the Senate, from over 50% in Congress 80 to around 10-20%
more recently, and from around 20% to under 6% in the same time period for the House.
    We restrict our sample to the post-WWI period from 1927 (Congress 70) to January 2019 (the
end of Congress 115). We impose this restriction because our identification strategy requires clear
party leadership positions for every roll call (necessary to obtain whipping directions, as described
below). Formal leadership positions were not fully consolidated until the 1920's (Evans, 2018,
ch.1). In the Senate (the focus of our main quantitative exercises in two dimensions), the first
Republican leader was only officially nominated in 1925 (the beginning of Congress 69), while the
first Democrat party leader was elected in 1920 (see Senate, 2020). Since the first Republican
leader (Charles Curtis) was elected months into Congress 69, we begin our sample in Congress
70. For similar reasons, we maintain the same restrictions when using data from the House of
Representatives.30
    To determine the whipping directions, Wp,t , we make use of leadership votes. For each roll call
vote, we code whether the party leadership voted Yes or No using the decisions by the Majority
and the Minority Leader. When such votes are unavailable, we use the Majority or Minority
Whip's vote instead, and when that is also missing, the direction of the vote of the majority of
the party. For the Senate, out of 25,824 roll calls in our time period, only 2,181 votes do not have
the Democratic Leader's vote, 1,388 do not have the Republican Leader's vote, 161 do not have
the vote of either the Democratic Leader or the Democratic Whip, and 355 do not have the vote
of either the Republican Leader or Republican Whip. Out of 32,763 roll calls in the House, only
2,808 do not have the vote of the Democratic Leader and 285 have neither that of the Democratic
Leader or Whip. For the Republicans in the House, 2,502 roll calls do not have the Republican
Leader and 429 do not have either the Republican Leader or Whip. 31 Whipping directions are
  30
      While party leadership in the House of Representatives was already formally established by both parties by
the late 1890's, the scope, powers and election of those leaders changed significantly between 1900 and 1920. Most
notably, the Democratic Party instituted elections for Majority Leader in 1911 (Congress 62) to limit the power
of the Speaker (initially, the Majority Leader was appointed by the Speaker). Meanwhile, the Republicans only
began electing Majority Leaders in the House in 1923 (United States House of Representatives History and Archives
(2020b)). There were also changes in the committee membership and selection of Majority Leaders: between 1899-
1919, the Majority Leader was also the chairman of the Ways and Means Committee regardless of party, although
from 1919 onward it became commonplace that such leaders would not serve in committees. Finally, we face data
limitations when using data earlier than 1921: no official records for the Democratic Whip between 1909-1921 exist
due to missing documentation (see United States House of Representatives History and Archives (2020a)).
   31
      The choice of using the Majority and Minority Leaders as the main information source for leadership behavior
follows such seminal work as Cox and McCubbins (1993). We show in Section 4 that using only votes where both
the Leaders and Whips agree yields qualitatively and quantitatively similar results. Another potential alternative


                                                       20
then based simply on how the leader votes and the direction of the vote (which is estimated by
the maximum likelihood estimator in equation (7)). If the leader says Yes, the whipping direction
is in the direction of Yes. If the leader says No, it is in the opposite direction (i.e. towards the
direction of the No vote). This coding characterizes the random variable Wp,t and allows us to
generate subsets of bills where leaders from both parties whip in the same/opposite directions. \
    In Figure 3, we provide summary information on the variation in whipping directions in our
sample. We present the number of roll call votes available in each Congress and then decompose
this number into votes for which the two party leaders voted identically and differently. This
decomposition is informative about the amount of variation available in the data, which is im-
portant because identification of the party discipline parameters requires both types of votes. We
see that we have a large sample of each type of vote. Although it varies over time, approximately
40% of roll calls have both leaders whipping in the same direction. Figure 3(b) shows the same
information for the House of Representatives, again indicating many roll call votes in each group.
The amount of data for the House is much larger than that for the Senate, with many more roll
calls per Congress, and 435 member voters per roll call versus 100.
    We are use all roll call votes in the sample to estimate both the two-dimensional model for the
Senate and the one-dimensional model for both the House and the Senate. The computational
cost of estimating our model increases sharply when moving to the two-dimensional case. Both the
number of ideology parameters and the number of bill specific parameters double which precludes
estimation of our two-dimensional model for the House for the time being. However, as computa-
tional power is constantly improving, our approach should soon be feasible for two dimensions in
the House as well.
    To give a better sense of the dimensionality of our problem, in Table 1 we include the total
number of parameters estimated in our roll call analyses. It reports all classes of parameters for the
Senate (two-dimension and one-dimension model) for the period 1927-2018 (i.e. up to Congress
115th) and for the House of Representatives (one dimension model) for the period 1927-2018.
would be to use the median party member's vote. However, this approach is problematic because we can only
identify the median member after performing the estimation. Finally, one could simultaneously use the votes of the
Majority/Minority Leader, Majority/Minority Whip and other ranking members of the party together to jointly
determine the whipping direction. Unfortunately, it becomes unclear how to treat aggregate that data when there
are missing votes of one or more members. We clarify that most of the missing values for Majority/Minority
Leadership votes is due to unclear or missing data on leadership, particularly due to leadership transitions in the
middle of a Congress, where the timing of a particular roll call is hard to assess (i.e. before or after the transition).
For instance, in the middle of Congress 87, Majority Leader John McCormack became the Speaker of the House.
As Speaker, he did not vote on roll calls. However, the previous Majority Whip (Carl Albert) became the Majority
Leader, so using his votes when McCormack's are unavailable is still appropriate.




                                                           21
4     Results
Our main application for the empirical analysis is the U.S. Senate model in two dimensions, but
we also include results for the one-dimensional House and Senate models. We refer to the two-
dimensional model as 2D and the one-dimensional as 1D.
    We estimate the likelihood presented in Section 2.4 jointly for the 70th-115th Congresses.
Given the number of parameters to be estimated, ensuring global convergence for every set of
starting parameters is not guaranteed. Therefore, we evaluate the estimation results for many sets
of starting parameters, finding similar estimates across many runs. We also performed extensive
Monte Carlo simulations of the model to prove that all parameters of the data generating process
can be recovered, providing additional assurance that the model is identified. We provide more
details on the implementation of our estimator in Appendix C.


4.1     Party Discipline and Polarization
The large number of parameters (see Table 1) requires us to focus on the parameters of most
interest. We begin with the party specific discipline parameters, y ¯max = {yDmax max
                                                                                  , yR }. We estimate
                     max
a different vector y¯     for each congressional cycle, therefore allowing discipline to vary across
parties and time. Figure 4 reports the point estimates for party discipline in the Senate 2D model
for the time period 1927-2018 together with a smooth fit line to show the trends in party discipline
for each party.
    Figure 4 illustrates fairly persistent, but evolving, levels of party discipline for the two main
American political parties. For both parties, we observe a U-shaped profile over our time period.
Neither party appears to lead or lag the other, with substantial contemporary correlation (0.515),
but typically higher party discipline for the Republican Party in the Post-War period. Party
discipline appears to be declining until the early 1970s, increasing until the end of the 1990s,
and then takes on an even steeper increase more recently. Interestingly, this time series evidence
accurately fits more descriptive analyses, like the one in Sinclair (2014). The inflection points
in the time series match the qualitative discussions of Congress experts, with a sharp separation
between the Committee ascendancy period of 1933-1960 to the period of stronger leadership and
realignment of 1960-1994 to the modern 1994-2018 Congress (Deering and Smith, 1997; Jenkins,
2011; Sinclair, 2014; Evans, 2018).32
   32
      For example, Jenkins (2011) specifically mentions rule changes that affect the organization of the House and
Senate over the 1960-1994 period ("To control proceedings, the leadership began relying on special (restrictive) rules
to structure debate and floor voting ") and in explaining the uptick in polarization for the post-1994 period ("... as
Senate parties have become more effective in recent years at steering the legislative agenda toward party cleavage
issues--those on which there is internal party unity and wide divergence between the two parties--a strengthening
of formal leadership structures in the Senate has also occurred, with party caucuses meeting more frequently and


                                                         22
    All the point estimates of party discipline are statistically significant (p-values < 0.001)33 ,
implying that the data strongly rejects, for every single congressional cycle in our sample, the null
hypothesis of the absence of party discipline. This fact remains true even at discipline's historical
lows of around 0.3 - 0.4 units in the 92nd-95th Congresses (1971-1976). More recent estimates are
                                                                max
historical high points, between 1.5 and 2. The 2018 level of yR     , for example, is 2.04, indicating a
substantial ability of the Republican leadership to reach far into the set of (potentially) dissenting
members. Intuitively then, even ideologically moderate Republican members of the 115th Senate,
such as Sen. Susan Collins or Sen. Mitt Romney, may appear more conservative in terms of their
vote profile along the first dimension than they truly are because of the powerful reach of the
Senate leadership.
    Our second main result is the time series of ideological polarization reported in Figure 6 for
the Senate 2D model over the 1927-2018 period. As with DW-Nominate and other methods, our
approach requires to specify location, scale, and rotation through normalizations (Assumptions
ID of Section 2.3). Although our assumptions pin down a rotation, such rotation is arbitrary, as it
depends on the particular normalizing bill chosen to have m0 = 0. Thus, to make our results more
comparable to DW-Nominate and to others in the literature (a comparison we return to in the next
section) ­ which is required for the correct interpretation of the correlations between approaches34
­ we rotate our estimates using the Procrustes rotation of our ideology estimates onto those of
DW-Nominate. Procrustes analysis is a popular and theoretically founded approach to comparing
these two multidimensional scaling methods (Goodall 1991; Kendall 1989). A Procrustes rotation
minimizes the sum of the squared differences between points in our matrix of estimates and the
DW-Nominate matrix, which constitutes the reference space.
    We derive estimates of ideological polarization from our estimates of politicians' ideologies,
noting that we assume that these ideologies are constant across Congresses (and serve to create
intertemporal linkages across Congressional cycles). We focus here on polarization in the first
dimension, but also report results for polarization along the second dimension (in Figure 7).
Following the standard in the literature, we define ideological polarization as the difference between
the ideological positions of the median Republican and the median Democrat in each dimension.
    The most salient fact in Figure 6 is the steady growth of ideological polarization over the
enhanced resources (both funds and staff levels) being devoted to party leadership offices.") (p.13). Also see Canen
et al. (2020) and the references therein for a discussion of rule changes in Congress that strengthened party leadership
over the 1970s. Such rule changes, which occurred both in the House and Senate over the 1970s, include megabills,
omnibus legislation, and time-limitation agreements, allowing leaders more control over the party rank-and-file and
the agenda.
   33
      We estimate the variance of the parameters using the empirical counterpart to the asymptotic variance of the
MLE, as is standard.
   34
      As linear correlation is dependent on the rotation of the data, calculating the naive correlation of our first
dimension estimates and DW-Nominate's first dimension would be uninformative. Appropriate transposition of
our estimates into the DW-Nominate space is necessary.


                                                          23
sample period. Ideological polarization appears to double approximately every forty years. This
result is inconsistent with the the U-shaped dynamic reported by McCarty et al. (2006) which
was obtained through DW-Nominate estimation. Our results imply that the standard intuition
that more moderate members are increasingly replaced with more extreme ones appears correct
(although with lower absolute levels due to the presence of party discipline). However, theories of
ideological polarization that revolve around non-monotonic dynamics are less robust. Rather, our
analysis suggests that the U-shaped profile observed in estimates where party discipline is ignored
is in fact due to party discipline itself changing non-monotonically.
    The U-shaped profile in party discipline is confirmed with both of the 1D Senate and 1D House
models, and is in fact more marked in these instances (see Figure 5(a) for the Senate 1D model and
Figure 5(b) for the House 1D model). Qualitative studies for the House, like Sinclair (1992), match
the timing and the sign of the time derivatives of our estimates. Figures 24 and 25 in Appendix
D report the time series for ideological polarization for the Senate and House 1D models, showing
remarkably similar profiles to the results of our Senate 2D model.
    To put the magnitudes of the party discipline parameters into perspective, we plot the share of
polarization attributable to party discipline (i.e. total party discipline divided by party discipline
plus ideological polarization) in Figure 8. As first demonstrated in Canen et al. (2020), the
denominator of this measure is the ideological polarization one would obtain with a model that
ignores the role of party discipline (a "misspecified" model that we turn to the next section),
a consequence of the fact ignoring whipping results in a misattribution of vote differences to
difference in ideologies across parties.35 The share of polarization attributable to discipline has
highs of over 80% in the 1930's, falls to around 60% in the Civil Rights Era, and is between 65-75%
in recent decades. Results for the Senate and House 1D models are quantitatively similar (Figure
26 in Appendix D).
    In Figure 9, we report the ideology of the median member in each party and further split the
Democratic Party into the Southern Democrats and Northern Democrats, to emphasize this impor-
tant component of historical heterogeneity within that organization. The well known ideological
convergence between Southern Democrats and the Republican party along the first ideological
dimension is evident in Figure 9.36
    To provide a more complete presentation of the distributions of ideological preferences along
the two policy dimensions, we report the kernel density estimates for the two parties over time.
The first dimension marginal distributions are reported in Figure 10, and the second dimension
distributions in Figure 11. We report only the 2D Senate model for brevity. Not only have the
  35
     Neglecting discipline shifts the ideologies of all members of a party by the same amount because of unbounded
ideology shocks: each member will, with some probability, be subject to discipline on every bill.
  36
     We report analogous figures for the second dimension in Appendix D.



                                                       24
first moments of the Democratic and Republican Parties been diverging over time, most visibly
from the 95th Congress (started in 1977) in Figure 10, but the variances in the first dimension of
each party have also fallen over time. Our model is consistent with the extant literature for these
well-established facts.
    In terms of symmetry, the pattern of ideological polarization does not appear to be driven by
one party relative to the other. Instead, both Republican and Democratic parties contribute to the
ideological divergence highlighted in Figure 9. The extant literature has discussed asymmetries
in voting polarization based on DW-Nominate (Grossmann and Hopkins, 2016), but they appear
driven by a marginally higher party discipline parameter for the Republican Party in the last part
of the sample and not by asymmetric ideological divergence.
    In summary, our first group of results shows that party discipline has played a significant role
over time, particularly in recent Congresses. The data clearly rejects models that omit party whip-
ping. While we confirm standard findings in terms of a recent increase in ideological polarization,
existing results of non-monotonic and asymmetric dynamics appear unsupported by the data once
the role of parties is included in the analysis.


4.2    Comparison to DW-Nominate
We compare our results to those of the DW-Nominate method. Recall that a comparison of our
2D estimates to those of DW-Nominate is appropriate because we analyze our estimates after a
Procrustes rotation on to DW-Nominate's space. Nevertheless, we must emphasize that this basis
for comparison is not unique ­ using other rotations would likely produce similar, but not identical
results.
    Figure 12 reports the time series of polarization in the first and second dimensions according
to DW-Nominate and a third model, which we call the "misspecified" model. The misspecified
model implements our main model with a constraint of no party discipline. It is therefore an
identified version of our two-dimensional model that is directly comparable to DW-Nominate in
that it lacks a role for parties. However, as shown in this figure, the misspecified model does not
replicate the early sharp decline in liberal-conservative polarization that so typically defines the
time series for DW-Nominate over the 20th century. This confirms our findings from Figure 6
for our benchmark model, and also suggests that the lack of a U-shape in ideological polarization
could also in part be due to our model being identified (further details in Appendix B).
    Figures 13 and 14 provide scatter plots of our first dimension estimates versus those of DW-
Nominate, both for our baseline and misspecified models. Figures 15 and 16 present the same
scatter plots for the second dimension estimates. The first dimension estimates of the misspecified
model align reasonably to those of DW-Nominate, but in our model with party discipline, a sizable


                                                25
gap opens up between members of the two parties located at the same first-dimensional ideological
level. This gap is driven by the fact that our model recognizes that individuals who have the same
preferences, but belong to different parties, are often whipped in opposite directions, appearing
less moderate. Ignoring party discipline, DW-Nominate misattributes the difference in voting
behavior exclusively to differences in preferences, as does our misspecified model. This shift is
ultimately responsible for the mismeasurement of ideological polarization in DW-Nominate, and
leads to a different interpretation of the data.
    Pairwise rank correlations between model estimates in the first and second dimension are also
informative. Notice, however, that these correlations paint a different picture than the location
of the marginal densities or consistency of the estimated ideology parameters. Rank correlations
simply capture the similarity in rankings of politicians between methodologies. The rank cor-
relation of the first dimension of ideological positions of our baseline model (after imposing the
rotation) and DW-Nominate is 0.857. This high correlation means that that our ordering and
that of DW-Nominate are quite similar along the first dimension. As the ordering of legislators
along the first dimension is probably the most widely-accepted feature of DW-Nominate, we find
this correlation reassuring. On the other hand, the rank correlation of second dimension ideo-
logical positions across models is much lower, 0.435. This low correlation is most likely because
the second dimension of ideologies and the cutline parameters appear the most sensitive to the
lack of identification in DW-Nominate. One plausible explanation is the short time period over
which this second dimension makes up an important feature of the legislative voting data (the
1960s and 1970s), while the first dimension appears relevant for the entire sample period. Lack of
identification unsurprisingly translates into less predictable estimates along the second dimension.
Comparing DW-Nominate to our misspecified model produces similar results. The rank correla-
tion along the first dimension is higher at 0.910, but the correlation along the second dimension
is slightly lower at 0.365.


4.3    Fit and Robustness
We assess the in-sample fit of our empirical model congressional cycle by congressional cycle,
further quantitatively validating our approach. We begin by reporting the time series for the in-
sample fraction of correctly predicted roll call votes in each Congressional cycle in Figure 17. The
share of correctly predicted votes increases over time, with at least 80 percent of all individual
choices being correctly predicted in any cycle. The share of correctly predicted votes in 2018
reaches about 95 percent of all votes cast, which is extremely high.
    However, it is important to remark that the ability to predict votes to a high degree may
not necessarily be fully indicative of model quality, especially with respect to bias along certain


                                                26
dimensions and the distributions of congressmembers. The increase in ideological polarization
over the past forty years may allow for high levels of correct predictions of a binary decision even
with biased estimates. DW-Nominate also has excellent predictive power, yet we have shown
that its estimates of preference parameters are biased by the omission of party discipline, an
important feature of the data. The misattribution by omission can be substantial - as discussed
in Section 4.1, party discipline makes up on average, 65 - 70 percent of voting polarization from
the misspecified model (Figure 8) over the entire period (with the remaining 30 - 35 percent being
correctly attributed to ideological polarization).
     Apart from the standard identification assumptions discussed in Section 2.3, our results may
depend on the way in which we construct the whipping direction variable, Wp,t . To probe the
reliance of our estimates on this variable's exact definition, we consider alternative whipping
directions based on suggestions within the extant literature. We re-estimate our model under
three alternative scenarios: (i) no whipping (i.e. Wp,t = 0) on lopsided votes (where lopsided is
defined as either a 65/35 percent vote or a 70/30 percent depending on the size of the majority
party),37 (ii) dropping votes where a party's Leader and Whip voted in different directions and
(iii) dropping votes where the leaderships of both parties vote in the same way (in this case
                                                                          max     max
we can only identify the aggregate amount of party discipline, yD             + yR    ). Each of these
specifications probes a particular assumption about either our modeling of whipping or Wp,t .
The first specification tests whether our results rely on the assumption of whipping on every vote.
It does so by incorporating an idea that has received extensive attention in the literature following
Snyder and Groseclose (2000), but still maintaining identification of the party discipline and
ideology parameters. The second specification tests the robustness of the empirical construction
of Wp,t itself. The econometrician does not observe the exact direction of party discipline. Instead,
we currently proxy it by leadership votes. This proxy might seem less appropriate when leaders
within the same party disagree (e.g. the Majority Whip's decision differs from the Majority
Leader's). One particular reason for this difference in voting could be the use of a motion to
reconsider in the Senate, whereby a senator on the prevailing side or who did not vote can motion
for a revote. This may incentivize a leader to vote against his/her preferred policy in order to
preserve the possibility of a future revote.38 Finally, the last specification tests whether our results
  37
      This is a a specification inspired, but different, than the one presented in Snyder and Groseclose (2000).
In contrast to their work, identification of this specification does not rely on comparing voting behavior of the
same legislators in lopsided and non-lopsided votes, a source of weak identification due to the lack of variation
                                                                                                                max
in voting behavior in lopsided votes (McCarty et al. (2001)). Instead, our parameters for party discipline (yp      )
are identified by information on the leadership voting/whipping directions within non-lopsided votes. As a result,
individual ideologies are recovered from average voting behavior conditional on discipline, using information on
both lopsided and non-lopsided votes.
   38
      Only a senator on the prevailing side or who did not vote can motion to reconsider. In most cases, this motion
is pro-forma: after it gets proposed, another senator who voted alike immediately motions to table it. This dual
procedure guarantees that the first vote is final (i.e. it will not be revoted). See Schneider and Koempel (2012) for


                                                         27
are driven by the roll calls where opposing leaders vote the same way. Such votes may be less
confrontational or salient, requiring different types of party discipline.
                                                    max       max
    We present the results for total discipline yD        + yR    across models in Figure 18, and the
results for individual party disciplines for (i) and (ii) in Figure 19 (i.e. the specifications where the
individual parameters are identified). It is clear that our quantitative and qualitative results are
remarkably similar across specifications, assuaging concerns that the results described in Section
4.1 are due to a particular definition or construction of Wp,t , or how we model whipping behavior.
    Finally, we compare our benchmark estimates of party discipline to those from Canen et al.
(2020), which derives identification from information contained in detailed internal party records
before floor votes (whip counts, as cataloged by Evans, 2018). This comparison is possible only
for the short subsample in which both sets of results are available: for both parties in the House of
Representatives between 1977-1986 (i.e. Congresses 95-99). Figure 27 in Appendix D shows that
the estimates of party discipline are remarkably correlated across identification strategies, with a
linear correlation of 0.878,39 and that the different identification strategies produce quantitatively
similar estimates of the role of parties. This result is reassuring in that it demonstrates the
robustness of our approach, and that our more parsimonious method is picking up informative
variation on the direction of party pressure from the data.


4.4     Implications for Theories of Party Organization
Our results also allow us to speak to different theories of political party organization. Such
theories for the most part have remained either theoretical or have been guided by less formal
quantitative approaches (Sinclair, 2014). We do not aim here for a complete analysis of the
historical determinants of party discipline, as this would be beyond the scope of the paper, but
include this discussion to demonstrate the potential value of having estimates of party power.
    Figure 20 reports evidence of a inverse U-shape time series in the variance of the first dimension
of ideologies within each party, in contrast to the U-shape in party discipline of Figure 4. This
negative correlation between the time series of party discipline and within party variance along
the liberal-conservative dimension is strong and statistically significant for both Republicans and
Democrats.40 This result would seem to be in line with predictions from the Conditional Party
details. Nevertheless, a Majority Leader may sometimes deviate from his/her preferred vote in order to file a motion
to reconsider. For example, when (s)he is about to lose a vote in the Senate, (s)he might prefer to switch sides
and vote with the opposition, preserving the possibility of a future revote due to a motion to reconsider. A recent
example was Mitch McConnell's vote with the Democrats in the failure to confirm Judy Shelton's nomination to
the Federal Reserve Bank (see: https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2020/11/17/shelton-fed-mcconnell/).
This motion is pro-forma in the House of Representatives (Schneider and Koempel, 2012).                   
  39
     To make the results comparable, we scale up the estimates from Canen et al. (2020) by a factor of 2 because
of differences in the way in which the ideologies and party discipline parameters were scaled in the two models.
  40                                              max
     The estimates from separate regressions of yp    on the variance of ideology estimates for party p are -9.218 for


                                                         28
Government theory of Aldrich (1995) and Rohde (1991). The theory states that legislators delegate
more agenda setting power to leaders when the party is more ideologically homogeneous ­ exactly
the pattern that our results seem to indicate. The intuition is that, as party members become more
aligned, it is more beneficial to yield power to leaders who are more likely to advance commonly
desired policies. To explain the trends in the data, one could hypothesize a dynamic version of
this argument: increases in party discipline due to more homogeneous parties may induce the exit
of moderate members, increasing ideological homogeneity even further. Increasing homogeneity
could then lead to a further increase in party discipline, and so on, in a self-reinforcing mechanism.
    We find a high degree of correlation between party discipline across parties (0.515) in our sam-
ple. This correlation is high even though there is extensive evidence of technological innovations
during this period, including the introduction of focus-group tested languages and coordinated
vocabularies by the 1994 Revolution Republicans (see Gentzkow et al., 2019). Because of these
innovations, one might have thought that increases in discipline would have come first for the
innovating party, followed by the other (as seen by the adoption of these tactics by Democrats).
Although still possible, the high correlation in discipline across parties suggests that such techno-
logical innovations disseminate quickly across the political spectrum.41
    Finally, we expect that our approach could prove fruitful to testing other existing theories of
                                                                  max
party behavior. Our model recovers consistent estimates for yp         without imposing structure on
its explanatory sources (e.g. majority status or divided government). As a result, we can use it as
a dependent variable in a regression framework to test such sources. Table 3 in Appendix reports
the estimates of such an exercise. To highlight one result, we find suggestive evidence that unified
and divided governments have similar party behavior. This finding is consistent with Krehbiel
(1998) and Mayhew (2004), but in contrast to work as Sundquist (1988), who argue that there
is something institutionally different about party behavior when the president's party does not
coincide with the majority in Congress.
Democrats and -3.529 for Republicans. Robust standard errors are 2.881 and 1.305, respectively.
  41
     In fact, qualitative evidence suggests that this spread may not be constrained to the U.S. alone ­ other countries
often adopt the same American legislative tactics and electoral innovations in their own campaigns and legislative
proceedings. For example, in the early 2000s, Silvio Berlusconi in Italy applied similar public relations techniques to
the U.S. Republican Revolution, in 2017 Emmanuel Macron in France employed some of the campaigning techniques
experimented with in the Democratic presidential campaigns of 2008 and 2012, and in 2018 Jair Bolsonaro in Brazil
explicitly mirrored Republican tactics (see https://apnews.com/article/e6d1ef0d496545dd86d21584253b2312). This
international spread of U.S.-born parliamentary innovations could possibly drive similar patterns of political po-
larization across different political systems.




                                                          29
5       Conclusion
Political polarization is currently at an all-time high in the United States many other Western
Democracies. This phenomenon is attributed by many to the election of representatives who
express radically more extreme views than their predecessors Under this reading, without compro-
mising the integrity of the electoral process, there would seem to be little remedy to the current
adversarial state of liberal democracies. Voters are purposefully electing extreme types over mod-
erates.
    Elected legislators, however, do not act as independent decision-makers. They belong to struc-
tured political organizations. These organizations operate with formal systems of leadership and
pursue specific party goals by incentivizing their members. Perhaps more encouragingly, party
strategies and the technology of whipping appear more amenable to transformation and policy
change than slow-moving secular trends in voters' attitudes.
    We show that U.S. parties have been critical in driving elite polarization, essentially carving
out, through stronger control and discipline, the moderate middle ground between the two parties.
Employing a structural model and a new methodology for the analysis of legislative voting in the
U.S., we show that the Democratic and Republican Party leaderships have played a substantial
role in driving political polarization over the last century. We estimate that about 65-70 percent
of current polarization in congressional voting is due to the ability of U.S. parties to discipline
and control the votes of their rank and file. Increasing ideological polarization accounts for the
remaining portion of the variation.
    Virtually all extant methods for the analysis of elite polarization currently attribute no role to
party discipline, instead ascribing the entirety of the variation to ideological polarization. Based
upon our tests, this assumption is statistically rejected by the data. In addition, within extant
models, legislators appear substantially farther from each other than they are in reality, misat-
tributing influence from the party leadership as extreme preferences.
    Because our methodology requires only vote data and leadership positions, we are also able
to document how the role of party discipline has changed over time. The well known U-shaped
profile of political polarization over the last century appears to be the combination of a monotonic
increase in ideological separation between median party members' policy preferences and a U-
shaped profile of party discipline over time (with a low point in discipline in the 1960's-early
1970's). Strategies of "slash and burn", in which parties describe other members disparagingly,
are now commonplace, and the timing of their emergence aligns with the inflection points in party
discipline estimated in the data.42
    At the moment, U.S. political parties appear to be at a high point of party control, with the
 42
      https://www.nytimes.com/1990/09/20/opinion/the-politics-of-slash-and-burn.html


                                                      30
technological tools and strategic abilities that allow them to direct their members (and to offer
incentives to toe the party line) more readily than ever before. We do not study these specific tools
and tactics here, but the ability to measure and analyze party control that we offer will hopefully
open the path to new research in this area.


References
Ahn, S. C. and A. R. Horenstein (2013). Eigenvalue ratio test for the number of factors. Econo-
 metrica 81 (3), 1203­1227.

Aldrich, J. H. (1995). Why parties?: The origin and transformation of political parties in America.
  University of Chicago Press.

Alesina, A., A. Miano, and S. Stantcheva (2020). The polarization of reality. In AEA Papers and
  Proceedings, Volume 110, pp. 324­28.

Armstrong, D. A., R. Bakker, R. Carroll, C. Hare, K. T. Poole, H. Rosenthal, et al. (2014).
  Analyzing spatial models of choice and judgment with R. CRC Press.

Baker, S. R., N. Bloom, B. Canes-Wrone, S. J. Davis, and J. Rodden (2014, May). Why has us
  policy uncertainty risen since 1960? American Economic Review 104 (5), 56­60.

Bertrand, M. and E. Kamenica (2018). Coming apart? cultural distances in the united states over
  time. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Binder, S. (2003). Stalemate: Causes and consequences of legislative gridlock. Brookings DC.

Boche, A., J. B. Lewis, A. Rudkin, and L. Sonnet (2018). The new voteview.com: preserving and
  continuing keith poole's infrastructure for scholars, students and observers of congress. Public
  Choice 176 (1-2), 17­32.

Bonica, A. (2014). Mapping the ideological market place. American Journal of Political Sci-
  ence 58 (2), 367­386.

Boxell, L., M. Gentzkow, and J. M. Shapiro (2020). Cross-country trends in affective polarization.
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Caillaud, B. and J. Tirole (1999). Party governance and ideological bias. European Economic
  Review 43 (4-6), 779­789.




                                                 31
Caillaud, B. and J. Tirole (2002). Parties as political intermediaries. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 117 (4), 1453­1489.

Canen, N., C. Kendall, and F. Trebbi (2020). Unbundling polarization. Econometrica 88 (3),
  1197­1233.

Carroll, R., J. B. Lewis, J. Lo, K. T. Poole, and H. Rosenthal (2009). Measuring bias and
  uncertainty in dw-nominate ideal point estimates via the parametric bootstrap. Political Anal-
  ysis 17 (3), 261­275.

Clinton, J., S. Jackman, and D. Rivers (2004). The statistical analysis of roll call data. American
  Political Science Review 98 (2), 355­370.

Clinton, J., I. Katznelson, and J. Lapinski (2014). Where measures meet history: Party polariza-
  tion during the new deal and fair deal. Governing in a Polarized Age: Elections, Parties, and
  Representation in America .

Cox, G. W. and M. D. McCubbins (1993). Legislative Leviathan: Party Government in the House,
  Volume 23. Univ of California Press.

Cox, G. W. and M. D. McCubbins (2005). Setting the agenda: Responsible party government in
  the US House of Representatives. Cambridge University Press.

Davis, S. J. (2019). Rising policy uncertainty. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Deering, C. J. and S. S. Smith (1997). Committees in congress. Sage.

Evans, C. L. (2011). Growing the vote: Majority party whipping in the us house, 1955-2002. In
  10th Annual Congress and History Conference, Brown University, June, pp. 9­10.

Evans, C. L. (2018). The Whips: Building Party Coalitions in Congress. University of Michigan
  Press.

Fern´
    andez-Val, I. and M. Weidner (2016). Individual and time effects in nonlinear panel models
  with large n, t. Journal of Econometrics 192 (1), 291­312.

Fiorina, M. P., S. J. Abrams, and J. C. Pope (2005). Culture war. The myth of a polarized
  America .

Forgette, R. (2004). Party caucuses and coordination: Assessing caucus activity and party effects.
  Legislative Studies Quarterly 29 (3), 407­430.

                                                32
Gentzkow, M. (2016). Polarization in 2016. Toulouse Network of Information Technology white
 paper .

Gentzkow, M., J. M. Shapiro, and M. Taddy (2019). Measuring group differences in high-
 dimensional choices: method and application to congressional speech. Econometrica 87 (4),
 1307­1340.

Goodall, C. (1991). Procrustes methods in the statistical analysis of shape. Journal of the Royal
 Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological) 53 (2), 285­321.

Grossmann, M. and D. A. Hopkins (2016). Asymmetric politics: Ideological Republicans and group
  interest Democrats. Oxford University Press.

Heckman, J. J. and J. M. Snyder (1997). Linear probability models of the demand for attributes
  with an empirical application to estimating the preferences of legislators. The RAND Journal
  of Economics 28.

Iyengar, S., Y. Lelkes, M. Levendusky, N. Malhotra, and S. J. Westwood (2019). The origins and
  consequences of affective polarization in the united states. Annual Review of Political Science 22,
  129­146.

Iyengar, S. and S. J. Westwood (2015). Fear and loathing across party lines: New evidence on
  group polarization. American Journal of Political Science 59 (3), 690­707.

Jenkins, J. A. (2000). Examining the robustness of ideological voting: evidence from the confed-
  erate house of representatives. American Journal of Political Science , 811­822.

Jenkins, J. A. (2011). The evolution of party leadership. In The Oxford Handbook of the American
  Congress, pp. 684­711. Citeseer.

Kendall, D. G. (1989). A survey of the statistical theory of shape. Statistical Science , 87­99.

Kingma, D. P. and J. Ba (2014). Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980 .

Krehbiel, K. (1993). Where's the party? British Journal of Political Science 23 (2), 235­266.

Krehbiel, K. (1998). Pivotal politics: A theory of US lawmaking. University of Chicago Press.

Krehbiel, K. (1999). Paradoxes of parties in congress. Legislative Studies Quarterly , 31­64.

Krehbiel, K. (2000). Party discipline and measures of partisanship. American Journal of Political
  Science , 212­227.

                                                 33
Levitt, S. D. (1996). How do senators vote? disentangling the role of voter preferences, party
  affiliation, and senator ideology. The American Economic Review 86 (3), 425­441.

Luntz, F. (2007). Words that work: It's not what you say, it's what people hear. Hachette UK.

Mayhew, D. R. (2004). Congress: The electoral connection. Yale university press.

McCarty, N. (2016). Polarization, congressional dysfunction, and constitutional change sympo-
 sium. Indiana Law Review 50, 223.

McCarty, N. (2019). Polarization: What Everyone Needs to Know. Oxford University Press.

McCarty, N., K. T. Poole, and H. Rosenthal (2001). The hunt for party discipline in congress.
 American Political Science Review 95 (3), 673­687.

McCarty, N., K. T. Poole, and H. Rosenthal (2006). Polarized America: The Dance of Ideology
 and Unequal Riches. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Meinke, S. R. (2008). Who whips? party government and the house extended whip networks.
 American Politics Research 36 (5), 639­668.

Mian, A., A. Sufi, and F. Trebbi (2014, 04). Resolving debt overhang: Political constraints in the
 aftermath of financial crises. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 6 (2), 1­28.

Moskowitz, D. J., J. Rogowski, and J. M. S. Jr. (2017). Parsing party polarization. mimeo.

Pastor, L. and P. Veronesi (2012). Uncertainty about government policy and stock prices. The
  Journal of Finance 67 (4), 1219­1264.

Polborn, M. K. and J. M. Snyder Jr (2017). Party polarization in legislatures with office-motivated
  candidates. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (3), 1509­1550.

Poole, K. T. and H. Rosenthal (1984). The polarization of american politics. Journal of Poli-
  tics 46 (4), 1061­1079.

Poole, K. T. and H. Rosenthal (1997). Congress: A Political-Economic History of Roll Call Voting.
  New York: Oxford University Press.

Poole, K. T. and H. Rosenthal (2001). D-nominate after 10 years: A comparative update to
  congress: A political-economic history of roll-call voting. Legislative Studies Quarterly , 5­29.

Poole, K. T., H. Rosenthal, et al. (1997). Congress: A Political-economic History of Roll Call
  Voting. Oxford University Press on Demand.

                                                34
Potthoff, R. F. (2018). Estimating ideal points from roll-call data: explore principal components
  analysis, especially for more than one dimension? Social Sciences 7 (1), 12.

Rajan, R. G. (2011). Fault lines: How hidden fractures still threaten the world economy. princeton
 University press.

Rivers, D. (2003). Identification of multidimensional spatial voting models. Typescript. Stanford
  University .

Robison, J. and K. J. Mullinix (2016). Elite polarization and public opinion: How polarization is
  communicated and its effects. Political Communication 33 (2), 261­282.

Rohde, D. W. (1991). Parties and Leaders in the Postreform House. University of Chicago Press.

Schneider, J. and M. L. Koempel (2012). Congressional Deskbook: The Practical and Comprehen-
  sive Guide to Congress. The Capitol Net Inc.

Senate, U. S. (2020). Majority and minority leaders. Online, Retrieved on Senate.gov on June 25,
  2020 .

Sinclair, B. (1992). The emergence of strong leadership in the 1980s house of representatives. The
  Journal of Politics 54 (3), 657­684.

Sinclair, B. (2014). Party wars: Polarization and the politics of national policy making, Volume 10.
  University of Oklahoma Press.

Smith, S. S. (2007). Party influence in Congress. Cambridge University Press.

Snyder, J. M. and T. Groseclose (2000). Estimating party influence in congressional roll-call
  voting. American Journal of Political Science , 193­211.

Stonecash, J. (2018). Diverging parties: Social change, realignment, and party polarization. Rout-
  ledge.

Sundquist, J. L. (1988). Needed: A political theory for the new era of coalition government in the
  united states. Political Science Quarterly 103 (4), 613­635.

Theriault, S. M. (2008). Party Polarization in Congress. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Theriault, S. M. (2013). The Gingrich senators: The roots of partisan warfare in Congress. Oxford
 University Press.




                                                35
United States House of Representatives History, A. and Archives (2020a). Democratic whips (1899
 to present). Online, Retrieved on House.gov on June 25, 2020 .

United States House of Representatives History, A. and Archives (2020b). Majority leaders of the
 house (1899 to present). Online, Retrieved on House.gov on June 25, 2020 .




                                              36
6   Tables and Figures

       Figure 1: Party Leaders Whipping in Opposite Directions in 2 Dimensions




       Figure 2: Party Leaders Whipping in the Same Direction in 2 Dimensions




                                         37
                           Figure 3: Roll Call Votes Across the Sample
                                             (a) Senate




                                             (b) House




Notes: The figures present summary statistics on the key variation necessary for the identification
of party discipline. They show, for each Congress, how many total roll calls there are, and how
those votes are split between roll calls in which both party leaders vote in favor of the new policy,
and those in which they vote in opposite directions.

                                                 38
              Figure 4: Party Discipline Over Time, 1927-2019 - Senate 2D Model




                      max
Notes: Estimates of yp    shown for each party, Democrats in filled blue, Republicans in unfilled
red. Party-specific smoothed fit (Loess) curves with span 0.7 are also shown.




                                               39
Figure 5: Party Discipline in the 1D Model
                (a) Senate




                (b) House




                   40
Figure 6: Ideological Polarization Between Senate Members, 1927-2019 (1st Dimension) - Senate
                                           2D Model




Notes: Estimates of the distance between party medians in the 1st dimension for the Senate 2D
Model are shown, together with a smoothed fit (Loess) curve with span 0.5.


Figure 7: Ideological Polarization Between Senate Members, 1927-2019 (2nd Dimension) - Senate
                                           2D Model




Notes: Estimates of the distance between party medians in the 2nd dimension for the Senate 2D
Model are shown, together with a smoothed fit (Loess) curve with span 0.5.




                                             41
  Figure 8: Share of Polarization Attributable to Party Discipline (Relative to 1st Dimension
                                 Ideologies) - Senate 2D Model




Notes: The estimated share of polarization attributed to party discipline is shown for each
Congress, computed by the total amount of party discipline divided          by that amount plus the
                                                                    max +y max
                                                                   yD
distance between party medians in the first dimension (i.e. ymax +ymax    R
                                                                       +(m,R -m,D )
                                                                                    ), together with a
                                                             D     R
smoothed fit (Loess) curve with span 0.5.


  Figure 9: Ideological Polarization Over Time (1st dimension), 1927-2019 - Senate 2D Model




                                                 42
  Figure 10: Ideological Polarization Between Senate Members, 1927-2019 - Senate 2D Model




Notes: Kernel density estimates of the ideological parameters for the first dimension from the
Senate 2D Model across Congresses.




                                             43
  Figure 11: Ideological Polarization Between Senate Members, 1927-2019 - Senate 2D Model




Notes: Kernel density estimates of the ideological parameters for the second dimension from the
Senate 2D Model across Congresses.




                                              44
Figure 12: Trends in Ideological Polarization: Misspecified Model vs. DW-Nominate - Senate 2D
                                              Model
                                     (a) First Dimension




                                    (b) Second Dimension




Notes: The two graphs compare the ideological polarization (difference between estimated party
medians) across time for the misspecified model (no whipping) and DW-Nominate.




                                             45
          Figure 13: Estimated (Senate 2D) Model vs. DW-Nominate, 1st Dimension




Notes: Scatter plot of first dimension estimated ideologies versus those from DW-Nominate, pooled
across all Congresses. Democrats are shown in blue, Republicans are shown in red. The correlation
is 0.857.


         Figure 14: Misspecified (Senate 2D) Model vs. DW-Nominate, 1st Dimension




Notes: Scatter plot of the first dimension estimated ideologies of the misspecified model (no
whipping) versus those from DW-Nominate, pooled across all Congresses. Democrats are shown
in blue, Republicans are shown in red. The correlation is 0.910.



                                               46
          Figure 15: Estimated (Senate 2D) Model vs. DW-Nominate, 2nd Dimension




Notes: Scatter plot of the second dimension estimated ideologies versus those from DW-Nominate,
pooled across all Congresses. Democrats are shown in blue, Republicans are shown in red. The
correlation is 0.435.


         Figure 16: Misspecified (Senate 2D) Model vs. DW-Nominate, 2nd Dimension




Notes: Scatter plot of the second dimension estimated ideologies of the misspecified model (no
whipping) versus those from DW-Nominate, pooled across all Congresses. Democrats are shown
in blue, Republicans are shown in red. The correlation is 0.365.



                                              47
      Figure 17: Model Fit: Share of Votes Correctly Predicted in the Senate (2D Model)




Notes: Average share of votes that are correctly predicted in each Congress. A vote is considered
to be correctly predicted if, under our estimated parameters, the probability of a
congressmember voting as observed in the data is larger than 0.5.


                                                  max    max
Figure 18: Robustness of Total Party Discipline (yD   + yR   ) Across Whipping Assumptions -
                                      Senate 2D Model




                                               48
Figure 19: Robustness of the Estimates of Party Discipline Across Whipping Assumptions -
                                    Senate 2D Model




                                          49
                    Figure 20: Variance of Estimated Ideologies over Time




Notes: Each panel shows the variance of estimated ideologies within party over time.


                     Table 1: Number of Parameters Across Specifications

                    Model            Ideology    Party Discipline   Roll Call   Total
            Senate - 1 Dimensional      789            92            25824      26705
            House - 1 Dimensional      3938            92            32763      36793
            Senate - 2 Dimensional     1568            92            22314      23974




                                                50
Appendix A: Identification
This Appendix proves the Identification of our model in two dimensions.
   For It = 1, we can rewrite (5) as:
                                                   1
            ¯t  Q1
 Pr Yit = 1|q       ¯t ; i , yp
                 p, x
                              max
                                  , mt =         1+m2
                                                          i
                                                         (2      i
                                                            - mt 1                  max
                                                                   - bt ) + Wp,t × yp
                                                     t


                                                              ¯t  Q1
Let us use the simplified notation, Pr (Yit = 1) = Pr Yit = 1|q          ¯t ; i , yp
                                                                      p, x
                                                                                   max
                                                                                       , mt . This term
is the likelihood component of politician i voting Yes on a bill t if It = 1. It is more convenient
for us to work with the standardized likelihood:

                                               1
                   -1 (Pr (Yit = 1)) =             i
                                                   2      i
                                                     - mt 1                max
                                                            - bt + Wp,t × yp   ,                      (8)
                                            1 + m2
                                                 t


which makes explicit the unique correspondence between data (on the left hand side) and model
parameters (on the right hand side).
    Using Assumption ID3(i), we begin by comparing the probability of voting Yes on the normal-
izing bill 0 between any two politicians, i and j , belonging to the same party:

                                                                        j
                          -1 (Pr (Yi,0 = 1)) - -1 (Pr (Yj,0 = 1)) = 2
                                                                    i
                                                                      - 2

    It is immediate that with j = 0 (the normalizing agent in Assumption ID2(i)), we obtain
                   i
identification of 2  for all i. In the absence of this normalization, we would only identify the
                                                                                               i N
differences of second dimension ideologies across legislators. Intuitively, identification of {2 }i=1
relies on the normalizing bill m0 = 0. This bill is such that differences in voting behavior only
come from the second preference dimension.
    For It = 0, we have instead

                                                 1
                 -1 (1 - Pr (Yit = 1)) =             i
                                                     2      i
                                                       - mt 1                max
                                                              - bt + Wp,t × yp   .                    (9)
                                              1 + m2
                                                   t

One can see immediately that the difference in standardized likelihoods using (9) again identifies
                                      i N
the second dimension ideologies, {2    }i=1 .
    Given the second dimension ideologies, we can identify the direction, I0 , of the normalized bill
by comparing the standardized likelihoods of two members of the same party with different second
dimension ideologies (which must exist for at least one party by Assumption ID1). Without loss,
                                        i     j
consider two members, i and j , with 2    > 2   . If It = 1 then (8) implies P r (Yit = 1) > Pr (Yjt = 1).
On the other hand, if I0 = 0, then (9) implies the opposite. Thus, knowledge of the relative size
of the voting probabilities identifies I0 , which also implies knowledge of Wp,0 .


                                                   51
    From the normalizing bill, for two politicians i and h that belong to different parties, who whip
in opposite directions, we obtain:

                                -1 (Pr (Yi0 = 1)) - -1 (Pr (Yh0 = 1)) =                          (10)
                              i   h           max           max
                            = 2 - 2 + WD,0 × yD   - WR,0 × yR
                              i   h     max    max
                            = 2 - 2 ± (yD   + yR   )

                 max    max
which implies yD     + yR   is known and uniquely identified in this case.
   If, instead, in the normalizing bill, the two parties whip in the same direction we obtain:

                               -1 (Pr (Yi,0 = 1)) - -1 (Pr (Yh,0 = 1)) =                         (11)
                             i   h           max           max
                           = 2 - 2 + WD,0 × yD   + WR,0 × yR
                             i   h     max    max
                           = 2 - 2 ± (yD   - yR   )

                 max    max
which implies yD     - yR    is known and uniquely identified in this case.
     Let W0 denote the subset of bills in which the two parties whip in the same (opposing) direction
if they whip in the same (opposing) direction on bill 0. Within the set, W0 , knowledge of It implies
                                max            max
knowledge of yt  WD,t × yD           ± WR,t × yR   , either from (10) or (11).
     We now identify the cutlines and directions for the subset of bills, W0 . Consider politicians
                                                                               0 0          k k
0 and k 's vote decisions on an arbitrary bill, t in W0 . The ideal points, (1  , 2 ) and (1 , 2 ) are
                                    k
known for these members, with 2 having been identified. In our estimation procedure, we assume
that the two politicians are members of opposing parties (D and R respectively). The standardized
likelihoods are then given by:

                  -1 (Pr (Y0t = 1)) = ±        1
                                             1+m2
                                                      0
                                                     (2      0
                                                        - mt 1                  max
                                                               - bt ) ± WD,t × yD
                                                 t
                                                                                                 (12)
                  -1 (Pr (Ykt = 1)) = ±       1
                                            1+m2
                                                     k
                                                     2      k
                                                       - mt 1                max
                                                              - bt ± WR,t × yR   ,
                                                t


where the sign of the RHS depends upon It .
   It is convenient to create a hypothetical member of party D, k , with identical voting probability
                                                                           k     k      k     k
to member k of party R. This (artificial) member has known ideal points 1    = 1   and 2   = 2  -yt
because yt has been identified for bills in W0 . The standardized likelihood for k satisfies




                                                    52
                                   1
-1 (Pr (Ykt = 1)) = ±                  k
                                       2      k
                                         - mt 1                max
                                                - bt ± WR,t × yR
                                1 + m2
                                     t

                                   1   k      k                max           max          max
                       = ±             2 - mt 1 - bt ± WR,t × yR   ± WD,t × yD    WD,t × yD
                                1 + m2
                                     t

                                   1   k      k                max
                       = ±             2 - mt 1 - bt ± WD,t × yD                                             (13)
                                1 + m2
                                     t


    The set of points in the (1 , 2 ) space that are at distance -1 (Pr (Yit = 1)) from i's ideal point
define a circle centered at        ¯i . Allowing for both It = 0 and It = 1, the equations for member 0 in
(12) and member k in (13) define the tangents to each of the two circles for members 0 and k . At
most four (mt , ^  bt ) pairs define cutlines that are tangent to both circles: at most two outer tangents
that place members 0 and k on the same side of a cutline, and at most two inner tangents that
place the members 0 and k on opposite sides of a cutline. Figure 21 presents a visualization of
the possible tangent cutlines.
    For an outer tangent such that both members lie on the same side of it, we have 2            i
                                                                                                   < mt 1  i
                                                                                                              +^ bt
for i = 0, k , or 2    i
                         > mt 1  i
                                    +^  bt for i = 0, k . These inequalities imply Pr (Yit = 1) < 1 2
                                                                                                      for both
                                    1
members or Pr (Yit = 1) > 2 for both members.
    For an inner tangent such that one member lies on each side, we instead must have Pr (Y0t = 1) <
1
2
   and Pr (Yk t = 1) > 1    2
                              , or Pr (Y0t = 1) > 1    2
                                                         and Pr (Yk t = 1) < 1 2
                                                                                 .
    Therefore, given knowledge of the voting probabilities, at most two of the four possible cutlines
(with an appropriate It associated with that cutline) can simultaneously satisfy the equations for
the standardized likelihood of 0 and k : either two cutlines that form outer tangents, or two
cutlines that form inner tangents.43
    Assumption ID1 allows us to pin down mt , bt , andIt uniquely from the two remaining possibil-
ities by means of contradiction. Suppose, to the contrary, that two pairs of solutions, (m                      
                                                                                                      t , bt , It )
and (m              
         t , bt , It ), satisfy the two standardized likelihood equations for 0 and k (and therefore
k ). Recall that each associated cutline must be tangent to both of the circles centered on each
member's ideal point.
    Now consider the possible locations of the other members of party D. To ensure (m                           
                                                                                                      t , bt , It )
is indistinguishable from (m                                                ¯i            -1
                                      t , bt , It ), the circle centered on  with radius     (Pr (Yit = 1)) for
each member, i, must also be tangent to both potential cutlines. Following the Locus theorem,
  43
     In the two limiting cases in which one party's cutline passes exactly through its respective member's ideal
point, the two possible cutlines are such that they pass on opposite sides of the other member's ideal point. The
appropriate cutline is then immediately identified by knowing whether the other member's voting probability is
greater or less than one-half.


                                                       53
a generic D member i must then lie on the line, A, passing through               ¯0 and the intersection of
the two potential cutlines or on the line orthogonal to A, A . Points on these two lines are the
only points that ensure i is equidistant from both cutlines, so that the circle associated with i is
tangent to both.
    We can rule out points on the line A . If the two potential cutlines are outer tangents to the
circles of 0 and k , then if a member i is located on A , he lies on the same side as 0 and k
for one cutline and on the opposite side for the other. But, we know whether each of the three
probabilities, Pr (Y0t = 1) , Pr (Yk t = 1) , Pr (Yit = 1), is greater or less than one-half.44 If all are
on the same side, all must be greater than one-half or all must be less. If i is on the opposite side,
then his probability must be greater than one-half if the other two are less than one-half, or vice
versa. Thus, if i lies on A , we can distinguish between the two pairs of solutions, a contradiction.
Similarly, if the two potential cutlines are inner tangents to the circles of 0 and k then for one of
the cutlines, i is on the same side as 0 (and opposite to k ) and for the other i is on the same side
as k (and opposite to 0). Knowing which voting probabilities are greater or less than one-half
again allows us to tell the solutions apart.
    We have then shown that if we have two potential solutions, all members of party D must lie
on the line A. One can construct an identical argument for party R: if there are two potential
cutlines, all members of party R must be collinear. But, all members of either party being collinear
violates Assumption ID1. Thus, the triplet (mt , ^    bt , It ) is uniquely identified for all bills in the set
W0 .
    Given uniqueness of the solution, Pr (Y0t = 1) greater or less than one-half provides It .
    mt can then be recovered from the difference of the normalized likelihoods of members 0 and
k:

                                   -1 (Pr (Y0t = 1)) - -1 (Pr (Ykt = 1))
                                            1   0   k       0   k
                               = ±            2
                                                2 - 2 - mt (1 - 1 ) + yt
                                         1 + mt

because the ideological parameters and yt are known. Finally, ^   bt  ± 1+1  m2
                                                                                bt  WD,t × yDmax
                                                                                                 is
                                                                              t
identified through the normalized likelihood of member 0 in (12), where its sign depends on the
known It .
    Now consider bill s which, by assumption ID3(ii) is assumed to satisfy ms = 0 and is contained
in the set W0 . The difference in the normalized likelihoods of member 0 and an arbitrary member
  44
    Notice that Pr (Yk t = 1) = Pr (Ykt = 1) by construction, so the hypothetical vote probabilities of k are known
because k 's vote probabilities are known.




                                                        54
i of party R on this bill is given by

                                                                      1
               -1 (Pr (Y0s = 1)) - -1 (Pr (Yis = 1)) =                  2
                                                                           i
                                                                          -2      i
                                                                             + ms 1 + ys
                                                                   1 + ms

          i
so that 1   is identified for all members of party R, because all of the other parameters have been
identified. For members of party D, the argument is the same except that ys does not enter the
equation.
    Having identified all of the  parameters, turn to the set of bills not in W0 . Consider the
normalized likelihoods of member 0 and another member from party D, j ,:

                     -1 (Pr (Y0s = 1)) = ±           1
                                                   1+m2
                                                            0
                                                           (2      0
                                                              - mt 1                  max
                                                                     - bt ) ± WD,t × yD
                                                       t
                                                            j      j
                     -1 (Pr (Yjs = 1)) = ±           1
                                                   1+m2
                                                            2 - mt 1                max
                                                                     - bt ± WD,t × yD
                                                       t


    We can repeat the above arguments that utilized 0 and k 's normalized likelihoods to identify
                                                                                          T
mt , ^
     bt , and It now that j 's ideal point, ¯j , has been identified. Thus, mt , ^
                                                                                 bt , I t   is identified.
                                                                                                  t=1
                                   max        max
    Finally, we can identify bt , yD   , and yR   . Recall that, from the normalized bill, we have either
(10) if the parties whip in opposite directions or (11) if the parties whip in the same direction.
From Assumption ID4, we can perform the same exercise on another bill in which the parties
whip differently (in opposite directions if they whip in the same direction on bill 0, or vice versa),
so that we have both the sum and the difference of the y        ¯max parameters, thus identifying both
individually. Given yD max
                           , mt , and It , we can then recover bt from ^ bt  ± 1+1     b  WD,t × yD
                                                                                    m2 t
                                                                                                      max
                                                                                              t

for all t.45
  45
    In the version of the model in which parties only whip (in opposite directions) when the party leaderships
                                                                                         max      max
disagree, we can't separately identify the party discipline parameters, but can recover yD    + yR    and each bt .
From member 0's normalized likelihood on bills that are not whipped, we obtain bt for these bills. On bills that are
                                                                                              max     max
whipped, the difference between normalized likelihoods of members of opposing parties gives yR     + yD   . Finally,
           max      max
assuming yR     = yD (without loss because only the sum is identifiable), we can recover bt for bills that are
whipped.




                                                           55
                 Figure 21: Identification Assumptions in a Numerical Example




Appendix B: DW-Nominate's Lack of Identification in Two
Dimensions (or more)
In this section, we provide new insights as to the lack of identification of DW-Nominate (Dynam-
ically Weighted Nominal Three-Step Estimation) in two dimensions. In Section B.1, we formally
prove (building on, but correcting the proof in Potthoff 2018), that W-Nominate is not identified.
This result immediately extends to DW-Nominate, as it is a generalization of W-Nominate with
dynamically changing ideal points (i.e. preferences linearly changing in time). In Section B.2, we
show that, even if the utility weight in W-Nominate were constrained to 1, the Gaussian utility
function assumed in Nominate makes it very difficult to determine the number of normalizations
necessary for it to be identified. This section builds on the work of Rivers (2003), which is, to
date, the best formal discussion of identification of multidimensional spatial models. Finally, in
Section B.3, we consider the effect of normalizing members' ideologies to lie within a unit circle:
the only clearly specified normalization that Nominate imposes.
    As background, the current version of DW-Nominate, updates active members' ideologies and
estimates the cutline parameters for new bills as they become available (Boche et al., 2018). To
do so, it holds constant inactive members' ideologies and the cutlines of previous bills (no "back-
propagation"). New ideology and cutline estimates all rely on previous runs of DW-Nominate for


                                                56
identification. To quote Boche et al. (2018), p.24, "...By effectively locking in place the locations
that Poole last estimated for past members, we guarantee that our scores maintain compatibility
with the widely used DW-Nominate scores with which scholars are familiar." Thus, unfortunately,
beyond the unit circle normalization that DW-Nominate imposes, we do not know what other
normalizations were initially imposed. As we show, however, no matter what these normalizations
were, DW-Nominate is not identified.


B.1: Lack of Identification of W-Nominate
In W-Nominate, the `W' stands for `weighted'. It normalizes the utility weight in the first dimen-
sion to be one and allows the weight in second dimension, w2 , to be estimated. Here, we prove that
this model is not identified by providing a transformation that can change the rank ordering of
members in either dimension. Importantly, the transformation we provide is not a combination of
a rotation, scale, and translation and thus poses a problem even if the rotation, scale, and location
of the estimates are constrained via suitable normalization (as in our work).
    Consider the likelihood argument in Carroll et al. (2009):

             P r(Yi,t = 1) =  [u(i , xt ) - u(i , qt )] =
                                    1      1 2 w2        2 2  1      1 2 w2       2 2
                              e- 2 (i -xt ) - 2 (i -xt ) - e- 2 (i -qt ) - 2 (i -qt )
                                        1            2           1            2




    where (·) is the CDF of the standard normal distribution. The vector of parameters of interest
          1
is  = {i    , x1    1 2      2 2
               t , qt , i , xt , qt , w2 }.
    Consider s > 0 and 0 < r < 1 and define the following candidate (nonlinear) transformation
of the parameter vector, which can be proven to not be a rotation (other than in the special case
w2 = s = 1):
                                        
                               ~1 = 1 r - 2 w2 (1 - r)
                                 i    i       i
                                        
                               ~ t = xt r - x2
                               x 1    1
                                               t w2 (1 - r)
                                 1    1
                                              2
                               q
                               ~t  = qt  r - qt  w2 (1 - r)
                               ~2 = s × 1 (1 - r) + 2 w2 r
                                i             i             i
                                                               
                               ~2
                               x          1
                                 t = s × xt       (1 - r) + x2t w2 r

                                 2        1                  2
                               q
                               ~t  = s × qt       (1 - r) + qt  w2 r
                                       1
                               w
                               ~2 =
                                       s2




                                                  57
To check that within this class of transformations one obtains the same likelihood of the vote data:

                            1   ~1   1 2- w
                                          ~2    ~2 -x     2  1 ~1            2       ~2
                                                                                     w     ~2 -q     2
                             ~t )
                    e- 2 (i -x                 ( i ~t ) - e- 2 (i -q   )                  ( i ~t )
                                                      2            ~t1           -               2
                                           2                                          2                  =
                                 1       1 2 - w2               2 1                  2       w2             2
                         e- 2 (i -xt )              (i   t ) - e- 2 (i -qt )                      (i   t)
                                     1               2 -x2           1   1               -         2 -q 2
                                                2                                             2




it suffices to show that:
                                                                                                     2                           2
                                                                                     ~1 - x
                                                                                          ~1             +w
                                                                                                          ~2 ~2 - x
                                                                                                                  ~2                 =
                                                                                      i     t                 i     t



                                                    1
                                                           2
                                                                                                                                     2
                                                    i  r - i          w2 (1 - r) - x1      2
                                                                                    t r + xt                          w2 (1 - r)
                        1                          2                                                                             2
                               1
                    +      s × i         (1 - r) + i w 2 r - s × x1
                                                                  t                               (1 - r) + x2
                                                                                                             t w2 r                  =
                        s2

     1
                                                      2                                                                          2
     i - x1
          t
                     2
                 r - i - x2
                          t          w2 (1 - r)            +        1
                                                                    i - x1
                                                                         t
                                                                                           2
                                                                                 (1 - r) + i - x2
                                                                                                t                         w2 r       =


                  1         2                    2                                           
                  i - x1
                       t
                                    2
                                r + i - x2
                                         t
                                                                    1
                                                     w2 (1 - r) - 2 i - x1
                                                                         t
                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                  r i - x2
                                                                                                         t  w2 (1 - r)
              1         2                              2                                                     
            + i -    x1
                      t
                                      2
                            (1 - r) + i -           x2
                                                     t
                                                                        1
                                                              w2 r + 2  i - x1
                                                                             t
                                                                                                     2
                                                                                             (1 - r) i - x2
                                                                                                          t    w2 r =


                                                                                              1                 2                    2
                                                                                              i - x1
                                                                                                   t
                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                    + w2 i - x2
                                                                                                                              t


    This proves that W-Nominate in two dimensions is not identified up to this class of transfor-
mations, which is broader than than the class of transformation that only rotate, scale, and/or
change the location of the ideal points.
    To show how this class of transformations is particularly damaging, consider three individuals
                                                                                                 1
i = a, b, c, each more conservative than the other with respect to the first dimension (i.e. 0 < a <
  1     1
b < c ). Suppose the ideal points of a and c are known. We can show that, for an infinite set
of values of r, either we can achieve the incorrect ranking, ~1 < 1 < 1 , or the incorrect ranking,
                                                              b     a     c
  1    1     ~1
a < c < b , along the first dimension.
    Consider the proposed transformation:
                                                
                                         ~1 = 1 r - 2
                                                                      w2 (1 - r).
                                          b   b     b


       2
   For b  0, the inequality
                                         1
                                                2                            1
                                         b  r - b               w2 (1 - r) < a




                                                                58
is always satisfied for 0 < r < 1 sufficiently small and the inequality

                                        1
                                               2                   1
                                        b  r - b      w2 (1 - r) < c

is always satisfied for any r. Then,  ~1 < 1 < 1 , which is the incorrect ranking.
                                       b   a   c
                 c1
         2
    For b  < -    w2
                     < 0, the inequality

                                        1   1
                                                   2
                                        c < b  r - b         w2 (1 - r)

                                                    1
is always satisfied for r sufficiently small. Then, a   1
                                                      < c <~1 , which is the incorrect ranking.
                                                            b
           c1              1
                           a
                   2
    For - w2 < b < - w2 < 0, the inequality
                          


                                        1   1
                                                   2
                                        a > b  r - b         w2 (1 - r)

is always satisfied for r sufficiently small. Then, ~1 < 1 < 1 , which is the incorrect ranking.
                                                     b   a   c
           a1
                   2
    For - w2 < b < 0, both inequalities
          


                                      1   1
                                                 2
                                      a < b  r - b          w2 (1 - r)
                                      1   1
                                                 2
                                      c > b  r - b          w2 (1 - r)

are always satisfied. Thus, only in this case do we obtain the correct ranking, a  1
                                                                                     <  ~1 < 1 .
                                                                                         b    c
    Notice that we can apply a similar argument along the second preference dimension as well,
further restricting the set of individuals who would be correctly ranked along both dimensions.
    Because the specific case under examination is not known, this result implies full indeterminacy
of the ranking of the ideology parameter estimates under this class of transformations. Specifically,
the ranking along one of the two dimensions can be wrong for an infinite number of transformations.


B.2: Identification of Nominate
The previous section proves lack of identification for nonlinear transformations when, as in W-
Nominate and DW-Nominate, the utility weight in the second dimension is estimated. Here, we
discuss the identification of Nominate, which constrains all utility weights to be equal to one.46
    In Section B.2.1, we consider the problem of identifying members' ideologies under the as-
sumption that some of the cutline parameters, x ¯t and q
                                                       ¯t , are known. In Section B.2.2, we discuss
the reverse problem: identifying the cutline parameters assuming some of the ideology parameters
are known. Sections B.2.1 and B.2.2 are illustrative of the interim steps of the Nominate method
  46
    We discuss the difficulties a Gaussian utility function creates even when  = 1 is assumed (Nominate estimates
the parameter  as well, creating a further burden for identification on top of the ones discussed here).

                                                       59
(Nominal Three-Step Estimation), where either the cutlines or the ideal points are taken as given
and the remaining set of parameters are estimated, iterating until convergence.

B.3.1: Known Bill Parameters

Making use of the Gaussian preferences employed in Nominate, let us start by highlighting that,
for known roll call "0"

                                             -1 [P r(Yi,0 = 1)] = u(i , x
                                                                        ¯0 ) - u(i , q
                                                                                     ¯0 )
                                             1      2         2      1         2          2

                                          e 2 ( i 0) ( i 0) - e 2 ( i 0 ) ( i 0 )
                                           -    1
                                                -x1      2
                                                      +  -x 2      -      1
                                                                          -q 1     2
                                                                                 +  -q 2



                                                  1 2                                          1 2
is a highly-nonlinear equation in two unknowns (i  , i ). A generalized cubic equation in (i    , i )
follows from a second-order Taylor expansion of the difference in the deterministic utilities on the
RHS for each vote:

                                                        -1 [P r(Yi,0 = 1)] =
                                       1      1 -x1 2 +  2 -x2 2            1 2 +  2 -q 2 2
                                      -2
                                      e      (i   0)   ( i 0 ) - e- 12 ( i
                                                                        1 -q0 ) ( i 0) =
                            1     n                                                    n                                         n
                         (- 2 )            1          2                        2                             2               2
                   n=0     n!
                                          (i - x1      2    2
                                                0 ) + (i - x0 )
                                                                                              1
                                                                                           - (i    1
                                                                                                - q0      2
                                                                                                     ) - (i    2
                                                                                                            - q0 )                   
          2        j            2           2                     2                        2                 2 2          2               2 2
    1
   -2     j =1     i - xj
                        0           -       j =1
                                                    j
                                                    i    j
                                                      - q0            +   1
                                                                          8                j =1
                                                                                                  j
                                                                                                  i - xj
                                                                                                       0           -      j =1
                                                                                                                                 j
                                                                                                                                 i    j
                                                                                                                                   - q0         =
            2                                                                              2            2          2
    -1
     2      j =1    xj    j
                     0 - q0           xj    j    j
                                       0 + q0 - 2i                × 1-         1
                                                                               4           j =1    xj
                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                               j
                                                                                                            + q0          j
                                                                                                                       - 2i xj    j   j
                                                                                                                             0 + q0 - i


It is therefore possible to see that, even using approximations, a single normalization on a "0" bill
is insufficient to uniquely pin down the (i   , i ) unknowns from the data -1 [P r(Yi,0 = 1)].
                                             1 2

    Notice further that even for a quadratic loss function, instead of a Gaussian utility function, a
single roll call normalization would still be insufficient for an unique mapping:

                                                           -1 [P r(Yi,0 = 1)] =
                       1  1                     2                     2            1                    2                2
                      -2 (i - x1      2    2
                               0 ) + (i - x0 )                                +    2
                                                                                            1
                                                                                           (i    1
                                                                                              - q0      2
                                                                                                   ) + (i    2
                                                                                                          - q0 )             =
                                                    2       j             2                2                 2
                                           1
                                          -2        j =1    i - xj
                                                                 0            -            j =1
                                                                                                  j
                                                                                                  i    j
                                                                                                    - q0         =
                                                           2
                                               -1
                                                2          j =1   xj    j
                                                                   0 - q0              xj    j    j
                                                                                        0 + q0 - 2i


    To see the extent of the normalizations needed for different classes of individual utility func-
tions, consider full knowledge of all policy issues x
                                                    ¯t , q
                                                         ¯t for the set of T bill upon which a politician
i votes, which can be treated as data. Then we can write the system of polynomials in for the
                       1 2
unknown ideology, (i    , i ):

                                                                              60
         
                                                       1 2        2 2
         
          -1 [P r(Yi,0 = 1)] = 0
                               0
                                  + 10 1
                                      i + 20 2
                                             i + 30
                                                    (i  ) + 40
                                                               (i  ) + 50 1 2
                                                                         i i + ...
          ...
         
                                                      1 2        2 2
          -1 [P r(Yi,t = 1)] = 0
                               t    t 1
                                  + 1     t 2
                                      i + 2      t
                                             i + 3 (i  ) + 4t
                                                              (i  ) + 5t 1 2
                                                                        i i + ...                                   (14)
          ...
         
         -1 [P r(Y = 1)] =  T +  T 1 +  T 2 +  T (1 )2 +  T (2 )2 +  T 1 2 + ...
         
                   i,T          0     1 i   2 i     3    i     4     i    5 i i


    Here, full knowledge of all x     ¯t = (x1         2
                                                 t , xt ) , q
                                                                    1 2
                                                             ¯t = (qt , qt ) delivers what essentially amounts to bill-
                t   t  t   t   t     t
specific data {0 , 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , ...}, and (14) remains a system of T (typically nonlinear) equations
                                         1 2
in the two original unknowns (i           , i ). Generally, there cannot be any theoretical assurance of a
                                                                                                                  1 2 
unique exact mapping from the data on the LHS of the equations in the system to a unique (i                        , i )
for every i beyond the linear system case. However, operating under the hypothesis that the model
                                                                                                                   1 2
is correctly specified the (14) will admit a unique solution for T large enough. In fact, (i                         , i )
may be identifiable given knowledge of only the bill parameters for  < T bills. We illustrate a
few cases here, but emphasize that a general proof is not available (to the best of our knowledge).
    For the quadratic utility case, the number of necessary normalizations is  = 2 bills (i.e. 8
parameter restrictions for x   ¯0 , x¯1 , q
                                          ¯0 , q
                                               ¯1 ), given that the polynomials in (14) are of the first order.
                                                                                        1 2
This implies that two roll calls can uniquely identify a solution (i                     , i ) to (14), i.e. there is no
observationally equivalent        ~1 , ~2 = (1 , 2 ) delivering the same set of values -1 [P r(Yi,t = 1)].
                                   i    i            i    i
    This result for quadratic utility is conceptually identical to the result in Rivers (2003), which
proves that, for d = 2, the number of required restrictions is d(d+1) = 6. The difference here is that
here we are considering as parameters the policy points, and not simply the policy cutlines (the 6
                                  0 0 0 1 1 1
parameter restrictions on {0        , 1 , 2 , 0 , 1 , 2 }). This difference does not affect the identification
of the set of ideal points, but makes identification of the bill parameters more burdensome.
    For utility functions that deliver conic functions in the system (14), the number of required
normalizations  = 5 (i.e. 20 parameter restrictions). To see why, consider first that any system of
two conic equations admits at most four solutions. Define these solutions as A , B , C , D . All of
these solution are observationally equivalent in the sense of exactly satisfying both equations. This
system defines the first two roll calls {x         ¯t , q¯t }t=0,1 that are required for normalization. Let us now
add an additional third bill x     ¯2 , q
                                        ¯2 introducing another conic equation and under the assumption
that such conic equation is non-redundant in the sense of the direction of axes of the associated
ellipse are not the same as those of any of the previously normalized conic equations. At most,
three of the elements of the set A , B , C , D will satisfy this third equation (if all the elements
of A , B , C , D satisfied this third restriction, than that would imply that the third conic
equation is, in fact, redundant). Without loss, define the remaining set of candidate solutions as

                                                           61
  A , B , C . Adding a fourth bill to the normalization (again assuming non-redundancy), delivers
a set of candidate solutions satisfying this fourth constraint of (at most) two elements A , B ,
and a fifth bill, pins down the ideology vector uniquely to, say, A . In summary, normalization
                                                                                      1 2
of five bills is needed for theoretical identification of the ideology parameters (i   , i ) under the
assumption that the model is correctly specified.
     For utility functions that deliver cubic functions in (14), as in the case of a second-order ap-
proximation of the difference in Gaussian utilities used in Nominate, the number of normalizations
is higher than  = 5 bills, as the number of conditions grows. This exercise illustrates that the
number of normalizations required for Gaussian utility functions in Nominate is likely much higher
than that required for quadratic utility functions, and that it is difficult to determine how many
bills must be normalized to uniquely identify the ideal points for N members.
     The discussion in this subsection illustrates the inherent difficulty in proving identification
within each of Nominate's interim steps (i.e. the algorithm's iteration step where all of the cutline
parameters are assumed given and the ideal points are estimated). It is not immediate that each
iteration is guaranteed to deliver a unique vector of ideal point estimates.

B.3.2: Known Ideal Points

Concerning the policy choice parameters x
                                        ¯t , q
                                             ¯t , let us focus on the expression

                                                             P r(Yi,t = 1) =
                                      -1       1 -x1 2 - 1    2 -x2 2      1      1 2 1        2 2
                               e       2   (   i   t)    2   (i   t ) - e- 2 (i -qt ) - 2 (i -qt )
                                                                              1            2




                                                                            1 2
for known ideology parameters. Specifically, under a normalization for 0 = (0 , 0 ), we can write:

                                                -1 [P r(Y0,t = 1)] =
                                -1    1 -x1 2 +  2 -x2 2     1  1 -q 1 2 +  2 -q 2 2
                            e    2   (0   t)   ( 0 t ) - e- 2  (0   t)    ( 0 t) =
                          1 n                                               n                                    n
                       ( 2)
                        -             1             2                   2                     2              2
                 n=0     n!
                                     (0 - x1      2    2
                                           t ) + (0 - xt )
                                                                                   1
                                                                                - (0    1
                                                                                     - qt      2
                                                                                          ) + (0    2
                                                                                                 - qt )                   
          2                                                                 2           2          2
   -1
    2     j =1   xj    j
                  t - qt      xj    j    j
                               t + qt - 20              × 1-        1
                                                                    4       j =1   xj
                                                                                    t
                                                                                               j
                                                                                            + qt          j
                                                                                                       - 20 xj    j   j
                                                                                                             t + qt - 0


which, even in second-order approximate form, does not lend to an immediate analysis of the
mapping from data to policy points and generally admits multiple solutions.
                                             1 2
    With a further normalization for 1 = (1   , 1 ) one can make more progress focusing on quadratic
losses or first-order approximation of the (difference in) Gaussian utilities. In particular, note that




                                                                    62
with quadratic losses:

                                                      -1 [P r(Y0,t = 1)] - -1 [P r(Y1,t = 1)] =
                    2                                                 2
               1                                                 1
             -            xj
                           t   -    j
                                   qt   xj
                                         t   +    j
                                                 qt   -    j
                                                          20   +            xj    j
                                                                             t - qt    xj    j    j
                                                                                        t + qt - 21 =     (15)
               2   j =1
                                                                 2   j =1
                                                                                2
                                                                                      xj    j
                                                                                       t - qt
                                                                                                j
                                                                                                0   j
                                                                                                  - 1 .
                                                                               j =1


Following a similar approach to that laid out in the preceding section, we can observe that for
every roll call t, four equations of the type (15) are necessary for the four unknown bill parameters.
We require therefore four politicians to be normalized (i.e. 8 parameters) to uniquely identify all
parameters x ¯t , q
                  ¯t from the data.
    For the case of Gaussian preferences such as those used in Nominate, however, the situation
appears more complex. For the case of the second order Taylor expansion, we see that the system
of equations of conditions for identification will be composed of generalized quartic equations and
so that we know that we need at least 20 restrictions. Again, this fact illustrates that Nominate
with Gaussian preferences requires a substantially higher number of identification restrictions than
for the quadratic utility case of Rivers (2003). Mirroring the problem with estimating the ideal
points holding the cutlines fixed, it is not immediate that the alternative iteration steps in which
the ideal points are held fixed and the cutlines estimated will deliver unique cutline estimates.


B.3: A discussion of further normalizations in DW-Nominate
The only normalization that DW-Nominate imposes that is consistently specified (see p.268 of
Armstrong et al. 2014) is that all of the ideologies must lie within a unit circle. This normalization
may at first appear intuitive, but we point out two difficulties that it creates. Both of the difficulties
arise because DW-Nominate does not re-estimate all ideologies and cutline parameters when new
roll call data arrives (i.e. no back-propagation). If one were to estimate everything without
restricting ideologies to the unit circle and then simply rescale them to lie within the unit circle,
the normalization would pose no problem. For example, one could take our estimates and simply
rescale them all to lie within the unit circle given that the scaling is arbitrary. But, because
DW-Nominate imposes the restriction in the estimation process, two complications arise.
    The first difficulty is that a unit circle restriction creates an artificial negative correlation
between the two dimensions of members' ideological positions. To see this problem most clearly,
consider a new member of Congress, i, that is very liberal in the first dimension. Locating this
              i                                                                                          i
member at 1      = -1 forces him or her to be perfectly moderate in the second dimension (2


                                                                63
must be 0). In reality, the estimation procedure will be forced to make a compromise: to place
a member at an extreme position along the first dimension, it must mechanically moderate the
member in the second dimension (and similarly, for placing a member at an extreme position along
the second dimension). We do not believe there is any ex ante reason to think that politicians
cannot simultaneously hold extreme positions in both dimensions, but DW-Nominate rules out
this possibility through the unit circle normalization.
    The second difficulty directly stems from the lack of back-propagation. At one point in time,
prior to knowing all future members' ideological points, DW-Nominate was scaled such that all
members at that time lied within the unit circle. But, unless the constraint was originally `slack'
(no members were located on the unit circle), this scaling implies that any future member that is
more extreme than any of those in this initial set will lie on the unit circle boundary artificially. If
progressively more extreme politicians are in fact replacing more moderate ones, this normalization
starts to progressively become more problematic. To provide suggestive evidence that this artificial
constraint is binding, in Figure 22, we plot the unit circle together with all DW-Nominate estimates
for each ideology from Congress 70 to Congress 115, both for the House and for the Senate.
Since Congress 70, approximately 7% of estimates in the House sit on the boundary of the unit
circle, with 8% being on the boundary for the Senate. This evidence suggests that the unit circle
boundary is directly and artificially constraining the estimated ideologies for a non-trivial number
of legislators. Furthermore, note that this constraint also affects estimates of members away from
the boundary, because their ideologies are estimated by incorporating information from those who
sit on the boundary.




                                                  64
Figure 22: The Role of the Unit Circle Restriction in DW-Nominate
                  (a) House of Representatives




                           (b) Senate




                               65
Appendix C: Computational Details of the Estimation Pro-
cedure
We maximize the likelihood in (7) via an unconstrained optimization procedure, providing the
analytic gradient to the algorithm to greatly improve estimation speed. Rather than using an
off-the-shelf quasi-newton algorithm (such as Matlab's fminunc), which proved to perform very
poorly given the non-convexity of our likelihood function, we instead use Adam, a version of the
steepest descent algorithm. Adaptive Moment Estimation (Adam) is a stochastic optimization
algorithm which is also ideal for problems with a large number of parameters like ours (Kingma
and Ba, 2014).
    As is standard, we run the estimation procedure until either the stepsize or the gradient is
small (for the 2D model, typically the estimation procedure terminated due to the stepsize being
small, on the order of 1e-4).
    Because for non-convex optimization problems, convergence to a global maximum cannot be
guaranteed, we ran the estimation procedure for our main model (Senate 2D) with 60 starting
points, with each batch of 12 taking roughly one day on a 64G RAM machine. This is an extensive
search for a problem of the size as the one that we study (90 years of Congressional voting,
including all available roll calls). For the Senate 2D model, we use the first dimension ideological
positions from the Senate 1D model as starting points. For the misspecified Senate 2D model
(without discipline), we use ideology estimates from the full Senate 2D model. Starting points
were otherwise randomly chosen (i.e. for the cutlines, party discipline parameters, and ideologies
for the 1D models).
    We report the estimates for the estimation run that produced the largest likelihood across
runs. But, we emphasize that the estimates of the main parameters of interest (namely, the party
discipline parameters) were quantitatively very similar (although not identical) across runs.




                                                66
Appendix D: Additional Tables and Figures

Figure 23: Ideological Polarization Over Time (2nd dimension), 1927-2019 - Senate 2D Model




                                           67
Figure 24: Ideological Polarization in the 1D Model
                    (a) Senate




                    (b) House




                        68
Figure 25: Ideological Polarization over Time, 1927-2019 - 1D Model
                            (a) Senate




                            (b) House




                                69
Figure 26: Share of Ideological Polarization Attributable to Party Discipline - 1D Model
                                      (a) Senate




                                       (b) House




                                          70
     Figure 27: Comparison of Party Discipline Estimates with and without agenda setting




                     max
Notes: Estimates of yp    compared to those from Canen et al. (2020) for 1977-1986 (i.e. Congresses
95-99). Canen et al. (2020) assumed utility
                                             shocks have a variance equal to two (instead of one),
so the prior estimates are rescaled by 2.




                                                71
                                 Table 2: Summary Statistics

                                      Senate                                          House
    Congress        Bills        Avg. bills    Bills    Fraction    Bills        Avg. bills   Bills    Fraction
                    introduced   per member    passed   that pass   introduced   per member   passed   that pass
 80th (1947-1948)     3,186         33.2       1,670     0.524       7,611          17.5      1,739     0.228
 81st (1949-1950)     4,486         46.7       2,362     0.527       10,502         24.1      2,482     0.236
 82nd (1951-1952)     3,665         38.2       1,849     0.505       9,065          20.8      2,008     0.222
 83rd (1953-1954)     4,077         42.5       2,231     0.547       10,875         25.0      2,129     0.196
 84th (1955-1956)     4,518         47.1       2,550     0.564       13,169         30.3      2,360     0.179
 85th (1957-1958)     4,532         47.2       2,202     0.486       14,580         33.5      2,064     0.142
 86th (1959-1960)     4,149         41.5       1,680     0.405       14,112         32.3      1,636     0.116
 87th (1961-1962)     4,048         40.5       1,953     0.482       14,328         32.8      1,927     0.134
 88th (1963-1964)     3,457         34.6       1,341     0.388       14,022         32.2      1,267     0.090
 89th (1965-1966)     4,129         41.3       1,636     0.396       19,874         45.7      1,565     0.079
 90th (1967-1968)     4,400         44.0       1,376     0.313       22,060         50.7      1,213     0.055
 91st (1969-1971)     4,867         48.7       1,271     0.261       21,436         49.3      1,130     0.053
 92nd (1971-1972)     4,408         44.1       1,035     0.235       18,561         42.7       970      0.052
 93rd (1973-1974)     4,524         45.2       1,115     0.246       18,872         43.4       923      0.049
 94th (1975-1976)     4,115         41.2       1,038     0.252       16,982         39.0       968      0.057
 95th (1977-1978)     3,800         38.0       1,070     0.282       15,587         35.8      1,027     0.066
 96th (1979-1980)     3,480         34.8        976      0.280       9,103          20.9       929      0.102
 97th (1981-1982)     3,396         34.0        786      0.231       8,094          18.6       704      0.087
 98th (1983-1984)     3,454         34.5        936      0.271       7,105          16.3       978      0.138
 99th (1985-1986)     3,386         33.9        940      0.278       6,499          14.9       973      0.150
100th (1987-1988)     3,325         33.3       1,002     0.301       6,263          14.4      1,061     0.169
101st (1989-1990)     3,669         36.7        980      0.267       6,664          15.3       968      0.145
102nd (1991-1992)     3,738         37.4        947      0.253       6,775          15.6       932      0.138
103rd (1993-1994)     2,805         28.1        682      0.243       5,739          13.2       749      0.131
104th (1995-1996)     2,266         22.7        518      0.229       4,542          10.4       611      0.135
105th (1997-1998)     2,718         27.2        586      0.216       5,014          11.5       710      0.142
106th (1999-2000)     3,343         33.4        819      0.245       5,815          13.4       957      0.165
107th (2001-2002)     3,242         32.4        554      0.171       5,892          13.5       677      0.115
108th (2003-2004)     3,078         30.8        759      0.247       5,547          12.8       801      0.144
109th (2005-2006)     4,163         41.6        684      0.164       6,540          15.0       770      0.118
110th (2007-2008)     3,738         37.4        556      0.149       7,441          17.1      1101      0.148
111th (2009-2010)     4,101         41.0        176      0.043       6,677          15.3       861      0.129
112th (2011-2012)     3,767         37.7        364      0.097       6,845          15.7       561      0.082




                                                72
                   Table 3: Regression Results - Sources of Party Discipline
                                                                         max
                                                           Estimates of yp
               Party (Republican)            0.051     0.036     0.051     0.036     0.036
                                            (0.073)   (0.097) (0.073) (0.097)       (0.060)
                Majority Status                        -0.045              -0.045    -0.045
                                                      (0.097)             (0.097)   (0.060)
       Divided Government (1 if Divided)                         0.032     0.032     0.087
                                                                (0.073) (0.074)     (0.051)

                   Observations                 92        92       92        92       92
                Decade Fixed Effect                                                  Yes
                          2
                        R                     0.005     0.009    0.008     0.011    0.635
                                                        max
Notes: Regressions of the time series of estimates of {yp   }p{D,R} for the Senate 2D model on a
Party level dummy variable (equal to 1 if p is Republican), dummy variable for Majority Status
(which equals 1 if party p held the majority of seats in the Senate, and 0 otherwise) and dummy
variable for divided government (which is equal to 0 if the president's party is the same as the
majority party in the House and in the Senate and 1 otherwise). Robust standard errors in
parentheses.




                                              73
