                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          ADVANCED TECHNOLOGIES ADOPTION AND USE BY U.S. FIRMS:
               EVIDENCE FROM THE ANNUAL BUSINESS SURVEY

                                        Nikolas Zolas
                                       Zachary Kroff
                                      Erik Brynjolfsson
                                     Kristina McElheran
                                       David N. Beede
                                      Cathy Buffington
                                     Nathan Goldschlag
                                        Lucia Foster
                                       Emin Dinlersoz

                                     Working Paper 28290
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28290


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020

Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not represent the
views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential
information is disclosed. The Census Bureau's Disclosure Review Board and Disclosure
Avoidance Officers have reviewed this data product for unauthorized disclosure of confidential
information and have approved the disclosure avoidance practices applied to this release. (DRB
Approval Number CBDRB-FY20-095, CBDRB-FY20-331 and CBDRB-FY21-041). We thank
Scott Ohlmacher, John Eltinge, John Jankowski, Rob Seamans, John Haltiwanger, Frank Li,
Susan Helper and Pascual Restrepo for excellent comments and feedback, as well as participants
in the 2020 AEAStat session. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Nikolas Zolas, Zachary Kroff, Erik Brynjolfsson, Kristina McElheran, David N.
Beede, Cathy Buffington, Nathan Goldschlag, Lucia Foster, and Emin Dinlersoz. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Advanced Technologies Adoption and Use by U.S. Firms: Evidence from the Annual
Business Survey
Nikolas Zolas, Zachary Kroff, Erik Brynjolfsson, Kristina McElheran, David N. Beede, Cathy
Buffington, Nathan Goldschlag, Lucia Foster, and Emin Dinlersoz
NBER Working Paper No. 28290
December 2020
JEL No. M15,O3,O47,O51
                                        ABSTRACT

We introduce a new survey module intended to complement and expand research on the
causes and consequences of advanced technology adoption. The 2018 Annual Business Survey
(ABS), conducted by the Census Bureau in partnership with the National Center for
Science and Engineering Statistics (NCSES), provides comprehensive and timely information on
the diffusion among U.S. firms of advanced technologies including artificial intelligence
(AI), cloud computing, robotics, and the digitization of business information. The 2018
ABS is a large, nationally representative sample of over 850,000 firms covering all private,
nonfarm sectors of the economy. We describe the motivation for and development of the
technology module in the ABS, as well as provide a first look at technology adoption and use
patterns across firms and sectors. We find that digitization is quite widespread, as is some
use of cloud computing. In contrast, advanced technology adoption is rare and generally
skewed towards larger and older firms. Adoption patterns are consistent with a
hierarchy of increasing technological sophistication, in which most firms that adopt AI or
other advanced business technologies also use the other, more widely diffused technologies.
Finally, while few firms are at the technology frontier, they tend to be large so technology
exposure of the average worker is significantly higher. This new data will be available to
qualified researchers on approved projects in the Federal Statistical Research Data Center
network.

Nikolas Zolas                                 David N. Beede
Center for Economic Studies                   Center for Enterprise Dissemination
U.S. Census Bureau                            U.S. Census Bureau
4600 Silver Hill Road                         david.n.beede@census.gov
Washington, DC 20233
nikolas.j.zolas@census.gov                    Cathy Buffington
                                              Special Projects and Research
Zachary Kroff                                 Economic Directorate
Center for Economic Studies                   U.S. Census Bureau
U.S. Census Bureau                            Catherine.D.Buffington@census.gov
zachary.kroff@census.gov
                                              Nathan Goldschlag
Erik Brynjolfsson                             Center for Economic Studies
Stanford Digital Economy Laboratory           U.S. Census Bureau
366 Galvez Street, Room 238                   Nathan.Goldschlag@census.gov
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER                                      Lucia Foster
erik.brynjolfsson@gmail.com                   Center for Economic Studies
                                              U.S. Census Bureau
Kristina McElheran                            lucia.s.foster@census.gov
University of Toronto Scarborough
105 St. George Street                         Emin Dinlersoz
Toronto, ON M5S 3E6                           Center for Economic Studies
k.mcelheran@utoronto.ca                       U.S. Census Bureau
                                              emin.m.dinlersoz@census.gov
1       Introduction
        Advances in technology are important drivers of productivity growth and living standards
(see e.g. Solow, 1957; Stiroh, 2001). Thus, measuring advanced technology adoption is critical
for understanding the current state of the U.S. economy and for planning for the future.
However, owing to a lack of comprehensive data on firms' adoption and use of such
technologies, we are "flying blind into what has been called the Fourth Industrial Revolution"
(Brynjolfsson and Mitchell 2017b). 2 This data gap hinders evidence-based decision making at all
levels of government and society. Datasets that provide detailed information on the diffusion of
new technologies are rare, and those that are available often suffer from coarse aggregation (to
industry classification levels), have response and sampling biases, fail to capture the non-
manufacturing economy, and/or miss key emerging technologies. Consequently, we have limited
knowledge about decisions to adopt these technologies or how adoption relates to firm
characteristics such as industry, firm size, and firm age.
        We describe the U.S. Census Bureau's recent efforts to fill this data gap by collecting
information on adoption and use of several advanced technologies from a large, nationally
representative sample of firms covering the private nonfarm sectors of the economy. 3 Our
contributions are threefold. First, we provide a detailed first look at the adoption rates for several
rising technologies that may shape the future, including artificial intelligence (AI), robotics and
digitization. Second, our discussion concerning the challenges and opportunities faced in this
collection provide context in analyzing the results and will be informative for other surveys that
seek to measure rapidly evolving technologies. Third, we provide guidance for future researchers
who seek to use this data in their own research through the Federal Statistical Research Data
Center (FSRDC) network. 4
        Despite increasingly widespread discussion in the press of machine learning, robotics,
automated vehicles, natural language processing, machine vision, voice recognition and other
advanced technologies, we find that their adoption rates are relatively low. Furthermore,


2
  The National Academy of Sciences (NAS) panel report in 2017 titled "Information Technology and the U.S.
Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here?" makes a similar point about the paucity of data in
this area and calls for a comprehensive and holistic approach to filling this data gap.
3
  The ABS covers all nonfarm employer businesses filing the 941, 944, or 1120 tax forms (see
https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/abs/about.html for more details about the ABS).
4
  Qualified researchers on approved projects can use these data and other Census Bureau micro data through the
FSRDC network. See https://www.census.gov/fsrdc.

                                                        2
adoption is quite skewed, with heaviest concentration among a small subset of older and larger
firms. We also find that technology adoption exhibits a hierarchical pattern, with the most-
sophisticated technologies being present most often only when more-basic applications are as
well. For instance, digitization of business information is very widely adopted. Adoption of
cloud services displays an intermediate level of adoption, with a large share of firms electing to
host at least one or more IT functions in the cloud. Intensive use of the cloud is slightly lower but
still quite prevalent. Cloud users overwhelmingly also display a higher level of digitization.
Likewise, firms reporting adoption of advanced business technologies also have predominantly
adopted both digitization and cloud services, suggesting interdependencies between technology
applications and potentially a cumulative progression of adoption.
        While the adoption of key technologies is closely associated with a number of readily
observed firm characteristics, it is worth noting that even after controlling for many of these
characteristics, there is substantial heterogeneity in adoption that cannot be fully explained by
available data. This suggests that our understanding of how and why firms adopt new
technologies is still rather imprecise, providing further motivation for the collection and use of
future survey data.
        An extensive literature amassed over the last decade argues that technology adoption and
use by firms significantly impacts labor markets and the economy overall. 5 Despite this growing
literature and an accelerating pace of technological change, measurement of technology use at
the firm-level has lagged considerably. This is particularly concerning in light of mounting
evidence for increasing differences among firms in productivity, growth, and contributions to
economic dynamism in recent years. 6 Scarcity of firm-level data has been cited as a central
bottleneck in developing a better understanding of these technologies' impacts on workers, firms,
and market dynamics (e.g., Seamans and Raj 2018).
        In the absence of detailed, firm-level data, researchers have relied primarily on
aggregated data or small-scale surveys focused on specific types of firms and technologies. For

5
  Acemoglu and Autor (2011), Brynjolfsson et al. (2019), Brynjolfsson and Mitchell (2017a), Acemoglu and
Restrepo (2019), and Agrawal, Gans, and Goldfarb (2019) all provide excellent reviews of current and future
research issues pertaining to the diffusion of various advanced technologies.
6
  While high cross-sectional heterogeneity in firm performance is long-established (e.g., Syverson 2004 & 2011;
Hopenhayn 2014), recent studies point to increasing firm heterogeneity along a number of economically important
dimensions (Andrews et al. 2015; Van Reenen 2018; Song et al. 2019; Decker et al. 2020; Autor et al. 2020; Bennett
2020a), some of which has been linked empirically to IT use (Barth et al. 2020; Lashkari et al. 2020).


                                                        3
instance, recent research has utilized nationwide or industry-level measures of robot diffusion
(Acemoglu and Restrepo 2020, Graetz and Michaels 2017), information technology (Bessen
2002), or industry-level total factor productivity and patents (Autor and Salomons 2018) as
proxies for automation. Yet, the relationship between labor and capital that is at the heart of
recent contributions to the literature varies both across and within highly heterogeneous firms. 7
Thus, observing variation among firms in adoption and use of technology is critical for
understanding the underlying mechanisms at work. Only with a higher-resolution lens will it be
possible to accurately characterize broader technology adoption effects at higher levels of
aggregation that reflect equilibrium outcomes of heterogeneous product, labor, and capital
markets, not to mention differentiated organizational and production contexts within those
markets.
         We introduce the technology module from the Annual Business Survey (ABS) and
present the first results from this module. This survey represents a partnership between the
Census Bureau and the National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics (NCSES) within
the National Science Foundation (NSF) and consolidates three surveys: the Survey of Business
Owners (SBO), the Annual Survey of Entrepreneurs (ASE), and the Business R&D and
Innovation Survey for Microbusinesses (BRDI-M) and adds a new and expanded collection on
nationally representative business innovation statistics. 8 The ABS captures many important
characteristics of the business context in which technology adoption and use take place. In
addition to the technology questions that are the focus of this "first look" paper, it asks
businesses about company information (such as the type of ownership), owner characteristics,
innovation, research and development (R&D), intellectual property, and finance and other
business characteristics. The current plan is to conduct the ABS for five years, with rotating
modules about particular topics (such as technology or globalization) allowing for longitudinal
analysis. The sample in the initial year of ABS was larger than is planned for subsequent years,




7
  Worker earnings, for instance, vary significantly by both firm (Song et al. 2019) and establishment (Barth et al.
2016), with firm-level variation in information technology investment explaining important between- and within-
firm differences in wages and other labor market outcomes in recent years (Barth et al. 2020). Dixon et al. (2020)
document striking firm-level heterogeneity in labor market outcomes associated with investment in robots.
8
  The SBO and ASE were conducted by the Census Bureau, while the BRDI-M was conducted by the Census
Bureau under a partnership with NCSES.


                                                          4
with approximately 850,000 employer businesses. 9 In subsequent years, the ABS will be mailed
to a nationally representative sample of approximately 300,000 employer companies across all
private nonfarm sectors in the United States.
         The ABS was mailed in June 2018 with data collection taking place through the end of
the calendar year (the primary reference period is calendar year 2017). The sample size and
timeliness make it one of the largest and most up-to-date data set available on advanced
technology adoption in the world. Response to the ABS is required by law, reducing selection
bias, though certainly not eliminating it. In contrast, many privately funded surveys typically
used in empirical work on technology adoption suffer from low response rates and significant
selection bias, limiting the generalizability of many findings. Finally, the ABS also includes
many small and young firms, which are often underrepresented in surveys of R&D and
technology use. This is important because these firms are central to economic growth and
dynamism (e.g., Haltiwanger et al. 2013 & 2016; Decker et al. 2014 & 2017), yet we have
evidence that they respond differently to new advances in information technology in general
(Hitt and Tambe 2016) and to new technologies such as cloud computing, in particular (Jin and
McElheran 2017).
         The economy-wide, large sample of firms allows for the tabulation and publication of
novel data on nascent and growing technology use by U.S. businesses that smaller samples
and/or imputation might not support. Also, the large sample size has the potential to identify at a
highly disaggregated level (e.g., 6-digit NAICS) the industries and locations in which these
nascent technologies are being adopted at a higher or lower rate. 10 Thus, the large sample size
may help inform sampling strategies for future data collections and the development of survey
instrument skip patterns for industries and firms for which these technologies are less relevant,
thereby reducing respondent burden.



9
  The reason for the large sample in the first year of the ABS is that it coincided with the quinquennial Economic
Census and is intended to provide data that had previously been provided by the SBO, which was conducted in
Economic Census years.
10
   One aspect of the data that we have yet to properly analyze is the geography of technology adoption. A recent
paper by Bloom et al. (2020) uses text analysis of earnings calls, newspaper announcements, patents and job
postings to document the spatial rise of 20 new and important technologies. Our analysis gets complicated by the
fact that the survey is enterprise-level and not establishment-level, so that it becomes difficult to pinpoint adoption
location by firms with multiple establishments. However, it may be possible combine the enterprise-level findings
with some more recent establishment-level surveys, like the Annual Survey of Manufactures (ASM) or Economic
Censuses (EC) to specify adoption of certain technologies, like robotics, by location.

                                                            5
           This first technology module contains three detailed questions: the availability of
information in digital format (digitization), expenditure on cloud computing services, and use of
several advanced business technologies. Taking these in turn, the first question explores firms'
reliance on digital information, which is widely regarded as a necessary input to more-advanced
uses of digital technologies (Brynjolfsson and McAfee 2014, Brynjolfsson and McElheran
2019). Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2014) argue that in order for firms to adopt artificial
intelligence technologies, the necessary ingredients are massive amounts of digital information
("big data") and sufficient computing power. In broad terms, digital information is defined as
"the representation of information in bits." 11 In addition to its importance as a prerequisite for AI
adoption, digital representation of information is a key ingredient for more effective management
of several business functions, such as electronic commerce, supply chain management, customer
relations and marketing, and human resources. Recent research based on the U.S. Census
Bureau's Management and Organizational Practices Survey (MOPS) has shown that decision
making that relies on digital information ("data-driven decision making") has been rapidly
diffusing in the U.S. and has important implications for firm performance (Brynjolfsson and
McElheran 2016 and 2019).
           The second question explores the extent to which firms rely on cloud computing, which
has shifted the cost structure and use of IT by a broad range of firms (Armbrust et al. 2010,
Brynjolfsson et al. 2010) and is widely viewed as a key enabler of digital transformation
(Forrester 2017, Sunyaev 2020). Also, a second necessary ingredient for adopting AI
technologies is sufficient computing power to handle and exploit massive quantities of digital
information. Until the mid-2000's, much of this computing power has been beyond the reach of
all but the largest, most technologically advanced firms. The advent of cloud computing services
made scalable computing resources available on-demand, fundamentally changing the economics
of IT use from an ownership model with high up-front fixed costs to an outsourced model with
highly elastic variable costs (Armbrust et al. 2010).
           Cloud services, therefore, may substitute for firms' fixed investments in their own
physical data centers and owned IT resources, including software. Yet, while cloud services
provide firms with the flexibility to scale up and down the volume of IT services they purchase,
the solutions offered are less tailored to an individual firm's needs (Staten 2008, Schneier 2015).

11
     Goldfarb and Tucker (2019) provide a useful review of the economics of digital technologies.

                                                           6
To the extent that cloud services enable outsourcing of major IT functions, smaller and younger
firms have become able to access computing capabilities that are too costly to implement in-
house. Consistent with this mechanism, Jin and McElheran (2017) find that outsourced IT since
the rise of cloud computing is significantly correlated with improved survival and productivity of
young establishments.
       Finally, the third question asks directly about the use of advanced "business
technologies," including those typically categorized as "AI." These technologies include
automated guided vehicles, machine learning, machine vision, natural language processing, and
voice recognition software. Respondents are presented with a list that covers robotics (i.e.,
"automatically controlled, reprogrammable, and multipurpose machines"), various cognitive
technologies (i.e., applications that help machines to "perceive, analyze, determine response and
act appropriately in [their] environment", a standard definition of AI), radio frequency
identification, touchscreens/kiosks for customer interface, automated storage and retrieval
systems, and automated guided vehicles. This question is aimed at pinning down where the
frontier of technology use actually lies and understanding interrelationships among different
applications, while informing future surveys' sampling methodology and content.
       Many of these frontier business technologies have been the focus of recent research. For
instance, Acemoglu and Restrepo (2020), Graetz and Michaels (2018), Dinlersoz and Wolf
(2018) and Dixon et al. (2020) find that the diffusion of robots has had important labor market
and productivity consequences across regions and nations. Similarly, using data on the
introduction of a machine translation system in a digital international trade platform,
Brynjolfsson, Hui, and Liu (2019) find significant economic effects arising from automation and
AI technologies. Their analysis indicates that machine translation has so far had economically
significant impact on trade volume on the platform by reducing language-related frictions.
       Using the data collected on AI, robotics, and digitization technologies, this paper
provides, as a first look, some key statistics on their diffusion across firms and sectors. The
diffusion rates are presented using tabulation weights constructed from the Longitudinal
Business Database (LBD) to give estimates for the entire population of U.S. firms. In addition,
estimates using both tabulation and employment weights are provided to offer a picture of the
fraction of workers employed by firms using the technologies. This is critical for understanding
the "future of work," given the increasing concentration of both employment and advanced

                                                  7
technology adoption in fewer, larger firms (e.g., Autor et al. 2020). The analysis documents the
prevalence of the technologies across firm size and age categories, as well as the co-presence
patterns for the technologies at the firm level. It also identifies which technologies are in the
early stages of diffusion as indicated by the rates of testing versus the rates of actual use of
technologies by firms. The firm-level connection between innovation and advanced technology
presence is also explored to better understand how technology adoption may enhance the firm's
ability to innovate, either indirectly, by allowing the firm to reallocate resources toward
innovation, or directly by building upon existing technology.
       Since the new data introduced here may provide a valuable resource to the research
community, we also discuss possible interpretations of our results as they relate to a number of
open questions about firm technology use and adoption. We highlight just a few of these
potential areas of inquiry including: (a) dynamics and diffusion, (b) technology hierarchy and
value chains, (c) technology as the "great equalizer" removing barriers for small and young
firms, (d) technology complementarities, (e) technology and innovation, and (f) technology and
the worker, specifically, the macroeconomic and distributional effects of new technology
adoption, including how new technologies may substitute for or complement workers in various
occupations. We do not attempt to draw definitive conclusions regarding these increasingly
salient topics, nor do we address causal links between firm characteristics and technology
adoption or between technology adoption and firm performance. Instead, our focus is to
highlight preliminary findings and how ABS data might be used to advance the research frontier
in these areas.
       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides context for the
ABS by reviewing related surveys and measures. Section 3 discusses the technology module and
high-level findings. We then turn to providing detailed results from each of the three questions in
Sections 4-6. In Section 7 we discuss our findings in light of open questions concerning
technology and key economic outcomes. We provide concluding remarks in Section 8.



2      Review of Other Business Technology Surveys

       We start by reviewing other business technology surveys. We restrict our attention to
business surveys, nevertheless acknowledging that household surveys can provide important


                                                  8
complementary information. 12 We start by discussing Census Bureau surveys and then discuss
other closely related private data collections that emphasize technology adoption.


     A. Surveys Administered by the Census Bureau
        The Census Bureau has collected data on advanced technologies over the past three
decades through various surveys (see Table 1). Three relatively short-lived surveys focused on
technology adoption and use are important to mention here, if only to discuss what was learned
and how this module fits within that framework. The Survey of Manufacturing Technology
(SMT) was an extensive survey on the adoption and use of advanced technologies in the
manufacturing sector. The SMT collected information from establishments within selected
manufacturing subsectors 13 about current and planned use of 17 technologies across 5 categories:
design and engineering (e.g., computer-aided design); fabrication/machining and assembly (e.g.,
numerically controlled/computer numerically controlled machines); automated materials
handling (e.g., automated guided vehicle systems); automated sensor-based inspection or testing;
and communications and control (e.g., local area networks). While providing rich details on
technology adoption, use, benefits, and costs at the plant level, the SMT was collected only for
three years (1988, 1991, 1993) before it was discontinued. It remains, however, one of the most
comprehensive surveys on advanced technologies, and in particular, on automation in the
manufacturing sector (see Dunne 1991; Doms et al. 1995; Dunne and Schmitz 1995; Jensen and
McGuckin 1996; McGuckin, et al. 1998; Dinlersoz and Wolf 2018).
        The Computer Network Use Supplement (CNUS), which asked manufacturing plants
about their e-commerce activities and e-business processes, was a supplement to the 1999
Annual Survey of Manufactures (ASM). The CNUS provided the most detailed insights to date


12
   The Census Bureau through the American Community Survey (ACS) and periodic supplements to the Current
Population Survey (CPS, jointly sponsored by the Bureau of Labor Statistics and the National Telecommunications
and Information Administration) collects data on household technology (i.e., computer and Internet) adoption and
use. The ACS and CPS also collect data on workers in technology-intensive occupations (e.g., computer
programmers) and industries (e.g., computer systems design and related services). The Bureau of Labor Statistics
collects data on workers by occupation, including technology-intensive occupations, in its Occupational
Employment Survey. The Pew Research Center also collects household data on computer and internet use.
13
   Sampled establishments were from one of the following subsectors: fabricated metal products (SIC 34); industrial
machinery and equipment (SIC 35); electronic and other electric equipment (SIC 36); transportation equipment (SIC
37); instruments and related products (SIC 38). These major industry groups accounted for about 43% of all
employees and value added in this sector as reported in the 1987 Census of Manufactures.


                                                         9
on early applications of the commercial internet (see Atrostic and Nguyen 2005, 2006, 2007;
Fichman and Melville 2014; McElheran 2015; and Fort 2017), including unprecedented insight
into the supply chain relationships mediated by the new technology (Forman and McElheran
2019). However, it was also restricted to the manufacturing sector and was only conducted once.
E-shipments data continues to be collected in the ASM (Angle and Forman 2018), but the
original, more detailed survey was not repeated after its initial year.
        Lastly, the Information and Communication Technology Survey (ICTS) was a
supplement to the Annual Capital Expenditure Survey (ACES) from 2003 to 2013. 14,15 The ICTS
asked for information regarding purchases and expenses for four types of ICT equipment and
software: computer and peripheral equipment; ICT equipment excluding computer and
peripheral equipment; electro-medical and electrotherapeutic apparatus; and computer software.
In contrast to the SMT and CNUS, ICTS covered non-manufacturing as well as manufacturing
firms. Of note, it separately measured firm-specific ("own-account") software investment by
firms, a particular type of investment that has been linked to innovation (Bessen and Righi 2020)
and impacts on workers (Barth et al. 2020a).
        In addition to the Census surveys geared specifically toward measuring technology, there
are many other Census collections with selected questions about technology. Most of these
questions ask about firms' or establishments' software use or e-commerce activities. For
example, the following contain at least one question about either software use or e-commerce
activities: Annual Retail Trade Survey (ARTS), Annual Survey of Entrepreneurs (ASE), Annual
Wholesale Trade Survey (AWTS), Business R&D and Innovation Survey (BRDIS), Census of
Construction Industries (CCN), Census of Manufacturing (CMF), Service Annual Survey (SAS),
and Survey of Business Owners (SBO). The Annual Survey of Manufactures (ASM) and the
CMF provide some of the most detailed breakdowns of establishment-level investments in
technology, separating out capitalized IT investment in computers and data processes equipment
beginning in 2002 and splitting operating expenses dedicated to IT into expensed computer
hardware and equipment, purchased software, and data and other purchased computer services
(Jin and McElheran 2017).


14
   The ACES is a nationally representative (covering manufacturing and non-manufacturing industries) annual
survey of around 50,000 firms and, from 2002 onward, includes capitalized IT expenditure.
15
   The ICTS for 2012 was suspended for budgetary reasons, was briefly reinstated for the year 2013, and then
discontinued.

                                                       10
         Other surveys ask about complementary subjects. The 2014 ASE module on R&D and
Innovation asks about process innovations (including automation). The Management and
Organizational Practices Survey (MOPS) asks how establishments use data to support decision
making. 16 The 2016 Business R&D and Innovation Survey for Microbusinesses (BRDI-M) 17
(conducted in partnership with the National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics
(NCSES) which was responsible for its predecessor Microbusiness Innovation Science and
Technology (MIST) Survey) asks whether processes were improved by increasing automation.
The BRDIS (newly renamed the Business Enterprise Research & Development Survey (BERD))
has targeted technology questions for a number of years, with special emphasis on R&D
expenditures related to specific technologies, including biotechnology and nanotechnology
(2008-2019) and artificial intelligence (2018-2019) (see Foster et al. 2020). Finally, some
information on robotics and automation-related imports by firms can be obtained from the
Longitudinal Firm Trade Transactions Database (LFTTD) which contains administrative data on
trade transactions by U.S. firms.
         As the above descriptions make clear, earlier Census Bureau data collections on
technology were generally not repeated over time and did not necessarily focus on emerging
technologies that might have the largest impact on business operations. 18 These data collections
also did not directly ask about the consequences of technology adoption and use for worker
outcomes at the business level (something that the ABS is scheduled to do in the 2019 version),
though certain insights are possible by linking complementary data sets (e.g., Barth et al. 2020a).
Furthermore, most technology data collection efforts have focused on manufacturing and not on
the diffusion of emerging technologies in other sectors. For example, data was not
systematically collected on the diffusion of radio-frequency identification (RFID) and barcodes
in retail and wholesale trade and other services that now collectively account for a larger share of
GDP than manufacturing and have implications for substitutions of different types of labor (in
particular, customer labor) in the production function (Basker et al. 2017).



16
   MOPS is a relatively newer ASM supplement that has been collected for years 2010 and 2015. See Brynjolfsson
and McElheran (2016 & 2019). New questions on artificial intelligence are planned for 2021.
17
   The BRDI-M is a follow up to the NCSES/Westat collected MIST survey conducted in 2014 that looks at the
innovation activities for firms with fewer than 10 employees
18
   Consensus is lacking on the technologies to focus on in a limited survey form and it is very difficult to predict in
advance which emerging technologies will have the largest impact on business operations.

                                                          11
        The Census Bureau has recently begun multiple efforts to further advance its
measurement of technology. In addition to the module on the 2018 ABS, beginning in reference
year 2018, the ASM began collecting expenditures on industrial robotics (Buffington, Miranda
and Seamans 2019); in the same year the Annual Capital Expenditures Survey (ACES) began
collecting expenditures on service and industrial robotics. The 2021 MOPS is currently being
developed and will likely include some questions about the use of AI in decision making. The
ASM and MOPS are establishment-based surveys; while the ACES and ABS are firm-based
surveys. The content on the respective surveys attempt to take this difference in scope into
account (for example, the MOPS asks about the locus of decision making) and we keep this
difference in mind when interpreting results (for example, each firm is assigned to a sector but
may encompass many disparate activities).
        Lastly, the 2019 ABS includes a technology module with a focus on workers. It asks
firms about the effects of technology adoption and use on their workers' numbers, types, and
skills. These questions offer a unique opportunity to document firms' own assessment of how
technology impacts their workforce. While workforce-related questions only have qualitative
response categories, firms' responses can be compared with the quantitative responses provided
by the same firms in other survey and administrative data. This last point highlights an
important strength of Census data: it is possible to link data from multiple surveys using
standardized record identifiers. Finally, in order to address the shortcoming of a lack of a
longitudinal component, which is especially important for understanding the diffusion of
technology, the ABS technology modules are scheduled to be repeated over three-year cycles. 19
While the sample of respondents will differ over this time period, Census expects there to be
considerable overlap, thereby providing a glimpse for how technology adoption changes over
time for a select group of firms.


     B. Other Surveys
        We highlight a few alternative, privately-run surveys in this section (see Table 2). Helper
(1995) uses a survey of 499 automotive suppliers regarding their use of computer numeric


19
  That is, the first technology module from 2018 will be repeated in 2021 and the second technology module from
2019 will be repeated in 2022.


                                                       12
control (CNC) machines and the applicability of this technology in their typical production 20 to
show that arm's-length supplier/customer relationships inhibit the adoption of CNC technology.
Aral et al. (2012) use survey data collected from customers of a major enterprise resource
planning system to look at complementarities between IT, HR analytics and performance pay.
The global marketing services company Harte Hanks administered an international survey to
make up the Computer Intelligence Technology Database (CITDB) from 1996 until 2015. This
survey samples more than 150,000 establishments of firms across 20 European countries and the
United States. The CITDB contains information on IT adoption in areas such as PCs/laptops,
servers, network infrastructure, IT employees, software and hardware, and (more recently) some
cloud computing. 21
        Some recent surveys focus on various automation technologies. The Georgia Tech
Survey of Advanced Technology and Robotics in U.S. Manufacturing was conducted in 2018 by
Nancey Green Leigh and others of the Georgia Institute of Technology (Green Leigh et al 2020).
This survey "was conducted to better understand U.S. manufacturers' use of robotics and
automation technology and to generate real knowledge about their impacts on employment and
manufacturing competitiveness." 22 Green Leigh surveyed 428 U.S. manufacturing firms
regarding their use of rapid prototyping, additive manufacturing, computer-aided design and
manufacturing (CAD/CAM), machine vision and real-time monitoring, advanced materials, CNC
machines, and robots.
        Finally, Helper, Seamans, Reichensperger, and Bessen collected responses to the
National Survey of Auto Suppliers for 2018. The National Survey of Auto Suppliers includes a
plant, human resources, and sales survey form administered to firms in "any tier of the supply
chain for new cars or light trucks." This survey asks auto suppliers about their use of various
automation technologies and how automation has impacted their employment, robots' effects on
certain performance outcomes, and their gathering and analysis of operations data. 23



20
   Helper excluded 213 of these respondents because the technology was either unknown to them or reportedly not
applicable to their business. Details about this survey can be found in Helper (1995).
21
   For more information about the CITDB, see Bloom et al. (2014), McElheran (2014), Bloom et al. (2016), and
Haug et al. (2016). Other notable works using CITDB include Bresnahan et al. (2002), Forman et al. (2002),
Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2003), Forman et al. (2009), Mahr (2010), Bloom et al. (2012), Forman et al. (2012), and
Kretschmer et al. (2012).
22
   Details about this survey can be found at https://planning.gatech.edu/gatech_survey_mfg_tech/.
23
   For more information on this survey, visit http://sites.bu.edu/tpri/auto-survey/.

                                                       13
        Researchers have also relied on data collections by trade associations. For instance,
country- and industry-level data on robot installations are published by the International
Federation of Robotics. UN Comtrade provides data on robot imports, and country-level
numbers of robotics patents filed are available from the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
(USPTO). The European Commission (EC) also released an enterprise-level survey that found
that 42% of enterprises adopt at least one AI technology (European Commission 2020). In
addition, some consulting firms have also collected data on technology adoption and use. For
example, Deloitte collected information from about 1,100 US-based companies representing 10
industries in 2018 and published adoption rates for advanced technologies in State of AI in the
Enterprise 24, while both McKinsey (McKinsey 2018) and PwC (PwC 2019) surveyed a number
of executives on their expected adoption of AI, with 20-30% of executives planning to adopt
some form of AI.
        A growing trend relies on machine learning and related techniques to measure the spread
and impact of new digital technologies by analyzing large data sets of job postings, employment
profiles and similar data on digital platforms. For instance, digitized information on workers and
job postings have been used to track the supply and demand of IT labor as a proxy for IT
diffusion in the economy (e.g., Tambe and Hitt 2012, 2020; Webb 2019; Bana et al, 2020;
Tambe et al. 2020; Atalay et al. 2020). Bennett (2020b) uses machine learning algorithms to
match the Port Import/Export Reporting Services (PIERS) data on sales of automation equipment
to the National Establishment Time Series (NETS) data, which is a panel-data version of Dun
and Bradstreet publications. In general, these large data sets improve on the power and coverage
of readily-available data sets such as COMPUSTAT, yet they still lack the representativeness
and accurate representation of dynamic patterns (particularly for young and small
establishments) available in Census data (Crane and Decker 2020).
        Data collection efforts to measure the diffusion of new technologies exist outside of the
U.S. and provide useful complementary views on this global phenomenon. For example, the
European Commission (EC) released an enterprise-level survey that found that 42% of
enterprises adopt at least one AI technology (European Commission 2020). Statistics Canada




24
  For more information see the report at https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/insights/us/articles/4780_State-of-
AI-in-the-enterprise/DI_State-of-AI-in-the-enterprise-2nd-ed.pdf.

                                                        14
collects firm-level data on a range of automation technologies, including robots, as well. (Dixon
et al. 2019).


3       Technology Module and Overall Results
        With this context serving as background, we now turn to how we developed the
technology module for the ABS. As the ABS was being developed, a team of researchers within
and outside of Census 25 had the opportunity to propose a limited set of questions as a module.
Three main criteria were considered in the development process: appropriateness, consistency,
and optimality. Generally, content must be appropriate with regard to the Census Bureau's
mission and its role in the larger Federal Statistical System, consistent with the instrument on
which it would appear (in terms of goals of the instrument and its format), and optimal in terms
of weighing the benefits (i.e., filling existing gaps in our knowledge) against the costs (i.e.,
respondent burden) of the additional data collection.
        Three questions were developed for inclusion on the 2018 ABS. As is standard practice
with the Census Bureau collections, these questions were subject to cognitive testing. The
decision to add the technology module to the ABS came relatively late in the survey cycle, which
meant weighing the benefit of quickly responding to an emerging data need ­and the opportunity
that the large sample presented ­against the drawbacks of only conducting one round of
cognitive testing. 26 One set of interviews took place in August 2017 during the second round of
ABS cognitive testing, and a second set took place during the same month as part of a debriefing
of high tech companies who participated in the Business R&D and Innovation Survey (BRDIS).
A detailed description of the results and recommendations from cognitive testing are in the
Appendix.
        The final resulting questions are shown in Text Box 1. The first question asks about the
intensity of digitization of six critical business activities (personnel, financial, customer
feedback, marketing, supply chain, and production) and allows for a write-in for "other"

25
   Catherine Buffington, Lucia Foster, and Scott Ohlmacher from Census, along with Erik Brynjolfsson and Kristina
McElheran.
26
   Census typically requires two rounds of cognitive testing for new survey content. The first round is exploratory
and is used to identify problems with the content including cognitive difficulty or excessive burden as well as
whether the respondent has the information needed to answer the question. The second round is confirmatory and
is used to confirm that changes made to the content based on findings and recommendations from the first round do
in fact correct the problems uncovered in testing.


                                                        15
activities. The second question asks about the intensity of cloud services purchases for eight
business functions and allows for a write-in for "other" functions. 27 These two questions have
check boxes for four percentage ranges (None, Up to 50%, More than 50%, and All) along with
an option for "Don't know" and one indicating that a particular type of information is not
collected by the business, or that the particular IT function is not used. This final response option
is useful for distinguishing firms that are not at risk of adopting a technology from those that
might be potential adopters at some point in the future, but which have not adopted as of the
survey year. 28 The third question concerns the testing and intensity of use of nine advanced
business technologies (including augmented reality, machine learning, and robotics) in the
production of goods or services. For each of the nine technologies, there are checkboxes for
"Testing," four intensity percentage ranges (No use, Less than 5%, 5%-25%, and More than
25%), and "Don't know" options.
         The ABS was collected from June through December 2018. The response rate for the
portion of the survey used in the paper was 68.7%, slightly lower than the usual response rate for
Census Bureau surveys (see Table 3). However, as shown in Table 4, when weighted by LBD-
derived tabulation weights, the size and age distributions of responders align closely with the
national population of firms. 29 The firms included in the sample for the 2018 ABS had a mean
employment of about 89 (or 26 by LBD tabulation weight), and a mean age of 16 years (the
same as with LBD tabulation weights). 30 About 67% of the firms sampled had fewer than 10
employees (75% by LBD tabulation weight), and 3% had 250 or more (1% by LBD tabulation
weight). The oldest firms (21+ years) represented about 33% of the sample (31% by LBD
tabulation weight), while young firms (0-5 years) accounted for 25% (27% by LBD tabulation
weight). These distributions line up well with the national size and age distributions for firms.
The LBD's 19 two-digit NAICS sectors were aggregated to form 13 sectors for the purposes of
the subsequent analysis. The largest shares of firms in the sample fall into Professional Services,


27
   Cloud services are "[information technology [IT] services provided by a third party that [a] business accesses on-
demand via the internet."
28
   When we consider overall adoption rates of a technology type (e.g. cloud computing), we only consider firms that
are "at risk" of adopting, meaning that as long as they respond that they are "at risk" for at least one of the
technologies listed within a category, then we include them in our denominator.
29
   The firm size, age and industry composition of the non-responses also closely aligns with the size, age and
industry distribution of responders.
30
   Firm size, age, and industry are derived from the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD).


                                                         16
Retail Trade, and Other (Arts, Food, Other Services) sectors. In the remainder of this paper, we
rely primarily on the LBD-derived tabulation weights when describing response rates as well as
extensive and intensive technology adoption rates. 31


     A. Item Non-Response
     One challenge in analyzing the results of the survey is the item non-response rate and the
share of "Don't Know" responses to the technology module questions. The item response rate to
the technology module does not differ dramatically from other parts of the survey (nearly 95%).
The cumulative responses are displayed in Figure 1. For item non-response, approximately
45,000 firms skipped the technology module, while answering other parts of the survey. For
these firms, the responses to each technology question are labeled as "Missing". For the item
responses, between 40,000 and 105,000 respond with "Don't Know", depending on the
technology and technology function (for instance, Digital Information had fewer firms
responding "Don't Know" than Cloud Computing or Business Technologies). Firms who
skipped the technology module and firms who responded with "Don't Know" are skewed toward
larger and slightly older firms when compared to the overall distribution of survey respondents. 32
This means that while the "Don't Know" responses may have relatively little effect on either
observed or imputed firm digitization rates, they may have a significant effect on one of our key
findings which estimates the association between adoption and firm size. Compared to
digitization, cloud services had a larger number of firms responding "Don't Know" to all
question categories (i.e., all categories of IT functions) and their size distribution is even more
skewed toward larger firms. Business technologies had the most firms respond "Don't Know" to
all question categories (roughly three times as many as for digitization). However, the size
distribution of the firms that responded "Don't Know" to the business technology questions is
very similar to that of the overall sample of survey respondents. While the overall levels of
business technology adoption may --of the three technology questions--be most affected by the

31
   Note that for this reason, tables and statistics in this paper may not line up with published Census Bureau
tabulations of ABS data (which rely on the survey weights used for sampling).
32
   The reason why this particular set of questions receives higher than usual "Don't Know" responses may be due to
the persons filling out the survey (usually financial analysts), who are unlikely to have reliable measures of intensive
(or extensive) use for the various technologies, as this is not typically a line-item found in financial statements. Note
also that Census was unable to perform a follow-up to the item non-response for the technology module in the 2018
ABS. However, in the following year of the ABS (2019 ABS), we find that the number of "Don't Know" responses
declined.

                                                           17
rate of "Don't Know" responses, we expect the association between size variables of business
technology use to be the least affected by "Don't Know" responses.

        The volume of "Missing" responses is another sample characteristic requiring
consideration. "Missing" responses are distinct from the "Don't Know" responses in that firms
leaving the technology questions blank generally do so consistently across each of the
digitization, cloud services, and business technology questions. These firms are much more
likely to be large. The share of firms with 250 or more employees skipping this module was
more than two times the corresponding share in the overall sample. For this reason, "Missing"
responses may have a significant effect on our estimates of how size predicts adoption of
digitization, cloud services, and business technologies. 33

        As we highlight below, our preliminary analysis reveals that both size and age appear to
be highly associated with various forms of technology adoption. Thus, excluding the "Don't
Know" or "Missing" responses from the sample may bias our findings and paint an inaccurate
picture of the types of firms that adopt frontier technologies. At the same time, we want to avoid
imposing strong assumptions on subsamples for which we have relatively little information. This
is particularly important in the context of firm technology adoption, which is known to be
skewed (e.g., Tambe and Hitt 2012), highly idiosyncratic due to organization-specific
complementary investments (e.g., Brynjolfsson and Saunders 2016; Brynjolfsson and
McElheran 2019; Brynjolfsson, Jin, and McElheran 2020) and is also implied in well-known
discussions of why productivity and performance among firms varies so widely (e.g., Syverson
2011, Song et al. 2019).


     B. Item Non-Response Imputation
     To address the issue of item non-response, we take two approaches. The first is to report
findings using only the raw data of certainty responses (i.e., excluding all "Missing" and "Don't
Know" responses). The second is to report findings after imputing values for "Don't Know"



33
   The public use tables reporting technology adoption levels (found here:
https://www.census.gov/data/tables/2018/econ/abs/2018-abs-digital-technology-module.html ) do not impute for
item non-response, nor do they correct for ABS sample weights as we do in this paper. If using the public-use tables
to report aggregate adoption rates, those rates may be considered a lower bound.


                                                        18
responses and for "Missing" items across the usage categories based on identifiable firm
characteristics. 34

         Note first that we leverage information from responses indicating that a particular
information type or IT function is not applicable to or used by the firm. We consider these firms
to not be at risk of adopting digitization or cloud services in these settings (e.g., a firm without
supply chain information cannot adopt digitization of supply chain data). Thus, when reporting
adoption rates based on observed data, we exclude them from the denominator. 35 In our
imputations, we include this as one of the possible categories and assign firms probabilistically
to this not-at-risk category. This preserves a consistent ratio of adopters to potential adopters
across imputed and non-imputed statistics.

         It is important to note two things about these ratios. The first is that they are designed to
shed light on the diffusion of technologies within the set of firms that might potentially adopt
them. This is distinct from calculating the ratio of adopters to all firms in the economy, which is
informative about the presence of a technology to date but might understate meaningful
technology use by including firms that are not candidates for adoption in the denominator. 36 This
is a particular concern for the ABS, which has unusually comprehensive coverage of the entire
population of U.S. firms ­ as opposed to a smaller survey that may only go to firms in a certain
industry or of a certain size, which automatically (often implicitly) constrains the risk set. We
report unconditional adoption rates in Appendix A.3.

         For imputed statistics, the imputed response for each firm is determined by performing an
ordered probit estimation using each of the usage categories as the dependent variable and firm
size (broken into 12 size bins, similar to the size bins in the legacy37 Business Dynamic Statistics
(BDS)) interacted with the firm's primary industry (2-digit NAICS based on the largest share of


34
   For the digitization and cloud services questions, the usage categories consist of "None", "Less than 50%", "More
than 50%" and "All". For the business technologies questions, the usage categories consist of "None", "Testing",
"Up to 5%", "Between 5% and 25%" and "More than 25%".
35
   Note, however, that in Appendix A.3 we do also report adoption rates unconditional on being at risk (i.e.,
including not-at-risk firms in the denominator).
36
   This is similar to calculating the unemployment rate, which only considers the number of participants in the labor
force and not the total adult population.
37
   In 2018, the BDS underwent a redesign which updated the size bins used in reporting. For more information, see
https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/bds/news-updates/updates/2018-bds-release.html.


                                                         19
the firm's payroll in the LBD), average payroll per employee, age (broken out into 8 size
categories), and state indicators, as the explanatory variables. For cloud services, we also use the
responses for digitization as an explanatory variable; for business technologies, we further use
the responses for both digitization and cloud services. 38 The ordered probit provides a set of
predicted probabilities for each of the informative usage categories for all three technology
questions. These corresponding probabilities are then combined with the LBD tabulation weights
and tabulated. Note that values are kept as-is for firms that responded to one of the usage
categories as either "None" or some usage. It is only firms that left the item blank or responded
with "Don't Know" for which probabilities are tabulated in the analysis below. 39 Details of the
imputation process, along with additional background information and post-imputation checks
can be found in the Appendix section A.2.

         Lastly, we describe our process for creating LBD tabulation weights using the 2017 LBD.
The survey weights and thus subsequent tabulation weights assigned to firms in the ABS result
from a complex survey frame and sampling design used to produce nationally representative
statistics by business owner characteristics including race, sex, ethnicity, and veteran status. 40
The resulting sample and subsequent set of responding firms do not produce nationally
representative weighted distributions of certain firm characteristics when compared to the LBD,
such as size, age or industry distribution. We compare the distributions of weighted firm counts
(see Table 4) and employment across NAICS sectors to their respective distributions in the 2017


38
   We first group all of the response options into the usage categories, counting the "Not Collected" option from the
Digitization question as "None" and the "Do not use IT function" from the Cloud Services question into "None". As
we demonstrate later in the paper, the technology categories appear hierarchical, implying that firms will be more
(less) likely to purchase (not purchase) cloud services if they have (do not have) information in a digital format and
so forth.
39
   In subsequent validation exercises, we calculated the firm-level precision (share of imputed responses that are
correct) and recall (share of actual responses that we imputed correctly) for the full sample by randomly splitting the
data into a 70/30 split. For 70% of the data, we estimate our imputation equation ("training set") and generate
probabilities on the remaining the 30% ("test set"), providing us with a set of validation statistics in each of the
response categories across all technologies and sub-technologies at the firm-level. Our validation across all of the
response categories found somewhat low precision and recall rates for each of the different "use" categories in
digitization and cloud, but performs better when the use categories are limited to "use" and "not use", indicating that
the firm controls used in the imputation have a hard time distinguishing between intensity. The validation performs
better for the "business technologies", where the majority of responses fall into the "no use" category. When
tabulating the imputation probabilities in our subsequent analysis and tables, we rely primarily on the extensive
margin (use/no use) measures.
40
   For more information, see https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/abs/technical-
documentation/methodology.html.


                                                          20
LBD. 41 We construct tabulation weights based on the universe of firms in the 2017 LBD to
adjust for these deviations from national estimates. Our weights are calculated by stratifying the
firms in the 2017 LBD and our final sample of firms in the ABS on firm size, age, and industry.
These strata are defined by the 19 two-digit NAICS sectors and the 12 firm size and 12 firm age
groups used in the BDS. All firms in a given stratum are assigned the same weight, which is
calculated by dividing the number of firms in that stratum from the 2017 LBD by the number of
firms in that stratum from the ABS sample. 42 With these new tabulation weights, we match much
more closely the firm and employment distributions in the 2017 LBD.

        We now turn to detailed analysis of the three technology questions in the next three
sections of the paper. Given the abundance of results, we have organized each of the sections in
the same manner. Each section has the same set of subsections: summary of responses
(subsection A), adoption and use rates (subsection B), industry breakdown (subsection C),
relation to firm size and age (subsection D), and summary remarks.

4. Digital Share of Information by Business Activity

The first question on the 2018 ABS technology module queried firms on the type of information
stored digitally.

     A. Summary of Responses

        Figure 1 contains the frequencies of responses for the digital share of information by
business activity or function. Digitization is widely adopted across the majority of firms, with
most firms electing to store their personnel and financial information digitally. Other types of
information, such as supply chain and production information, were less likely to be stored
digitally mainly due to firms not collecting those types of information in any format. It is worth
emphasizing that, had we not restricted attention to whether the information existed at the firm in
any format, we would dramatically underestimate the move from "analog" to digital
representations of information by U.S. firms. An open ­ but distinct ­ question is whether firms


41
   The LBD is the underlying data used in creating the Business Dynamics Statistics (BDS), which reports economy-
wide statistics on firms and establishments.
42
   To account for unusually large weights caused by too few ABS firms in a stratum, we also winsorize the LBD
tabulation weights at the 99.99th percentile.


                                                       21
should collect additional types of information and/or whether the availability of digital
technologies expands or shrinks the scope of their activities. 43 We take the boundary of firm
activities as given for our core estimates.

        For firms that did respond in the affirmative for each type of information, the most
frequent responses are "more than 50%" or "all", followed by "up to 50%." There are a large
number of firms indicating full digital information use for personnel and financial business
activities. These categories represent the highest overall use of digital information, followed by
customer feedback and marketing. Table 5 lists the three most common information types
digitized by sector. In all sectors, financial and personnel information are the most likely to be
digitized.

    B. Adoption and Use Rates

        Table 6 contains the adoption and intensive use shares for digital information by business
function. A firm is considered an adopter if its response indicates at least some use of digital
information in a business function. According to our LBD tabulation weights, 90.2% 44 (75.6%
non-imputed) of firms that collect at least one type of information stored at least one type of
information in digital format. Consistent with the frequencies in Table 5, the highest rates of
adoption are in financial, personnel, and marketing activities. The relatively high rates of
adoption in these categories are not surprising, as most firms rely on basic financial and
personnel functions, regardless of sector. On the other hand, the lowest rates of adoption are
observed in production and supply chain activities, in part driven by the fact that these activities
are more concentrated in the manufacturing sector, which only makes up 4% of national firm
counts. Also shown in Table 6, the incidence of intensive usage (more than 50% or all) parallels
the basic adoption rates by function. The most intensive use is in financial functions, where
70.8% of the firms use digital information at high intensity. In contrast, supply chain function
has the lowest incidence of intensive use at about 32.6%.




43
   While conventional wisdom suggests that digital technologies lower the costs of collecting information, thereby
expanding the scope of firm information collection and processing, work on early waves of technology adoption has
suggested a countervailing mechanism whereby the firm boundary itself contracts (Brynjolfsson et al. 1994; Forman
and McElheran 2019).
44
   Across business functions ­ not in table

                                                       22
        Table 7 highlights the five business function pairs that have the highest co-presence
(correlation) with adoption of digital information. The correlations indicate the extent of
potential complementarities between the information types. The highest correlation (0.70) occurs
in the financial and personnel pair, which is consistent with the fact they have the top two
adoption rates in Table 6. The next pair is marketing and customer feedback, which have a
correlation of 0.69. The high correlation for this pair is sensible if firms that use digital
information in their marketing activities also tend to have digitized customer feedback platforms.
The relatively high correlation for supply chain and production is also intuitive. Production and
supply chain activities complement one another and the reliance on digital information in
production pairs well with digitization of information in the supply chain.

    C. Industry Breakdown

        Figure 2 is a butterfly chart of adoption and use rates for digital information by sector.
The right panel of the chart represents, by sector, the adoption rates of digital information across
all surveyed information types. The adoption rate for "at-risk-of-adoption" firms is highest
(96.5%) in the Information sector, followed by Professional Services and Education. The sectors
with the lowest adoption rates (85%-88%) are Transportation & Warehousing, Retail Trade, and
Other (Arts, Food, Other). The segments within each bar in the chart capture adoption rates by
the number of information types in digital format. The leftmost segment in the right panel
indicates the share of firms that have digitized at least three types of information, the next
segment adds firms with exactly two information types digitized, and the final segment
represents with only one type of information digitized. In all sectors, a large share of adopters
report having three or more types of information digitized.

        The left panel of Figure 2 represents intense use of digitization (defined as "50% or
more" or "all") by sector. Once again, Information leads with more than 91% of "at-risk" firms
indicating intensive use. In general, the ranking of sectors by adoption and intensity of use rates
parallel each other. Similar to the extensive margin measures, most firms report digitizing at least
two types of information, regardless of sector. In fact, the fraction of firms digitizing only one
type of information intensively is relatively small in each sector. Overall, digitization appears to
be highly prevalent across sectors.

        D. Relation to Firm Size and Age

                                                  23
         Table 8 shows digitalization rates by firm size and age. Specifically, the table reports the
estimated coefficients 45 from a linear probability model (LPM) where the dependent variable is
an indicator of whether a firm uses at least one type of digital information, and the independent
variables are pairwise interactions of four size categories and four age categories (16 size-age
cells in total). 46 The estimated coefficients for size-age cells indicate that for a given size level,
the presence of digital information slightly increases with firm age, with the exception of the
smallest size category, where the use indicator actually declines with age. This observation is
consistent with research that old, small firms are a relatively low-growth and less-advanced
segment of the firm population, and thus may be less reliant on digital information in business
functions. This finding is supported in Jin and McElheran (2017) and is consistent with prior
work on low- versus high-growth entrepreneurship (Guzman and Stern 2020). In general, the
adoption rate is monotonic in size, with the largest firms having consistently higher rates of
adoption relative to smaller firms.

         The general pattern with age is more nuanced. For smaller firms (1-9 employees), age is
negatively associated with adoption rates, with a smaller proportion of old firms adapting their
information digitally than young firms. However, as the size increases, this pattern changes, with
age positively associated with increased adoption of digitization.

         To summarize, the vast majority of firms (>90%) that collect at least one form of
information store at least one form of information digitally. Both financial and personnel
information are the most likely sources of information to be digitized, with both information
types intensively digitized. Manufacturing, Information and Professional Services are among the
highest adopters of digitization, with size being a primary correlate of adoption. The next section
looks at cloud service purchases.




45
  All coefficients are statistically significant at a 0.1% level of significance.
46
  The results from a Probit specification yield essentially identical estimates for the digital information technology,
and for most of the other technologies discussed below. Hence, we uniformly use an LPM for all specifications that
follow later in the paper. For further information on limitations and potential biases introduced from estimating a
probability model using ordinary least squares (OLS) see Horrace and Oaxaca (2006).

                                                          24
5. Cloud Service Purchases by IT Function

       This section describes the adoption patterns for cloud service purchases across size, age
and sector. We see similar but lower rates of adoption across the categories of cloud services,
with firms electing to host multiple IT functions in the cloud rather than concentrating cloud
purchases within a single IT function.

   A. Summary of Responses

       Using our LBD-derived weights, the majority of firms (78.4%; 54.1% non-imputed) that
perform at least one IT function also purchase at least one cloud service. These purchases vary
across several functions, with little concentration in a specific function, as found in Figure 3. A
large number of firms indicated that they did not know whether they had any cloud purchases.
For many IT functions, among those reporting cloud use, the frequency of responses was
typically highest for the "up to 50%" category followed by "more than 50%" and "all".
Exceptions to this are in Security or Firewall and Billing and Account functions and to some
extent in Servers. For these functions, more adopters of cloud reported in the "all" category
compared to "more than 50%." The Data Analysis function has the lowest number of firms
reporting some cloud purchase, whereas Billing and Account Management shas the highest
number of firms, closely followed by Security or Firewall and Collaboration and
Synchronization functions.

   B. Adoption and Use Rates

       Table 9 contains the extensive margin of adoption and intensive use shares in terms of
expenditure for purchased cloud services by business function. A firm is considered an adopter if
its response indicates at least some expenditure on cloud services in a business function. First,
when all functions are considered, both the adoption rates of cloud services and their intensive-
use rates tend to be generally lower than the adoption of digital information reported in Table 6.
The highest adoption and intensive-use rates are observed for Billing and for Security, whereas
the lowest rates are in Customer Relations and in Data Analysis. The rates in Table 9 indicate
that purchased cloud services are more prevalent in relatively standard IT functions and adoption
and intensity are lower in more-specialized functions. Overall, about a quarter of the firms have
indicated adoption of purchased cloud services in All IT functions.


                                                 25
         One notable pattern for cloud services purchased is the lack of a single mass
concentration for a particular service. This suggests that firms are utilizing the cloud for a variety
of business processes and perhaps speaks to the flexibility and/or diversity of cloud services
available by the time of the survey. The ranking of the intensive-use rates (defined as "50% or
more" and "all") is similar to the ranking of the adoption rates with a few exceptions. Intensive
usage rates in Data Storage and Servers services are higher than Synchronization and All IT
cases. Data Analysis is lowest ranked in terms of intensive use as with its ranking in the adoption
rates.

         Table 10 shows the top five business function pairs that have the highest co-presence
(correlation) in terms of adoption of purchased cloud services. As in Table 7, the correlations
indicate the extent to which the two functions in a pair tend to rely or not on cloud service
purchases. The highest correlation (0.73) occurs in the Servers and Security pair which may be
driven by the fact that Security, which has the highest rate of adoption for cloud services, could
go hand-in-hand with a need to protect servers. The relatively high correlations between All IT
functions and Security, Servers, and Storage may not be too surprising, as these functions are
often bundled together by cloud-hosting providers. The third-highest correlation is for the pair
Servers and Storage (0.67), which is consistent with firms unsurprisingly needing storage
services to harness digital information created through online transactions on those servers.

    C. Industry Breakdown

         Like Figure 2, Figure 4 provides the butterfly chart for adoption and intensive-use rates
across sectors in the case of purchased cloud services. Like digitization, the highest adoption and
intensive-use rates are in Information, followed closely by Professional Services and Education.
The lowest rates are in Agriculture, Mining, Utilities, Retail Trade, and Transportation and
Warehousing, in addition to the Other category. These ranking are consistent with a prior that IT-
intensive sectors such as Information, Professional Services, Education and Health Care may
have more reliance on cloud services. Figure 4 also reveals that cloud services purchases have
much lower diffusion rates compared to those for digital information in any given sector. For
instance, in the Information sector, the digital information diffusion rate based on at least some
use in a business activity is about 97%, compared to the diffusion rate of purchased cloud
services, which is about 89%.

                                                 26
            As in the case of digital information use, for all sectors there is a large fraction of firms
relying on cloud services for three or more IT functions, indicating that conditional on using
some cloud services firms tend to use those services for many IT functions, regardless of sector.
Table 11 shows that Billing and Security are the most common IT functions for most sectors,
with certain sectors predominantly relying on the cloud to perform collaborative or synchronized
tasks. Roughly one-third the sectors list "All IT functions" as the third most common use in the
cloud. This seems to be suggestive that digitization and cloud usage are most efficient when used
and shared across multiple platforms. This may be due to a variety of reasons such as shared
infrastructure and personnel, price breaks from vendors offering bundled services, or
complementarities in functionality.

       D. Relation to Firm Size and Age

            The relationship between adoption of purchased cloud services to firm size and age is
shown in Table 12. As in Table 8, the cells contain the magnitudes of the estimated coefficients 47
from a linear probability model, where the dependent variable is an indicator for a firm
purchasing cloud services for at least one IT function and the independent variables are the 16
size-age bins. While the relationship between cloud services expenditure and both size and age
are generally lower than for digital information across all cells, the patterns are broadly similar.
For the smallest size category (1-9 employees), the adoption rate declines with age, from 0.74 to
0.58, moving from the youngest (0-5 years old) to the oldest (21+ years old) firms. For the
middle size categories (10-49 or 50-249 employees), the variation across age categories is much
more limited. For the largest size category (250+ employees), there is a non-monotonic pattern
with the adoption rate first increasing with age and then declining. The smallest-oldest category
has the lowest adoption rate, consistent with the pattern for digital information. The highest rates
occur for firms in the higher size categories, again consistent with the digitization patterns. The
relatively higher rates of adoption for middle- and large-size categories may indicate that these
firms are most likely to outsource IT services to a cloud computing provider, while smaller firms
may either perform IT functions internally, not have a need for cloud computing and storage




47
     All coefficients are statistically significant at a 0.1% level of significance.


                                                               27
services, or face higher frictions to adoption (e.g., such as a dedicated IT staff for migrating IT
functionality into the cloud). 48

         To summarize, the adoption rates for business IT functions in the cloud is significantly
lower than the adoption rates of storing information digitally. However, this technology is fairly
widespread across various applications, as nearly a third of each different type of IT function is
being performed in the cloud and being used intensively. We see a monotonic pattern of adoption
by size similar to digitization, where the largest firms are the most likely to adopt some form of
cloud computing services. The relationship between cloud use and firm age is more nuanced and
varies with firm size while being non-monotonic. Typically, the lowest adoption rates are among
the oldest firms. The next section looks at business technologies and their patterns of adoption.

6. Advanced Business Technologies

         In this section we analyze firm responses to the business technologies question. Due to
their wide technological scope, we link the responses here with the previous technology adoption
questions and perform a deeper set of analyses assessing the range of response categories.

     A. Summary of Responses

         The frequency of responses in Figure 5 indicates that very few firms use the business
technologies included in the module, and many answered, "Don't know". Based on our LBD
tabulation weights, only 10.3% (8.5% non-imputed) of firms adopt at least one of the listed
advanced business technologies. Given the advanced and specialized nature of at least some of
the technologies, it is not surprising that only a relatively small number of firms indicate any
type of use. The highest use frequencies are observed in automated storage, touchscreens and
machine learning. However, our analysis of the responses to the automated storage question
indicated that firms most likely interpreted automated storage as mainly data storage and not the
physical storage and retrieval systems the question was intended to measure. 49 As a result, we do

48
   In the case of the latter, we may be able to capture this by looking at adoption patterns in future ABS modules that
focus on cloud computing.
49
   We performed multiple sets of analyses identifying the sectors and industries most likely to use automated storage
and retrieval systems and looked at technological similarities that were correlated with automated storage and
retrieval systems. We found the publishing sector is the largest adopter and most likely to adopt automated storage.
We also found a significantly higher correlation between automated storage and "data storage" in cloud computing
than would be predicted. As a result, we concluded that subsequent analyses using automated storage as an outcome
variable are likely to be invalid.

                                                          28
not consider the responses for this technology suitable for addressing our research questions, and
they are dropped from the analysis.

    B. Adoption and Use Rates

        Table 13 provides the use and testing rates for each business technology. Perhaps not
surprisingly, the highest use and testing rates are observed for the Touchscreen/Kiosks
technology. The adoption rate is 6.1% for this technology and the testing rate is quite small
(0.9%). Machine learning comes second in use and testing rates, but the rates are quite low at
2.9% and 0.7%, respectively. Voice Recognition and Machine Vision, which are can be
considered examples of Machine Learning applications, have the next two highest use and
testing rates.

        While robots are usually singled out as a key technology in studies of automation, the
overall diffusion of robotics use and testing is very low across firms in the U.S. The use rate is
only 1.3% and the testing rate is 0.3%. These levels correspond relatively closely with patterns
found in the robotics expenditure question in the 2018 ASM. Robots are primarily concentrated
in large, manufacturing firms. The distribution of robots among firms is highly skewed, and the
skewness in favor of larger firms can have a disproportionate effect on the economy that is
otherwise not obvious from the relatively low overall diffusion rate of robots. The least-used
technologies are RFID (1.1%), Augmented Reality (0.8%), and Automated Vehicles (0.8%).
Looking at the pairwise adoption of these technologies in Table 14, we find that use of Machine
Learning and Machine Vision are most coincident. We find that use of Automated Guided
Vehicles is closely associated with use of Augmented Reality, RFID, and Machine Vision.

        Next, we turn to testing-versus-use rates across different technologies to assess which
technologies are in earlier phase of diffusion, that is, where testing is high relative to use. In
Figure 6, the vertical axis represents the ratio of the fraction of firms testing to the fraction of
firms using. The technologies are represented by the circles. The size of each circle corresponds
to the use rate for that technology with larger circles representing higher rates of use.
Technologies are ordered in the figure by usage rate, low to high. As shown in panel a, the
technology with the highest testing-to-use ratio is Augmented Reality, where nearly half as many
firms as those using the technology report testing it. The next highest ratios are observed in
RFID and Natural Language Processing and the lowest ratios are in technologies that are

                                                   29
relatively more diffused (and hence, used), such as Touchscreens, Machine Learning and
Machine Vision. For Touchscreens, for instance, only about 15 firms report testing the
technology for every 100 that use it. It is notable that most testing-to-use ratios are below 0.3,
indicating that there are fewer than 30 firms testing the technology for every 100 using it.

          The remaining panels of Figure 6 plot the testing-to-use ratio for technologies by firm
size, age, and manufacturing status. Panel b displays ratios by firm size, where small firms are
defined as those with 1-9 employees and large firms are those with at least 250 employees. The
blue circles capture usage among large firms and the orange circles represent usage among small
firms. The sizes of the circles are smaller for small firms for each technology, consistent with the
earlier finding that larger firms tend to use the business technologies at a higher rate, in general.
Interestingly, testing-to-use ratios are higher for small firms for most business technologies (and
particularly for Robotics and RFID technologies). The ratios are similar for large and small firms
for Automated Vehicles and Machine Learning.

          Panel c in Figure 6 shows the ratios by firm age. Young firms are defined as those that
are 0-5 years old and old firms are the ones that are 21 years or older. Strikingly, testing-to-use
ratios are almost uniformly higher for young firms compared to the older firms, in some cases
substantially so (e.g., Augmented Reality, Automated Vehicles, and Robotics). The only
technology where the two ratios are similar is Touchscreens. It is interesting to note that circle
sizes are similar across the two age groups, reflecting the earlier finding that firm age is less of a
predictor for technology use than is firm size. Overall, the patterns in Figure 6, panel c indicate
that within the population of young firms there is a high rate of testing compared to use, whereas
older and larger firms tend to either experiment less with these technologies or the diffusion of
these technologies among the set of older and larger firms is relatively greater by the time of our
survey.

          Finally, panel d in Figure 6 presents the testing-to-use ratios for manufacturing versus
non-manufacturing industries. Despite popular conceptions that Services are at the frontier of
new technology adoption, more of the technologies covered in the ABS tend to be adopted
within manufacturing, as indicated by the much larger circles for manufacturers, with the
exception of Voice Recognition, Touchscreens, and Natural Language Processing. For the
technologies most closely associated with automation, such as Machine Learning, Robotics and

                                                   30
Machine Vision, manufacturing firms show significantly higher usage compared to non-
manufacturing firms. This seems to indicate that these specific technologies may have started to
find their place within the production process for manufacturing firms, while non-manufacturing
firms are still experimenting with how these technologies can be implemented for their
businesses. The largest differences in testing-to-use ratios across the two sector-based groups are
in Voice Recognition, where testing is relatively more prevalent in manufacturing, and Natural
Language Processing, where testing is relatively more intense in non-manufacturing.

   C. Industry Breakdown

       The butterfly chart in Figure 7 provides sectoral diffusion rates for all business
technologies considered together. Manufacturing leads with about 15% of firms indicating use of
at least one business technology, followed by Health Care (14%), Information (12%), Education
(11%) and Professional Services (10%). The lowest diffusion rates for the technologies are in
Construction, Agriculture, Mining and Utilities, Management and Administrative, and Finance,
Insurance and Real Estate sectors. The extensive margin of use in these sectors hover around 5%.
Note that, conditional on at least some advanced technology adoption, most firms across all
sectors report using only one technology, in stark contrast to the use of digital information and
cloud services. It may be that the benefits of digital information and cloud services across
multiple business functions are much higher than for the use of these frontier technologies, either
because they are more "general or flexible" in their application or because there are economies
of scope in their adoption. In addition, the costs of adoption for digitization and cloud services
may also be lower.

       The testing rates on the left panel of the figure reveal an interesting pattern. While
Manufacturing leads sectors in rates of adoption, the testing rate in Manufacturing is not the
highest. In fact, Information has the highest testing rate at about 8.1%, followed by Professional
Services. These two sectors also have the highest testing-to-use ratio (0.48 and 0.36,
respectively). The lowest ratios are in Health Care, Retail Trade and the Other (Arts, Food, and
others).

       Looking at the most common types of business technologies adopted by sector in Table
15, we find that there is substantial variation. The trade sectors (Retail, Wholesale and others)
primarily adopts Touchscreens followed by Machine Learning. Manufacturing is most likely to

                                                 31
adopt Machine Learning followed by Touchscreens and Robotics. RFID technology is most
commonly used in the Retail, Wholesale, and Transportation and Warehousing sectors,
consistent with these industries tracking physical goods through supply chains.

        The three industries (4-digit NAICS) with the highest adoption rate for a given
technology are shown in Table 16. Not surprisingly, robotics use is highest in three
manufacturing industries, with the highest rate in Motor Vehicle Parts Manufacturing (17%). 50
                                                                          51
RFID use is most common in Warehousing and Storage (6%).

     D. Relation to Firm Size and Age

        How does the use of business technologies vary by firm size and age? Table 17 provides
the estimated coefficients from a Linear Probability Model where the left-hand-side variable is
whether a firm uses at least one of the business technologies, and the right-hand-side variables
are 16 size-age categories, as in Tables 8 and 12. A clear pattern emerges. First, the smallest
firms have the lowest use rates and the use rates tend to increase with size, even when controlling
for firm age. Second, for small firms (less than 50 employees) use rates tend to decline with age
(though not monotonically), with oldest small firms having the lowest adoption rates in general.
For larger firms (50+ employees), use rates exhibit the opposite pattern: as firm age increases, so
does the use rate (especially for 50-249 employee firms). The highest use rates are in the largest
and oldest firms. Another notable feature of the table is that for each age category the use rate
increases with size. Overall, these patterns suggest that size is an important predictor of business
technology use and the connection between age and the use of these technologies depends on
size.

     7. Discussion of Results in the Context of Open Research Questions

     The technology module of the 2018 ABS reveals several interesting patterns of technology
adoption across firm size, age, and sector. Most notably, we find that adoption for the latest
advanced technologies appears to be quite low, overall, with adoption mainly being led by the


50
   This finding is also consistent with the preliminary findings from the Robotics question in the 2018 ASM on
which manufacturing industries are the largest adopters.
51
   One interesting, but potentially concerning finding is that Machine Learning is most prevalent in Metalworking
Machinery Manufacturing (12.3%) and Machine Shops (11.6%), which may be the result of cognitive error around
the term "machine" or reflect the growing trend of embedding algorithms in production technology. Software
Publishers, less surprisingly, are in the top-3 industries using machine learning. Further follow-up is needed.

                                                        32
largest and oldest firms. This contrasts with popular discussion but it is consistent with much
prior work on IT adoption, which documents advantages for incumbent firms (albeit sometimes
with a lag) due to mechanisms such as economies of scale or complementary organizational
capital (Bertschek and Kaiser 2004, Tambe and Hitt 2012, Saunders and Brynjolfsson 2016). We
also capture technologies at different states of diffusion, with digitization and cloud computing
already taking on relatively large and significant roles in business and, within adopting firms,
across business functions.

        The technology module, in its current state, can be used to address several open empirical
questions related to technology adoption across firms. 52 These include first-order questions, such
as how pervasive AI use is among US firms, to more deeper questions relating to dynamics and
diffusion, sequence of technology adoption, and the organizational capabilities and/or
infrastructure required to adopt the most-advanced technologies. This data is also informative
about complementarities among different technologies (Milgrom and Roberts 1990 & 1995,
Bertschek and Kaiser 2004, Brynjolfsson and Milgrom 2013), which have already been
mentioned in describing some of the notable pairwise correlations. In addition to these questions,
the module linked to the 2018 ABS innovation module sheds light on technology's role in
stimulating innovation. Finally, and most relevant, the technology module provides a glimpse
into the macro-economic and distributional effects of technology use. Each of these questions are
discussed below.

        A. AI Adoption

One of the primary goals of the ABS technology module is to provide the first comprehensive
look into the adoption rates of Artificial Intelligence (AI) by US firms. As AI rapidly advances
its capabilities and becomes more integrated into the workplace, there is an ongoing debate as to
whether these technologies will lead to further prosperity and enhance our productivity or
whether they will lead to mass joblessness and wage stagnation (Brynjolfsson and McAfee,
2014; Aghion et al. 2017). Central to this debate is obtaining reliable measures on the




52
  This is in contrast to some of the open macroeconomic questions related to technology adoption described in
Comin & Mestieri (2014). These questions also include how to measure technology adoption and what are some of
the key drivers of adoption, but with emphasis on the macro and across-country effects of adoption.

                                                      33
pervasiveness of this technology and identifying which firms are already using this technology
so that we can begin to gauge its impact.

       In a 2017 report by the National Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine
(NASEM) entitled, "Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and
Where Do We Go From Here?", an expert panel acknowledges the potential of AI to transform
the economy, but notes that accurate forecasts of these effects are limited due to the absence of
reliable data on the use of AI in the economy. The ABS can potentially rectify this gap in the
data by providing a first glimpse as to the spread of AI across a nationally representative set of
firms and identifying a set of firms that are leading the race in its adoption.

       From the set of business technologies, we have identified five potential technologies that
incorporate elements of AI. These include: Automated Guided Vehicles, Machine Learning,
Machine Vision, Natural Language Processing and Voice Recognition. Across all AI-related
technologies, the aggregate adoption rate for all firms in the economy is 6.6% (4.5% non-
imputed), meaning that approximately 1 in 16 firms in the US are utilizing some form of AI in
the workplace. This adoption rate is significantly lower than the adoption rate highlighted in the
AI survey by the European Commission and other private surveys by McKinsey, Deloitte, and
PwC. However, it is important to consider the sampling methods of those surveys. Neither of the
other surveys claim to be nationally representative and tend to focus on larger, publicly traded
companies. In contrast, ABS sample includes many small firms where AI adoption is very low.

       This is important because AI adoption rate varies greatly by firm size. Figure 8 charts the
adoption rate of AI across 12 different size categories used in the BDS. Adoption rates (defined
as usage or testing) monotonically increase from 5.3% for the group of firms with the smallest
number of employees to 62.5% for firms with 10,000+ employees.

       In other words, scale appears to be a primary correlate of AI usage, likely due to both the
large quantities of data and computing power required to fully realize the most popular types of
AI currently available. This may potentially have far-reaching implications on topics such as
inequality, competition and the rise of "superstar" firms (Autor et al 2020; Lashkari et al 2019),
especially if AI is shown to have widespread productivity benefits (Tambe et al, 2020). If only a
select group of firms are able to fully realize the benefits of AI, we can expect further divergence


                                                  34
for the "frontier" and most productive set of firms. Alternatively, early adoption of AI by some
firms may generate rapid rates of growth.

          B. Technological Hierarchies

          The three technology categories listed in the technology module seem to require different
levels of technological sophistication for adoption, with digitization being the first step, and
culminating in one of the advanced business technologies. This "hierarchy" in technological
sophistication is apparent in Figure 9, which plots a Sankey diagram of firm counts that adopt
each of the different technology categories. From the diagram, we can see that the vast majority
of firms who utilize the cloud for their IT services also digitize their information. Similarly, we
see that for the vast majority of firms that adopt at least one advanced business technology, they
almost always purchase cloud services.

          This clear evidence of hierarchy points to some of the challenges that firms may face, as
well as barriers to technology adoption. In the exercises that relate technology use to firm size
and age, we found that the largest and oldest firms are by far the most likely to adopt at least one
business technology, implying that scale effects may be an important determinant of technology
adoption. And while it has been speculated that cloud services can "open" up unlimited
computing power to smaller firms, the uptake of this technology and other advanced, nascent
technologies is still very low, suggesting that the rates of return to investing in these technologies
for smaller firms is not high enough to justify the costs. This may be due to the return being
dependent on the scale of the data being used. Small firms are likely to have only small amounts
of digital information and so have little reason to invest in high-powered computing or apply the
latest machine learning algorithms to their data. On the other hand, the returns to access to high-
powered computing and the latest advances in AI become much more apparent as digitization
scales.

          In panel b. of Figure 9, we plot a similar Sankey diagram for firms who test or use
"Machine Learning", one of the core technologies associated with artificial intelligence. In this
example, the majority of firms who adopt Machine Learning have multiple cloud computing
purchases (usually 3 or more IT functions hosted on the cloud) and multiple pieces of their data
digitized. Related to this idea of technological hierarchies, are technological complementarities,
which we discuss in the next subsection.

                                                  35
        C. Technological Complementarities

        We started to explore the notion of technological complementarities when we listed the
top five pairwise technological correlations within each category of technology. The idea behind
technological complementarities is that adopting one kind of technology is likely to lead to
adopting another type, or that certain technology types require adoption of multiple technologies
and complementary investments in order to fully benefit (Brynjolffson et al. (2018)).

        To further explore this idea, we look at the highest cross-category pairwise correlations
with each of the advanced business technologies in Table 18. We find that for many of the core
elements of artificial intelligence, namely Machine Learning, Machine Vision, and Natural
Language Processing, the associated technology categories associated with these include
digitizing production information and performing their data analysis on the cloud. These
correlations suggest that certain technologies may need to be adopted in tandem to fully reap the
benefits of the technology.

        D. Technology and Innovation

        Adopting technologies is often associated with improvements in productivity and
efficiency. However, it is not clear what mechanism within the firm causes these improvements,
as adoption may also be associated with higher labor costs (for higher skilled workers), training
and learning, significant capital investments and perhaps changing some of the underlying
fundamentals for the firm. These factors may also force the firm to innovate so that it can
effectively adopt the new technology.

        As an exercise, we look at how technology adoption is associated with measures of both
product and process innovations within the innovation module of the ABS. 53 We estimated a
linear probability model looking at whether a firm responded positively to producing a product
or process innovation in the last three years based on their technology adoption, controlling for
their size, age and industry. We group each of the firms into eight different technology
categories: None (no use across all technology categories), Digitization Only, Cloud Only,



53
 Product innovation is defined as the business having introduced or significantly improved a new good or service,
while process innovation is defined as the business having introduced or significantly improved their method of
manufacturing, logistics, delivery or distribution methods or support activities.

                                                       36
Business Technology Only, Digitization and Cloud, Digitization and Business Technology,
Cloud and Business Technology, All three technologies.

           We plot the coefficients for these technology groupings in Figure 10. We see that as the
technological sophistication increases, the magnitudes of the coefficients for both product and
process innovations increases, indicating a positive association between technology adoption and
innovation. We further decompose these regressions to each of the subcategories in panel b,
looking at the adoption of each technology type on any (product or process) innovation. We see a
surprising amount of heterogeneity across each technology type, with certain technologies
having stronger and positive associations with innovation than others.

           E. Macro/Distributional Outcomes of Technology Use

           While a survey can tell us firm exposure to certain technologies, it does not tell the whole
story for the worker and the technologies to which workers are exposed. In this section, we
weigh some of the key statistics by employment and demonstrate how some of the key advanced
business technologies, despite having relatively low adoption rates at the firm-level, have
significantly higher worker exposure rates.

           Weighted by the LBD tabulation weights, the imputed adoption rates of digitization,
cloud services and at least one advanced business technology are 90.2%, 78.4% and 10.3%
respectively. However, in Table 19, if we assume that each worker within the firm has at least
some exposure to the firm's technology, then the "exposure" rates for digitization, cloud
services 54 and at least one business technology change to 98.9%, 94.3% and 57.2%. The
employment-weighted shares of adoption for all technology types differ quite dramatically from
the weighted results, with the employment-weighted adoption rates for advanced business
technologies being nearly five times higher. Therefore, while the firm-level adoption rates for
advanced business technologies is quite low, more than 4 of 10 workers are in firms that have
adopted at least one of the technologies. Second, more than 9 out of 10 workers are in firms that
have adopted at least one form of digital information and purchased cloud services. These
findings raise some important questions regarding the macroeconomic/distributional impacts of
these technologies, especially if we believe that these technologies will substitute for labor.


54
     Conditional on collecting and storing at least one type of information and utilizing at least one IT function

                                                             37
Furthermore, the discrepancies between firm versus employment-weighted adoption rates hint at
the reallocation that may be at play in shifting inputs and resources from non-adopting to
adopting firms.

       Taking a closer look at each of the business technologies in Table 19, we find that the
business technologies with the highest discrepancies between the firm-weighted adoption rates
and employment-weighted adoption rates are Robotics and RFID, each of which has an eight
times higher employment-weighted adoption rate. One of the limitations of the survey is that it is
a firm-level survey, while adoption of certain technologies may take place only at the
establishment level, suggesting that the employment-weighted exposure measures listed here are
an upper bound.

       F. Technology as Equalizer

       One reason some economists believe that technology adoption is important is that
technology may be viewed as a "great equalizer." In this view, young and small firms, that could
be more nimble, may be able to quickly scale up using the cost savings and efficiency
improvements from adopting the latest technologies as compared to old, large incumbents. One
aspect that this survey reveals, however, is that the latest technology adoption is mostly being
done by the larger and older firms, potentially leading to increased separation between the
typical firm and "superstar" firms.

       This may actually be driven by the technology itself, as much of the latest technology
relies on scale effects to be useful. For instance, leading manifestations of machine learning and
artificial intelligence benefit from larger amounts of data and smaller firms may be unable to
provide the necessary data where adopting these technologies proves efficient. This could create
a positive feedback loop creating "superstar" firms as large firms reap efficiency gains from
adopting and refining the latest technologies, which in turn, makes them larger and making the
technology even more productive.

   8. Conclusion

       We have provided an introduction to the technology module in the 2018 ABS and placed
it in the larger context of related work at the Census Bureau to collect comprehensive data on
technology adoption and use by U.S. firms in order to provide a more accurate picture of the

                                                38
state of advanced technology use in the U.S. economy. Because of the large pool of respondents
(about 850,000 firms) in the 2018 ABS, the module represents a unique opportunity to offer
insights on technology adoption and use across all sectors of the economy and across a variety of
key firm characteristics.

       Using this new collection, we provide a first look at the diffusion of digital information
use, cloud computing purchases, and several new and emerging business technologies. A few
key observations emerge. While the use of digital information in business functions and cloud
computing purchases for many IT functions are highly prevalent across firms, the diffusion of
the business technologies is very limited. However, employment-weighted diffusion rates
indicate that the presence of many of these technologies in large firms exposes many workers in
the economy to these technologies. Further insights into how these new technologies impact the
skill composition and demand for these workers will be unveiled in the 2019 ABS. In addition,
there are important differences in the diffusion and intensive use rates across sectors. The
analysis of the connection between the prevalence of different technologies and firm life-cycle
indicators (firm size and age) reveals that technology adoption and use is not always
monotonically related to these indicators.

       In general, the business technologies explored in the module's third question are more
prevalent in larger and older firms. This skewness in technology prevalence suggests that these
technologies may have a disproportionate economic impact despite their generally low adoption
rates. If the concentration of economic activity in larger and older firms in the U.S. economy
continues to increase as it has in the recent past, then the effects of technology adoption by these
firms will have growing influence on key economic aggregates, such as employment and
productivity. It is our hope that this paper serves as an impetus for further research using this
new data set to help answer these important questions.

       Looking towards the future, we will continue to validate the responses from the survey by
incorporating and comparing output from existing Census data on technology use such as the
2018 ASM, 2018 BRDIS (and 2019 BERD) and 2018 ACES. We also plan to utilize
administrative data, such as patents linked to Census data (see Graham et al. 2018) to help
validate responses and look outside towards external researchers utilizing the Federal Statistical
Research Data Centers (FSRDC) network to contribute their ideas on validating and improving

                                                 39
the data. Finally, looking even further in the future, the same technology module is expected to
be a part of the 2021 Annual Business Survey, providing a panel dimension for the set of firms
queried on both modules.




                                                40
References

Acemoglu, D, and Autor D. 2011. "Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for employment
     and earnings." Handbook of labor economics. Vol. 4. Elsevier. 1043-1171.
Acemoglu, D. and Restrepo, P., 2019. "Automation and new tasks: how technology displaces
     and reinstates labor." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 33(2), pp.3-30.
Acemoglu, D. and Restrepo, P., 2020. "Robots and jobs: Evidence from US labor
     markets." Journal of Political Economy, 128(6), pp.2188-2244.
Aghion, P., Jones, B.F. and Jones, C.I., 2017. "Artificial intelligence and economic
      growth". National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. w23928.
Agrawal, A, Gans J, and Goldfarb A. 2019. "The Economics of Artificial Intelligence" NBER
      Conference Report.
Andrews, D, Criscuolo, C and Gal, P. 2015. "Frontier Firms, Technology Diffusion and Public
      Policy." OECD Future of Productivity Background Paper.
Angle, P and Forman C. 2018. "Does it level the playing field for small establishments?
       Evidence from manufacturing. Evidence from Manufacturing". Georgia Tech Scheller
       College of Business Research Paper. 18-37):
Aral, S., Brynjolfsson, E. and Wu, L., 2012. "Three-way complementarities: Performance pay,
        human resource analytics, and information technology." Management Science, 58(5),
        pp.913-931.
Armbrust, M, Fox A, Griffith R, Joseph AD, Katz R, Konwinski A, Lee G, Patterson D, Rabkin
      A and Stoica I. 2010. "A view of cloud computing." Communications of the ACM. 53(4):
      50-58.
Atalay, E, Phongthiengtham P, Sotelo S and Tannenbaum D. 2020. "The evolution of work in
       the united states." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. 12(2): 1-34.
Atrostic, BK and Nguyen SV. 2005. "IT and productivity in U.S. Manufacturing: Do computer
        networks matter?" Economic Inquiry. 43(3): 493-506.
Atrostic, BK and Nguyen SV. 2006. "How businesses use information technology: Insights for
        measuring technology and productivity." U.S. Census Bureau Center for Economic
        Studies Working Paper CES 06-15.
Atrostic, BK and Nguyen SV. 2007. "Computer input, computer networks, and productivity."
        Hard-to-measure goods and services: Essays in honor of Zvi Griliches. University of
        Chicago Press.
Autor, D and Salomons A. 2018. "Is Automation Labor-Displacing? Productivity Growth,
       Employment, and the Labor Share." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, (Spring):
       1-87.
Autor, D, Dorn D, Katz LF, Patterson C and Van Reenen J. 2020. "The fall of the labor share
       and the rise of superstar firms." The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 135(2): 645-709.
Bana, S., Brynjolfsson, E., Rock. D., and Steffen, S. 2020. "Job2vec: Learning a Representation
       of Jobs", Available at SSRN.

                                               41
Barth, E., Bryson, A., Davis, J.C. and Freeman, R., 2016. "It's where you work: Increases in the
       dispersion of earnings across establishments and individuals in the United
       States." Journal of Labor Economics, 34(S2), pp.S67-S97.
Barth, E., Davis, J.C., Freeman, R.B. and McElheran, K., 2020a. "Twisting the Demand Curve:
       Digitalization and the Older Workforce." NBER Working Paper w28094.
Barth, E., Roed, M., Schøne, P. and Umblijs, J., 2020b. "How Robots Change Within-Firm
       Wage Inequality."
Basker, E, Foster L and Klimek S. 2017. "Customeremployee substitution: Evidence from
       gasoline stations." Journal of Economics & Management Strategy. 26(4): 876-896.
Bennett, VM. 2020a. "Changes in persistence of performance over time." Strategic Management
       Journal. 41(10): 1745-1769.
Bennet, VM. 2020b. "Automation and market dominance". Mimeo, Fuqua School of
       Management, Duke University.
Bertschek, I and Kaiser U. 2004. "Productivity Effects of Organizational Change:
       Microeconometric Evidence." Management Science. 50(3): 394-404.
Bessen, J. 2002. "Technology adoption costs and productivity growth: the transition to
       information technology." Review of Economic dynamics 5.2: 443-469.
Bessen, J. E. and C. Righi. 2020. "Information Technology and Firm Employment." Boston
       Univ. School of Law, Law and Economics Research Paper No. 19-6. Available at SSRN:
       https://ssrn.com/abstract=3371016 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3371016 .
Bloom, N., Hassan, T.A., Kalyani, A., Lerner, J. and Tahoun, A., 2020. "The Geography of New
      Technologies." Institute for New Economic Thinking Working Paper Series, (126).
Bloom, N, Sadun R and Van Reenen J. 2012. "Americans do IT better: US multinationals and
      the productivity miracle." American Economic Review, 102(1), pp.167-201.
Bloom, N, Garicano L, Sadun R, and Van Reenen J. 2014. "The distinct effects of information
      technology and communication technology on firm organization." Management Science
      60, no. 12: 2859-2885.
Bloom, N and Draca M and Van Reenen J. 2016. "Trade induced technical change? The impact
      of Chinese imports on innovation, IT and productivity." The Review of Economic Studies,
      83(1), pp.87-117.
Bresnahan, T.F., Brynjolfsson, E. and Hitt, L.M., 2002. "Information technology, workplace
      organization, and the demand for skilled labor: Firm-level evidence." The Quarterly
      Journal of Economics, 117(1), pp.339-376.
Brynjolfsson E, Hofmann P and Jordan J. 2010. "Cloud computing and electricity: Beyond the
       utility model." Communications of the ACM. 53(5): 32-34.
Brynjolfsson, E, Jin W and McElheran K. 2020. "The power of prediction: Predictive analytics,
       organizational complements, and firm performance." Working paper available at SSRN.
Brynjolfsson, E, Rock D, and Syverson C. 2017. "Artificial intelligence and the modern
       productivity paradox: A clash of expectations and statistics." National Bureau of
       Economic Research, No. w24001.
                                               42
Brynjolfsson, E., Hui, X. and Liu, M., 2019. "Does machine translation affect international
       trade? Evidence from a large digital platform." Management Science, 65(12), pp.5449-
       5460.
Brynjolfsson, E, Malone TW, Gurbaxani V and Kambil A. 1994. "Does information technology
       lead to smaller firms?" Management Science. 40(12): 17.
Brynjolfsson, E, and McAfee A. The second machine age: Work, progress, and prosperity in a
       time of brilliant technologies. WW Norton & Company, 2014.
Brynjolfsson, E and Mitchell T. 2017a. "What Can Machine Learning Do? Workforce
       Implications." Science 358(6370): 1530-1534.
Brynjolfsson, E and Mitchell T. 2017b. "Track How Technology Is Changing Work." Nature,
       544(7650): 290-291.
Brynjolfsson, E and McElheran K. 2016 "The Rapid Adoption of Data-Driven Decision-
       Making." American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 106(5): 133-139.
Brynjolfsson E and McElheran K. 2019. "Data in Action: Data-Driven Decision Making and
       Predictive Analytics in U.S. Manufacturing." Working paper, Rotman School of
       Management, Toronto, Canada.
Brynjolfsson, E and Milgrom P. 2013. "Complementarity in organizations." The handbook of
       organizational economics, pp.11-55.
Brynjolfsson, E., Rock, D. and Syverson, C., 2018. "The productivity J-curve: How intangibles
       complement general purpose technologies".National Bureau of Economic Research
       Working Paper No. w25148.
Brynjolfsson, E. and Saunders, A., 2009. "Wired for innovation: How information technology is
       reshaping the economy". Mit Press.
Buffington, C, Miranda J and Seamans R. 2018. "Development of Survey Questions on Robotics
       Expenditures and Use in U.S. Manufacturing Establishments." U.S. Census Bureau
       Center for Economic Studies Working Paper, CES 18-44.
Comin, D. and Mestieri, M., 2014. "Technology diffusion: Measurement, causes, and
      consequences." In Handbook of Economic Growth (Vol. 2, pp. 565-622). Elsevier.
Crane, L.D, and Decker, RA. 2020. "Research with private sector microdata: The case of
       NETS/D&B." Conference paper, NBER Summer Institute.
       https://conference.nber.org/conf_papers/f142811.pdf.
Decker, R, Haltiwanger J, Jarmin R and Miranda J. 2014. "The role of entrepreneurship in us job
      creation and economic dynamism." Journal of Economic Perspectives. 28(3): 3-24.
Decker, RA, Haltiwanger J, Jarmin RS and Miranda J. 2017. "Declining dynamism, allocative
      efficiency, and the productivity slowdown." American Economic Review Papers and
      Proceedings. 107(5): 322-26.
Decker, RA, Haltiwanger J, Jarmin RS and Miranda J. 2020. "Changing business dynamism and
      productivity: Shocks versus responsiveness." American Economic Review. 110(12):
      3952-90.


                                              43
Dinlersoz, EM and Wolf Z. 2018. "Automation, labor share, and productivity: Plant-level
       evidence from U.S. Manufacturing." U.S. Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies
       Working Paper, CES 18-39.
Dixon, J., Hong, B. and Wu, L., forthcoming. "The Robot Revolution: Managerial and
       Employment Consequences for Firms." Management Science.
Dunne, T. 1991. "Technology usage in u.S. Manufacturing industries: New evidence from the
      survey of manufacturing technology." U.S. Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies
      Working Paper, CES 91-7.
Dunne, T and Schmitz JA, Jr. 1995. "Wages, employment structure and employer size-wage
      premia: Their relationship to advanced-technology usage at us manufacturing
      establishments." Economica. 62(245): 89-107.
Doms, M, Dunne T and Roberts MJ. 1995. "The role of technology use in the survival and
      growth of manufacturing plants." International Journal of Industrial Organization. 13(4):
      523-542.
Fichman, RG and Melville NP. 2014. "How posture-profile misalignment in it innovation
      diminishes returns: Conceptual development and empirical demonstration." Journal of
      Management Information Systems. 31(1): 203-240.
European Commission. 2020. "European enterprise survey on the use of technologies based on
      artificial intelligence". https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/artificial-
      intelligence-first-quantitativ.e-study-its-kind-finds-uptake-businesses-across-europe
Forman, C, Goldfarb A and Greenstein S. 2002. "Digital dispersion: An industrial and
      geographic census of commercial internet use". National Bureau of Economic Research
      No w9287.
Forman, C, Goldfarb A and Greenstein S. 2009. "The Internet and Local Wages: Convergence or
      Divergence?" National Bureau of Economic Research No. w14750.
Forman, C, Goldfarb A and Greenstein S. 2012. "The Internet and local wages: A puzzle."
      American Economic Review 102.1: 556-75.
Forman, C and McElheran K. 2019. "Firm organization in the digital age: It use and vertical
      transactions in U.S. Manufacturing." University of Toronto Working Paper,
      https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3396116.
Forrester. 2017. "Unlock the value of cloud: How to expand your hybrid cloud with consistency,
       high performance, and security everywhere." Report, Forrester Consulting, Cambridge,
       MA.
Foster, L., Grim, C. and Zolas, N., 2020. "A portrait of US firms that invest in
        R&D." Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 29(1), pp.89-111.
Fort, TC. 2017. "Technology and production fragmentation: Domestic versus foreign sourcing."
       The Review of Economic Studies. 84(2): 650-687.
Goldfarb, A and Tucker C. 2019. "Digital economics." Journal of Economic Literature, 57(1),
       pp.3-43.



                                               44
Graetz, G and Michaels G. 2018. "Robots at work." The Review of Economics and Statistics,
       100(5):753-768.
Graham, S.J., Grim, C., Islam, T., Marco, A.C. and Miranda, J., 2018. "Business dynamics of
      innovating firms: Linking US patents with administrative data on workers and firms."
      Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 27(3), pp.372-402.
Green Leigh, N., Kraft, B. and Lee, H., 2020. "Robots, skill demand and manufacturing in US
       regional labour markets." Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society, 13(1),
       pp.77-97.
Guzman, J. and Stern, S., 2020. "The State of American Entrepreneurship: New Estimates of the
     Quantity and Quality of Entrepreneurship for 32 US States, 1988­2014." American
     Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 12(4), pp.212-43.
Haltiwanger, J, Jarmin RS, Kulick RB and Miranda J. 2016. "High growth young firms:
       Contribution to job, output and productivity growth." US Census Bureau Center for
       Economic Studies Paper No. CES-WP-16-49.
Haltiwanger, J, Jarmin RS and Miranda J. 2013. "Who creates jobs? Small versus large versus
       young." Review of Economics and Statistics. 95(2): 347-361.
Haug, K.C., Kretschmer, T. and Strobel, T., 2016. "Cloud adaptiveness within industry sectors­
       Measurement and observations." Telecommunications policy, 40(4), pp.291-306.
Helper, S. 1995. "Supplier relations and adoption of new technology: results of survey research
       in the US auto industry." National Bureau of Economic Research No. w5278.
Hopenhayn, H.A., 2014. "Firms, misallocation, and aggregate productivity: A review." Annual
      Review of Economics., 6(1), pp.735-770.
Horrace, W.C. and Oaxaca, R.L., 2006. "Results on the bias and inconsistency of ordinary least
       squares for the linear probability model." Economics Letters, 90(3), pp.321-327.
Hitt, LM and Tambe P. 2016. "Health care information technology, work organization, and
       nursing home performance." ILR Review, 69(4), pp.834-859.
Jensen, JB and McGuckin RH. 1996. "Firm performance and evolution: Empirical regularities in
       the U.S. Microdata." U.S. Census Bureau, Center for Economic Studies Working Paper
       CES 96-10.
Jin, W and McElheran K. 2017. "Economies before Scale: Learning, Survival, and Performance
       of Young Plants in the Age of Cloud Computing", Rotman School of Management
       Working Paper No. 3112901.
Kretschmer, T, Miravete EJ, and Pernías JC. 2012. "Competitive pressure and the adoption of
       complementary innovations." American Economic Review 102.4: 1540-70.
Lashkari, D., Bauer, A. and Boussard, J., 2019. "Information technology and returns to scale."
      Available at SSRN https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3458604.
Mahr, F. 2010. Aligning Information Technology, Organization, and Strategy: Effects on Firm
       Performance. Springer Science & Business Media, 2010.
McElheran, K. 2014. "Delegation in multiestablishment firms: Evidence from it purchasing."
      Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 23(2), pp.225-258.
                                               45
McGuckin, RH, Streitwieser ML and Doms M. 1998. "The effect of technology use on
     productivity growth." Economics of Innovation and New Technology. 7(1): 1-26.
McKinsey. 2018 "AI Adoption Advances, but foundational barriers remain."
     https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/artificial-intelligence/ai-adoption-advances-
     but-foundational-barriers-remain#
Milgrom, P and Roberts J. 1995. "Complementarities and fit strategy, structure, and
      organizational change in manufacturing." Journal of Accounting and Economics, 19(2-3),
      pp.179-208.
Milgrom, P and Roberts J. 1990. "The economics of modern manufacturing: Technology,
      strategy, and organization." The American Economic Review, pp.511-528.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, 2017. "Information technology and
       the US Workforce: Where are we and where do we go from here?" National Academies
       Press.
PwC. 2019. "2019 AI Predictions."
      https://www.pwc.com/us/en/services/consulting/library/artificial-intelligence-predictions-
      2019
Schneier B. 2015. "Should companies do most of their computing in the cloud? (Part 1), blog
       post." https://www.schneier.com/blog/archives/2015/06/should_companie.html, accessed
       May 1, 2017.
Seamans, R, and Raj M. 2018. "AI, labor, productivity and the need for firm-level data."
      National Bureau of Economic Research No. w24239.
Solow, R. M. 1957. "Technical change and the aggregate production function." The Review of
       Economics and Statistics, 312-320.
Song, J, Price DJ, Guvenen F, Bloom N and Von Wachter T. 2019. "Firming up inequality." The
       Quarterly Journal of Economics. 134(1): 1-50.
Staten J. 2008. "Is cloud computing ready for the enterprise?" Forrester Research Report.
        https://www.forrester.com/report/Is+Cloud+Computing+Ready+For+The+Enterprise/-/E-
        RES44229#.
Stiroh, K. J. 2001. "What drives productivity growth?" Economic Policy Review, 7(1).
Sunyaev A. 2020. "Cloud Computing. In: Internet Computing." Springer, Cham.
      https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-34957-8_7
Syverson, C., 2004. "Product substitutability and productivity dispersion." Review of Economics
       and Statistics, 86(2), pp.534-550.
Syverson, C. 2011. "What determines productivity?" Journal of Economic Literature. 49(2):
       326-365.
Tambe, P., Hitt, L.M. and Brynjolfsson, E., 2012. "The extroverted firm: How external
      information practices affect innovation and productivity." Management Science, 58(5),
      pp.843-859.


                                               46
Tambe, P and Hitt LM. 2012. "The productivity of information technology investments: New
      evidence from it labor data." Information Systems Research. 23(3-part-1): 599-617.
Tambe, P., Hitt, L., Rock, D. and Brynjolfsson, E. 2020. "Digital Capital and Superstar Firms",
      NBER Working Paper.
Van Reenen, J. 2018. "Increasing differences between firms: Market power and the macro
      economy." CEP Discussion Paper Working Paper, 1576.
Webb, M. 2019. "The impact of artificial intelligence on the labor market." Available at SSRN
      3482150.




                                               47
Text Box 1: 2018 Annual Business Survey Technology Questions




                                         48
49
Text Box 2: 2018 Annual Business Survey Technology Definitions
Augmented reality                           Technology that provides a view of a real-
                                            world environment with computer-
                                            generated overlays.
Automated guided vehicles (AGV) or          A computer-controlled transport vehicle
AGV systems                                 that operates without a human driver.
                                            AGVs navigate facilities through the use
                                            of software and sensors.
Automated storage and retrieval systems     Technology that locates, retrieves, and
                                            replaces items from predetermined storage
                                            locations.
Machine learning                            Computer algorithms that use data to
                                            improve their predictive performance
                                            without being reprogrammed.
Machine vision                              Technology used to provide image-based
                                            automatic inspection, recognition or
                                            analysis.
Natural language processing                 Technology that allows a computer to
                                            process human speech or text.
Radio-frequency identification (RFID)       A system of tags and readers used for
system                                      identification and tracking. Tags store
                                            information and transmit them using radio
                                            waves. Readers maybe be mobile or fixed
                                            in place.
Robotics                                    Reprogrammable machines capable of
                                            automatically carrying out a complex set
                                            of actions.
Touchscreens/kiosks for customer            A computer with a touchscreen that allows
interface (Examples: self-checkout, self-   a customer to receive information or
check-in, touchscreen ordering)             perform tasks related to the business such
                                            as registering for a service or purchasing
                                            items.
Voice recognition software                  Software that converts speech to text or
                                            executes simple commands based on a
                                            limited vocabulary or executes more
                                            complex commands when combined with
                                            natural language processing.




                                              50
    Table 1: Technology Information in Surveys Conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau*

                   Survey                                Years                       Topics
                                                                           Software, Data Processing,
 Annual Business Survey (ABS)*                       2017-2018            Digitization, Cloud Services,
                                                                           Automation, AI, Robotics
 Annual Capital Expenditures Survey                      2018                       Robotics
 (ACES)                                              2002-2018                       Software
                                                     1999-2018                     E-Commerce
 Annual Retail Trade Survey (ARTS)
                                                     2002, 2017            Software, Data Processing
                                                     2014-2016            E-Commerce, Tech on Profits
 Annual Survey of Entrepreneurs (ASE)
                                                         2014                 Software, Automation
                                                         2018                        Robotics
 Annual Survey of Manufactures (ASM)
                                                     2000-2018                   Data Processing
 Annual Wholesale Trade Survey
                                                     1999-2018                     E-Commerce
 (AWTS)
 Business Research & Development and
                                                     2008-2016                       Software
 Innovation Survey (BRDIS)*
 Business R&D and Innovation Survey -
                                                     2014, 2016               Software, Automation
 Microbusiness (BRDI-M)*
 Census of Construction Industries                       2012              Software, Data Processing
 (CCN)                                                   2002                    E-Commerce
 Census of Manufacturing (CMF)                   2002, 2007, 2012        E-Commerce, Data Processing
 Census of Retail Trade (CRT)                            2017               Self-service technologies
 Computer Network Use Supplement
                                                         1999                      E-Commerce
 (CNUS)
 Information and Communication
                                                 2003-2011, 2013                  ICT, Software
 Technology Survey (ICTS)
 Management and Organizational
                                                     2010, 2015              Data-Driven Decisions
 Practices Survey (MOPS)
 Service Annual Survey (SAS)                         2005-2016                     E-Commerce
 Survey of Business Owners (SBO)                     2007, 2012                    E-Commerce
 Survey of Manufacturing Technology
                                                 1988, 1991, 1993       Software, Automation, Robotics
 (SMT)
* Note: The ABS, BRDIS, and BRDI-M surveys are conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau for the National
Center for Science and Engineering Statistics (NCSES), which provides funding as well as expertise on the
surveys' subject matter, content, and sampling strategy.



                                                    51
                    Table 2: Relevant Other Surveys on Technology Use
                                                  Observation
  Source (Authors)             Years                                        Topics
                                                  Count/Type
Helper, Seamans,
                                                                     Automation, Robotics,
Reichensperger, and            2018         Ongoing/Establishment
                                                                       Data Processing
Bessen

Nancy Green Leigh              2017             428/Establishment    Automation, Robotics

                                                                     ICT, Software, Cloud
Harte Hanks                  1996-2015       160,000/Establishment
                                                                           Services

Susan Helper                   1989                 286/Firm             Automation

Deloitte - State of AI
                               2018                1,100/Firm                 AI
in the Enterprise
Narrative Science in
Partnership with
                               2017                 197/Firm                  AI
National Business
Research Institute
Accenture ­
                               2019                6,672/Firm                 AI
Technology Vision
McKinsey Digital
Manufacturing Global           2018                <700/Firm         Digital Manufacturing
Expert Survey
                                                                      Business processes,
                                                                       management for
                                                                         manufacturing
McKinsey ­ Global
                             2018-2019               44/Site          establishments that
Lighthouse Network
                                                                        have scaled "4th
                                                                     industrial revolution"
                                                                           solutions




                                           52
                         Table 3: Response Rates and Sample Construction*


                                                   # of Responses
 Initial Mailout (June 2018)                           850,000
 Response 55                                           583,000
 Linked to 2017 Longitudinal                           573,000
 Business Database (LBD) 56




55
   Survey response is determined by whether the respondent answered question 1 of the survey, which asks whether
the business has ceased operations. Note that there are several instances and sections of the survey where responses
are "Missing" or left blank. These are classified as "item non-response". If the firm ceased operations at the time of
the survey and are matched to the LBD, we retain the records for that firm and that firm is still included in our main
sample.
56
   The match rate between the ABS and 2017 LBD is not perfect, due to a variety of unforeseen reasons, including
that the ABS firm transitioned to a non-employer firm (no payroll), firm exits, merger and acquisition activity and
more.

                                                          53
Table 4: Summary Statistics and Distributions of ABS Respondents*
a. Firm Level Statistics
                                                       ABS Sample              ABS-LBD Sample                     National
 Mean                                                    (Raw)                   (Weighted)                     (2017 BDS)
 Employment                                               89.32                     26.28                           24.24
 Age                                                      16.33                     15.61                            n.a.


b. Firm Distributions (in %)
                                                       ABS Sample              ABS-LBD Sample                    National
 By Size                                                 (Raw)                   (Weighted)                    (2016 BDS)**
 1 to 9                                                      67                           75                          76
 10 to 49                                                    21                           20                          20
 50 to 249                                                    8                            4                           4
 250+                                                         3                            1                           1

                                                       ABS Sample              ABS-LBD Sample                     National
 By Age (in %)                                           (Raw)                   (Weighted)                     (2017 BDS)
 0 to 5                                                      25                           27                          33
 6 to 10                                                     16                           17                          16
 11 to 20                                                    25                           25                          23
 21+                                                         33                           31                          28

 c. Sectoral Distribution (in %)
                                                       ABS Sample              ABS-LBD Sample                     National
 Sector                                                  (Raw)                   (Weighted)                     (2017 BDS)
 Agriculture, Mining, Utilities                               2                            1                         0
 Construction                                                10                           11                        11
 Education                                                    1                            2                         2
 Finance, Insurance, Real Estate                             10                            9                         9
 Health Care                                                  9                           11                        11
 Information                                                  2                            1                         1
 Management & Administrative                                  5                            6                         6
 Manufacturing                                                8                            4                         4
 Other (Arts, Food, Other Services)                          14                           23                        23
 Professional Services                                       17                           13                        13
 Retail Trade                                                13                           11                        11
 Transportation & Warehousing                                 4                            3                         3
 Wholesale Trade                                              5                            5                         5

*Note: Tables tabulated from linked 2018 ABS data with the 2017 Longitudinal Business Database (LBD). The 2017 size, age
and industry figures from the LBD are the figures listed in the tables. Firms that did not respond to any of the 2018 ABS survey
are excluded. Industry tabulations for multi-unit firms are generated from the largest payroll industry within the firm (if there is a
tie, then the largest employer is used).

**The firm size categories reported in Table 4b were created based on size categories used in a previous (legacy) BDS. With the
release of the 2017 and 2018 BDS came updated size categories which make it impossible to compare the publicly available size
categories to the size categories used here. For this reason, we compare to the legacy 2016 BDS instead of the new 2017 BDS.

                                                                  54
Table 5: Top Use Digitized Information by Business Function by Sector
                                                                       Business Function
 Sector                                                1st                    2nd                       3rd
 Agriculture, Mining, Utilities               Financial                Personnel                Production
 Construction                                 Financial                Personnel                Marketing
 Manufacturing                                Financial                Personnel                Production
 Wholesale Trade                              Financial                Personnel                Marketing
 Retail Trade                                 Financial                Personnel                Marketing
 Transportation & Warehousing                 Financial                Personnel                Marketing
 Information                                  Financial                Personnel                Marketing
 Finance, Insurance, Real Estate              Financial                Personnel                Marketing
 Professional Services                        Financial                Personnel                Marketing
 Management & Administrative                  Financial                Personnel                Marketing
 Education                                    Financial                Personnel                Marketing
 Health Care                                  Financial                Personnel                Marketing
 Other (Arts, Food, Other)                    Financial                Personnel                Marketing
Notes: "Use" is defined as having responded with "Up to 50%", "More than 50%" or "All" for the information
category listed on "Digital Share of Business". Shares are computed using the LBD tabulation weights of firm
counts, divided by the total number of firms (including those that left the responses as "Don't Know" or missing).
Imputed responses for "Missing" and "Don't Know" categories are used in the numerator.




Table 6: Use of Digital Information by Business Function ­ Conditional

 Business Function                                               % Use                   % Intensive Use
 Financial                                                     83.8   (87.5)                 70.8   (73.7)
 Personnel                                                     72.0   (76.2)                 53.2   (56.4)
 Marketing                                                     61.2   (67.8)                 44.1   (49.4)
 Feedback                                                      53.4   (59.9)                 38.5   (43.6)
 Production                                                    46.4   (54.5)                 36.4   (42.3)
 Supply Chain                                                  44.6   (53.8)                 32.6   (39.0)
 Other                                                         14.2   (19.4)                 11.7   (15.9)
Notes: "Use" is defined as having responded with "Up to 50%", "More than 50%" or "All" for the information
category listed on "Digital Share of Business". "Intensive Use" is defined as having responded with "More than
50%" or "All". Shares are computed using the LBD tabulation weights of firm counts, divided by the total number
of firms, conditional on collecting and storing the business function (including those that left the responses as
"Don't Know" or "Missing" whose responses were imputed). Listed shares are imputed shares, with raw weighted
values in parentheses.




                                                          55
Table 7: Top Pairwise Correlated Digitized Information Use by Business Functions
             Function 1                             Function 2                            Correlation
              Financial                              Personnel                           0.695 (0.737)
             Marketing                               Feedback                            0.678 (0.678)
            Supply Chain                            Production                           0.597 (0.598)
            Supply Chain                            Marketing                            0.516 (0.521)
            Supply Chain                             Feedback                            0.480 (0.484)
Notes: "Use" is defined as having responded with "Up to 50%", "More than 50%" or "All" for the information
category listed on "Digital Share of Business". Correlation is defined as cross-category responses (Use/No Use) at
the firm-level. Imputed values are listed, while raw weighted values are in parentheses.




Table 8: Size-Age Coefficients for Digital Share of Business Activity
                                                                 Firm Size
 Firm Age                1 to 9                 10 to 49                50 to 249               250+
 0 to 5                  0.897 (0.871)          0.963 (0.942)           0.980 (0.960)           0.974 (0.924)
 6 to 10                 0.866 (0.835)          0.956 (0.939)           0.973 (0.954)           0.987 (0.966)
 11 to 20                0.907 (0.880)          0.957 (0.935)           0.971 (0.957)           0.987 (0.984)
 21+                     0.797 (0.760)          0.951 (0.931)           0.980 (0.965)           0.980 (0.964)
Notes: Size-Age coefficients generated from linear probability model (LPM) where the outcome variable is "Use/No
Use" for at least one type of information that is digitized. Respondents who answered with "Do not collect this
information" for all of the information types are excluded. Independent variables are the 16 size-age categories
assigned to each firm and the LPM is weighted by the LBD tabulation weights. All coefficients are significant to the
0.1%. All firms are included (including "Don't Know" and missing) with the dependent variable being imputed for
firms whose responses are "Missing" or "Don't Know" (with raw weighted values in parentheses).




                                                        56
Table 9: Cloud Service Purchases by IT Function - Conditional


 Cloud Service Purchased                            % Use                     % Intensive Use
 Billing                                          50.8 (56.6)                  33.8 (37.5)
 Security                                         49.7 (58.1)                  31.2 (36.3)
 Synchronization                                  46.5 (53.6)                  23.6 (27.2)
 All IT                                           45.8 (54.0)                  25.4 (29.9)
 Data Storage                                     44.1 (51.7)                  26.1 (30.5)
 Servers                                          41.6 (48.5)                  26.0 (30.1)
 Customer Relations                               37.6 (44.0)                  22.4 (26.1)
 Data Analysis                                    30.8 (37.6)                  18.0 (22.0)
 Other                                             8.7 (11.8)                    5.9 (8.0)
Notes: "Use" is defined as having responded with "Up to 50%", "More than 50%" or "All" for the category listed on
"Cloud Service Purchases". "Intensive Use" is defined as having responded with "More than 50%" or "All". Shares
are computed using the LBD tabulation weights of firm counts, divided by the total number of firms conditional on
the firm performing the IT function (including those that left the responses as "Don't Know" or missing, whose
values were imputed). Listed shares are imputed shares, with raw weighted values in parentheses.




Table 10: Top Pairwise Correlations among Cloud Service Purchases
           Technology 1                         Technology 2                        Correlation
              Servers                             Security                         0.727 (0.731)
             Security                              All IT                          0.721 (0.716)
              Servers                           Data Storage                       0.666 (0.669)
              Servers                              All IT                          0.661 (0.659)
           Data Storage                            All IT                          0.661 (0.664)
Notes: "Use" is defined as having responded with "Up to 50%", "More than 50%" or "All" for the category listed on
"Cloud Service Purchases". Correlation is defined as cross-category responses (Use/No Use) at the firm level.
Imputed values are listed, while raw weighted values are in parentheses.




                                                       57
Table 11: Top Use Categories for Cloud Services by Sector
                                                                 Cloud Services
 Sector                                    1st                         2nd                          3rd
 Agriculture, Mining,
 Utilities                              Billing                      Security                Synchronization
 Construction                           Billing                      Security                Synchronization
 Manufacturing                          Security                     Billing                 Synchronization
 Wholesale Trade                        Security                     Billing                 Synchronization
 Retail Trade                           Billing                      Security                Synchronization
 Transportation &
 Warehousing                            Billing                      Security                Synchronization
 Information                        Synchronization                   All IT                     Billing
 Finance, Insurance, Real
 Estate                                Security                      Billing                 Synchronization
 Professional Services              Synchronization                  Security                    All IT
 Management &
 Administrative                         Billing                      Security                Synchronization
 Education                          Synchronization                  Billing                    Security
 Health Care                            Billing                      Security                    All IT
 Other (Arts, Food, Other)              Billing                      Security                    All IT
Notes: "Use" is defined as having responded with "Up to 50%", "More than 50%" or "All" for the category listed on
"Cloud Service Purchases". Shares are computed using the LBD tabulation weights of firm counts, divided by the
total number of firms (including those that left the responses as "Don't Know" or missing). Imputed responses for
"Missing" and "Don't Know" categories are used in the numerator.




Table 12: Size-Age Coefficients for Cloud Service Purchases
                                                                 Firm Size
 Firm Age               1 to 9                   10 to 49             50 to 249              250+
 0 to 5                 0.744 (0.698)            0.867 (0.825)        0.891 (0.849)          0.878 (0.822)
 6 to 10                0.689 (0.640)            0.842 (0.800)        0.874 (0.828)          0.912 (0.886)
 11 to 20               0.754 (0.706)            0.829 (0.785)        0.852 (0.811)          0.886 (0.854)
 21+                    0.579 (0.525)            0.796 (0.752)        0.855 (0.822)          0.852 (0.814)
Notes: Size-Age coefficients generated from linear probability model (LPM) where the outcome variable is "Use/No
Use" for at least one type of cloud service purchase. Respondents who answered with "Do not use IT function" for
all of the cloud purchase types are excluded. Independent variables are the 16 size-age categories assigned to each
firm and the LPM is weighted by the LBD derived tabulation weights. All coefficients are significant to the 0.1%.
All firms are included (including "Don't Know" and missing) with the dependent variable being imputed for firms
whose responses are "Missing" or "Don't Know" (with raw weighted values in parentheses).




                                                        58
Table 13: Business Technology Use Rates by Type


 Business Technology                                  % Use                         % Testing
 Touchscreens                                        6.1    (6.0)                     0.9   (0.9)
 Machine Learning                                    2.9    (2.9)                     0.7   (0.7)
 Voice Recognition                                   2.5    (2.6)                     0.7   (0.7)
 Machine Vision                                      1.8    (1.8)                     0.4   (0.4)
 Robotics                                            1.3    (1.4)                     0.3   (0.3)
 Natural Language                                    1.3    (1.3)                     0.4   (0.4)
 RFID                                                1.1    (1.1)                     0.3   (0.3)
 Augmented Reality                                   0.8    (0.8)                     0.4   (0.4)
 Automated Vehicles                                  0.8    (0.8)                     0.2   (0.2)
Notes: "Use" is defined as having responded with "In use for less than 5% of production or service", "In use for
between 5% - 25% of production or service" or "In use for more than 25% of production or service " for the
category listed on "Business Technologies" (excluding "Automated Storage and Retrieval Systems"). "Testing" is
defined as having responded with "Testing but not using in production or service". Shares are computed using the
LBD tabulation weights of firm counts, divided by the total number of firms (including those that left the responses
as "Don't Know" or missing). Listed shares are imputed shares, with raw weighted values in parentheses.




Table 14: Top Pairwise Correlations among Business Technologies
          Technology 1                           Technology 2                          Correlation
         Machine Learning                        Machine Vision                       0.522 (0.516)
        Automated Vehicles                     Augmented Reality                      0.491 (0.489)
          Machine Vision                        Natural Language                      0.398 (0.395)
              RFID                             Automated Vehicles                     0.389 (0.386)
          Machine Vision                       Automated Vehicles                     0.383 (0.380)
Notes: Correlations are for whether a firm lists "Use" for a technology category. "Use" is defined as having
responded with "In use for less than 5% of production or service", "In use for between 5% - 25% of production or
service" or "In use for more than 25% of production or service " for the category listed on "Business Technologies"
(excluding "Automated Storage and Retrieval Systems"). Imputed values are listed, while raw weighted values are
in parentheses.




                                                           59
Table 15: Top Use Sub-Categories for Business Technologies by Sector
                                                                     Business Technology
 Sector                                              1st                        2nd                        3rd
                                                                                                  Automated
 Agriculture, Mining, Utilities           Touchscreens               Machine Learning             Vehicles
 Construction                             Touchscreens               Machine Learning             Voice Recognition
 Manufacturing                            Machine Learning           Robotics                     Touchscreens
 Wholesale Trade                          Touchscreens               Machine Learning             RFID
 Retail Trade                             Touchscreens               Machine Learning             RFID
 Transportation & Warehousing             Touchscreens               Machine Learning             RFID
 Information                              Touchscreens               Machine Learning             Voice Recognition
 Finance, Insurance, Real Estate          Touchscreens               Voice Recognition            Machine Learning
 Professional Services                    Touchscreens               Voice Recognition            Machine Learning
 Management & Administrative              Touchscreens               Machine Learning             Voice Recognition
 Education                                Touchscreens               Machine Learning             Voice Recognition
 Health Care                              Touchscreens               Voice Recognition            Machine Learning
 Other (Arts, Food, Other)                Touchscreens               Machine Learning             Machine Vision
Notes: "Use" is defined as having responded with "In use for less than 5% of production or service", "In use for
between 5% - 25% of production or service" or "In use for more than 25% of production or service " for the
category listed on "Business Technologies" (excluding "Automated Storage and Retrieval Systems"). Shares are
computed using the LBD tabulation weights of firm counts, divided by the total number of firms (including those
that left the responses as "Don't Know" or missing). In this scenario, "Use" for a business technology includes
"Testing". Imputed responses for "Missing" and "Don't Know" categories are used in the numerator.




                                                           60
Table 16: Top 3 Industry Use Rates for Each Business Technology
 Augmented Reality                                             Mean (All Industries)          0.010    (0.007)
 5121     Motion Picture and Video Industries                                                 0.042    (0.035)
 5112     Software Publishers                                                                 0.032    (0.025)
 5414     Specialized Design Services                                                         0.028    (0.023)
 Automated Guided Vehicles                                     Mean (All Industries)          0.009    (0.007)
 1151     Support Activities for Crop Production                                              0.066    (0.059)
 4245     Farm Product Raw Material Merchant Wholesalers                                      0.041    (0.039)
 2379     Highway, Street and Bridge Construction                                             0.031   (0.028)
 Machine Learning                                              Mean (All Industries)          0.034    (0.025)
 3335     Metalworking Machinery Manufacturing                                                0.127    (0.108)
 3327     Machine Shops; Turned Products; Screw, Nut and Bolt Manufacturing                   0.119    (0.105)
 5112     Software Publishers                                                                 0.104    (0.083)
 Machine Vision                                                Mean (All Industries)          0.021    (0.016)
 3344     Semiconductor and Other Electronic Component Manufacturing                          0.142    (0.123)
 3335     Metalworking Machinery Manufacturing                                                0.115    (0.098)
 3363     Motor Vehicle Parts Manufacturing                                                   0.107    (0.084)
 Natural Language Processing                                   Mean (All Industries)          0.015    (0.011)
 5112     Software Publishers                                                                 0.065    (0.049)
 5191     Other Information Services                                                          0.058    (0.046)
 5182     Data Processing, Hosting, and Related Services                                      0.052    (0.042)
 RFID                                                          Mean (All Industries)          0.016    (0.011)
 4931     Warehousing and Storage                                                             0.064    (0.056)
 4248     Beer, Wine, and Distilled Alcoholic Beverage Merchant Wholesalers                   0.061    (0.048)
 3363     Motor Vehicle Parts Manufacturing                                                   0.061    (0.045)
 Robotics                                                      Mean (All Industries)          0.019    (0.014)
 3363     Motor Vehicle Parts Manufacturing                                                   0.189    (0.158)
 3261     Plastics Product Manufacturing                                                      0.176    (0.151)
 3335     Metalworking Machinery Manufacturing                                                0.145    (0.128)
 Touchscreens                                                  Mean (All Industries)          0.066    (0.049)
 6231     Nursing Care Facilities (Skilled Nursing Facilities)                                0.212    (0.155)
 3121     Beverage Manufacturing                                                              0.172    (0.147)
 7139     Other Amusement and Recreation Industries                                           0.159    (0.125)
 Voice Recognition                                             Mean (All Industries)          0.028    (0.021)
 6215     Medical and Diagnostic Laboratories                                                 0.183    (0.154)
 6211     Offices of Physicians                                                               0.144    (0.122)
 6214     Outpatient Care Centers                                                             0.087    (0.072)
Notes: "Use" is defined as having responded with "In use for less than 5% of production or service", "In use for
between 5% - 25% of production or service" or "In use for more than 25% of production or service " for the
category listed on "Business Technologies" (excluding "Automated Storage and Retrieval Systems"). Shares are
computed using the LBD tabulation weights of firm counts, divided by the total number of firms (including those
that left the responses as "Don't Know" or missing). Raw weighted values are in parentheses. Means generated from
cross-industry means. In this scenario, "Use" for a business technology includes "Testing". Imputed responses for
"Missing" and "Don't Know" categories are used in the numerator.




                                                       61
 Table 17: Size-Age Coefficients for Business Technologies
                                                                Firm Size
  Firm Age               1 to 9                 10 to 49               50 to 249               250+
  0 to 5                 0.098 (0.094)          0.232 (0.210)          0.267 (0.224)           0.347 (0.262)
  6 to 10                0.076 (0.073)          0.216 (0.203)          0.258 (0.235)           0.334 (0.281)
  11 to 20               0.118 (0.113)          0.194 (0.179)          0.244 (0.224)           0.330 (0.271)
  21+                    0.062 (0.059)          0.182 (0.171)          0.329 (0.312)           0.379 (0.356)
 Notes: Size-Age coefficients generated from linear probability model (LPM) where the outcome variable is "Use/No
 Use" for at least one type of business technology. Independent variables are the 16 size-age categories assigned to
 each firm and the LPM is weighted by the LBD tabulation weights. All coefficients are significant to the 0.1%. All
 firms are included (including "Don't Know" and missing) with the dependent variable being imputed for firms
 whose responses are "Missing" or "Don't Know" (with raw weighted values in parentheses).




 Table 18: Technological Complementarities with Business Technologies


                           Most Correlated                                Most Correlated
Business Technology       Digital Information        Correlation            Cloud Service               Correlation
Augmented Reality         Other Information         0.086 (0.083)      Other IT Functions             0.108 (0.105)
Automated Vehicles        Other Information         0.081 (0.079)      Other IT Functions             0.104 (0.102)
Machine Learning          Production                0.127 (0.129)      Data Analysis                  0.148 (0.147)
Machine Vision            Production                0.114 (0.114)      Data Analysis                  0.124 (0.122)
Natural Language          Other Information         0.084 (0.083)      Data Analysis                  0.116 (0.114)
RFID                      Supply Chain              0.101 (0.099)      Data Analysis                  0.103 (0.101)
Robotics                  Production                0.108 (0.107)      Data Analysis                  0.086 (0.085)
Touchscreens              Feedback                  0.165 (0.171)      Data Analysis                  0.168 (0.17)
Voice Recognition         Feedback                  0.092 (0.098)      All IT Functions               0.122 (0.124)
 Notes: Correlations are for whether a firm lists "Use" for a technology category with "Use" in another technology
 category (Digitization or Cloud Computing). In this scenario, "Use" for a business technology includes "Testing".
 Imputed values are listed, while raw weighted values are in parentheses.




                                                         62
Table 19: Firm-Weighted versus Employment-Weighted Adoption Rates for Business
Technologies
                                         % Use                 % Use
                                         (Tab-             (Employment-             Difference
    Business Technology                Weighted)             Weighted)                Ratio
 Touchscreens                        6.1 (4.6)              25.4 (13.6)             4.2 (2.9)
 Machine Learning                    2.9 (2.2)                8.9 (5.2)             3.1 (2.4)
 Voice Recognition                   2.5 (2)                  7.5 (5.9)               3 (3)
 Machine Vision                      1.8 (1.4)                5.6 (3.1)             3.2 (2.3)
 Robotics                            1.3 (1.0)               10.4 (6.4)             7.8 (6.1)
 Natural Language                    1.3 (1.0)                4.3 (3.5)             3.3 (3.5)
 RFID                                1.1 (0.9)                9.6 (4.9)             8.4 (5.6)
 Augmented Reality                   0.8 (0.6)                 2 (1.4)              2.4 (2.2)
 Automated Vehicles                  0.8 (0.6)                2.2 (1.6)             2.7 (2.5)
Notes: "Use" is defined as having responded with "In use for less than 5% of production or service", "In use for
between 5% - 25% of production or service" or "In use for more than 25% of production or service " for the
category listed on "Business Technologies" (excluding "Automated Storage and Retrieval Systems"). "Testing" is
defined as having responded with "Testing but not using in production or service". Shares are computed using the
LBD tabulation weights of firm counts, divided by the total number of firms (including those that left the responses
as "Don't Know" or missing). Employment weights are combined with the LBD tabulation weights and the
difference ratio is computed by dividing the Employment Weighted Use rate by the LBD Tabulation-Weighted Use
rate. Imputed values are listed, while raw weighted values are in parentheses.




                                                         63
Figure 1: Firm Responses to Digital Share of Information by Business Activity


                             Digital Share of Business Activity
         None       Up to 50%       More than 50%          All    Not Collected   Missing/Don't Know*
 400,000
 350,000
 300,000
 250,000
 200,000
 150,000
 100,000
  50,000
         0
              Personnel       Financial     Customer Marketing           Supply    Production   Other
                                            Feedback                     Chain

*Note: Tabulations based on unweighted and unimputed responses.




                                                     64
Figure 2: Extensive and Intensive Margin Measures of Digitized Information by Sector -
Conditional




Notes: "Use" is defined as having responded with "Up to 50%", "More than 50%" or "All" for the information
category listed on "Digital Share of Business". "Intensive Use" is defined as having responded with "More than
50%" or "All". Shares are computed using the LBD tabulation weights of firm counts, divided by the total number
of firms that did not respond "Do Not Collect This Information" for all information types (including those that left
the responses as "Don't Know" or missing). Sectors are defined by 13 aggregated LBD 2-digit NAICS codes and
assigned for multi-unit firms based on the industry with the largest payroll share within the firm. Original responses
classified as "Missing" or "Don't Know" are imputed.




                                                          65
Figure 3: Firm Responses to Purchases of Cloud Service



                                         Cloud Service Purchases
            None      Up to 50%         More than 50%        All     Don't use IT function          Missing/Don't Know*
 400,000

 350,000

 300,000

 250,000

 200,000

 150,000

 100,000

   50,000

        0
                All IT    Security or     Servers   Data Storage Collaboration Data Analysis   Billing and    Customer      Other
              functions    Firewall                               and Synch.                    Account      Relationship



Note: Tabulations based on unweighted and unimputed responses.




                                                        66
Figure 4: Extensive and Intensive Margin Measures of Use Rates for Cloud Service
Purchases by Sector - Conditional




Notes: "Use" is defined as having responded with "Up to 50%", "More than 50%" or "All" for the category listed on
"Cloud Service Purchases". "Intensive Use" is defined as having responded with "More than 50%" or "All". Shares
are computed using the LBD tabulation weights of firm counts, divided by the total number of firms that did not
respond "Did not use this IT function" for all cloud purchase types (including those that left the responses as "Don't
Know" or missing). Sectors are defined by combined 2-digit NAICS and assigned for multi-unit firms by largest
payroll industry by firm. Original responses classified as "Missing" or "Don't Know" are imputed.




                                                         67
Figure 5: Firm Responses to Business Technologies




   Note: Tabulations based on unweighted and unimputed responses.




                                                    68
Figure 6: Testing-to-Use Ratios




 a. Testing-to-Use Ratios for all Business Technologies                       b. Testing-to-Use Ratios for all Business
                      (All Firms)                                                      Technologies (By Size)




 c. Testing-to-Use Ratios for all Business Technologies
                                                                              d. Testing-to-Use Ratios for all Business
                       (By Age)
                                                                              Technologies (By Manufacturing Status)

Notes: "Use" is defined as having responded with "In use for less than 5% of production or service", "In use for
between 5% - 25% of production or service" or "In use for more than 25% of production or service " for the
categories listed on "Business Technologies" (excluding "Automated Storage and Retrieval Systems"). "Testing" is
defined as having responded with "Testing but not using in production or service". Bubble size is determined by
number of firms who respond to "Use" for the listed technology. Categories are sorted by use rates for large firms in
panel b., old firms in panel c. and manufacturing firms in panel d. All ratios here are calculated using imputed
response for "Missing" responses.




                                                         69
Figure 7: Extensive and Intensive Margin Measures of Use and Testing Rates for Business
Technologies by Sector




   Notes: "Use" is defined as having responded with "In use for less than 5% of production or service", "In use for
   between 5% - 25% of production or service" or "In use for more than 25% of production or service " for the
   category listed on "Business Technologies" (excluding "Automated Storage and Retrieval Systems"). "Testing"
   is defined as having responded with "Testing but not using in production or service". Sectors are defined by
   combined 2-digit NAICS and assigned for multi-unit firms by largest payroll industry by firm. Original
   responses classified as "Missing" are imputed.




                                                       70
Figure 8: AI Usage across size Categories (Weighted)




Notes: The figures visually represent the share of firms (weighted by survey-LBD weights) that indicate use or test
at least 1 of the following business technologies: Automated Guided Vehicles, Machine Learning, Machine Vision,
Natural Language Processing and Voice Recognition. Values are based on the imputed probabilities for respondents
who answered "Missing" or "Don't Know" to 1 or more of the aforementioned business technologies.




                                                        71
Figure 9: Technological Hierarchies 57




                          a. Sankey Diagram for Business Technologies (Any)




                                b. Sankey Diagram for Machine Learning



57
   The Sankey diagrams visually represents firm counts as they progress from no technology adoption to business
technology and machine learning technology adoption. The size of the grey area is representative of the number of
firm counts progressing to the next stage. Note that the calculations are made using imputed responses for
"Missing".

                                                        72
Figure 10: Technology Adoption and Innovation




                            a. Technology Adoption and Innovation Outcomes




                        b. Technology Adoption and Innovation Outcomes (Any)

Notes: The figures visually represent the coefficients from an LPM where the dependent variable is a 1/0 for
whether the firm conducted a Product or Process Innovation (defined as having responded "Yes" to one of the
categories listed under Product or Process Innovation in the ABS). Panel b. considers the subset of firms who use a
technology category (i.e. Digitization or Cloud Computing) and looks at how the individual subcategories is
associated with any type of innovation (either product or process). The independent variables include the technology
use categories, along with firm size and age controls, and industry fixed effects. All coefficient plots are calculated
using imputed independent variables for "Missing".

                                                          73
Appendix:
A1. Cognitive Testing
First Week
       The second round of cognitive testing for the ABS, which was the first set of interviews
to include the three technology questions, occurred in Nashville in mid-August. Nine companies
participated in the testing. Each was given three questions relating to its use of digital
information, cloud services, and business automation technologies. Two versions of Question 1
were tested to determine both the most preferred wording (i.e., "digital" vs. "digitized"), as well
as the best method to measure the use of digitized data. Version A used the term "digitized" and
asked what shares of different types of data were digitized; and version B used the term "digital"
and asked how the business changed its availability of different types of digital data. Question 2
asked about the extent to which the establishment purchased cloud services for various IT
functions. Question 3 asked about how intensively the business used various technologies
(mainly relating to automation; e.g., automated guided vehicles (AGVs), machine learning,
robotics, etc.). The column choices for each of the three questions included both qualitative (i.e.,
"slight," "moderate," "extensive," etc.) and quantitative (i.e., percentage range) measures of
technology use. Appendix A contains the original versions of the questions tested.


       Results from testing Question 1 showed that respondents generally preferred version A
(i.e., they preferred being asked about how much of their data was digitized, as opposed to being
asked about how its availability changed), but they also typically preferred the word "digital"
over "digitized." Consequently, the version A measure of digitized data use was recommended,
replacing the term "digitized" with "digital," and including a definition of digital data. Including
examples of personnel data to clarify its meaning was also recommended. For Question 2,
respondents overall understood the concept of cloud services and were able to answer
confidently whether they used them. In some cases, however, respondents either were not sure in
which category to include a service or did not know whether the cloud service was free or
purchased. Recommendations for this question included adding a clearer definition of cloud
services and including examples of name-brand products in applicable categories. In answering
Question 3, many of the technological terms were unfamiliar to some respondents, however they
were generally able to answer confidently and accurately regarding the technologies they did not


                                                  74
use. For technologies that were utilized by participant firms, respondents occasionally
misunderstood the question's intended scope (e.g., employees using touchscreen technology in
settings other than labor substitution). Here, the sole recommendation was to include examples
that would clarify the intended scope of the question.


Second Week
        The second set of interviews for the technology questions took place in Boston in late-
August. Six companies included in the BRDIS were given revised versions of the three
technology questions (see Text Box A2). Question 1 now had a single version, asking about the
share of different types of "information" (term substituted for "data") that was "digital" (term
substituted for "digitized"). The columns no longer included qualitative measures, but rather
solely percentage ranges. The percentage ranges themselves were also adjusted, and a "Not
Applicable" column was added. Similarly, the revision to Question 2 removed all qualitative
descriptors and asked simply for percentage ranges of cloud services shares (with respect to
spending). For clarity, the revision also included product examples for the "Data storage and
management" and "Collaboration and file synchronization" categories. In revising Question 3 the
phrase "for customer interface," along with some examples, was added for clarification to the
"Touchscreens/kiosks" category. Also, unlike the previous two questions, the revision of
Question 3 removed the quantitative descriptors (i.e., percentage ranges) of automation
technology use, in addition to adding a column with "Not currently using, but planning future
use."
        The responses to the revised version of Question 1 seemed generally more confident.
With the revised wording, the overall understanding of the question was good. Almost all
respondents easily answered, "More than 50%" for every category, and many stated confidently
that simply "Everything is digital." The revised version of Question 2 was better understood than
the original, however all but one individual responded that they would need to consult their
firm's IT group to accurately answer the question. The revised version of Question 3 was
relatively difficult for respondents to answer. The fact that there were only qualitative
descriptions to measure overall use of different technologies made it unclear how to answer the
questions if, for example, a technology is used extensively in one part of the company but little
or not at all in another.


                                                 75
Text Box A1: First Version of the Technology Questions

1A) What share of each of the following types of data is digitized at this business?

                     Data Not     Slightly Digitized Moderately              Heavily            Entirely
                     Digitized    (less than 5% of   Digitized (6-50%        Digitized (50-     Digitized
                                  this kind of data) of this kind of data)   99% of this kind
                                                                             of data)
  Personnel
  Financial
  Customer
  feedback
  Marketing
  Supply chain
  Production
  Other (write-in)


1B) During the three years from 2015 to 2017, to what extent did this business change the availability of
digital data of each of the following types?
               Digital        Decreased    No Change in       Slight            Moderate     Extensive
               Data Not       Availability Availability       Increase in       Increase in Increase in
               Used                                           Availability      Availability Availability

  Personnel
  Financial
  Customer
  feedback
  Marketing
  Supply
  chain
  Production
  Other
  (write-in)




                                                    76
2) In 2017, to what extent did this business purchase cloud services for the following information
technology (IT) functions?

                                        Not        Did not     Slight         Moderate       Intensive
                                        Used       purchase    Use            Use            Use
                                                   as cloud    (less than     (6-50% of      (More than
                                                   service     5% of          spending for   50% of
                                                               spending       this           spending
                                                               for this       function)      for this
                                                               function)                     function)
  Security or firewall
  Servers
  Data storage and management
  Collaboration and file
  synchronization
  Data analysis
  Billing and account management
  Customer relationship management
  Other (write-in)




                                                   77
3) In 2017, to what extent did this business use the following technologies?


                                          Not Used    Slight           Moderate Use    Intensive Use
                                                      Use (Piloting    (In use for     (In use for
                                                      or using in      between 5-      more than
                                                      less than 5%     25% of          25% of
                                                      of production    production or   production or
                                                      or service)      service)        service)
  Augmented reality
  Automated guided vehicles (AGV)
  or AGV system
  Automated storage and retrieval
  systems
  Cloud-based servers, storage and
  data management
  Machine learning
  Machine vision software
  Natural language processing
  Radio-frequency identification
  (RFID) inventory system
  Robotics
  Touchscreens/kiosks
  Voice recognition software




                                                     78
Text Box A2: Revised Version of the Technology Questions

Question 1
In 2017, what share of each of the following types of information was digital at this business?
Mark one box for each row
                          Data not     Less than   More than 25%,        More than     Not
                          digital      25%         but less than 50%     50%           Applicable
  Personnel
  Financial
  Customer feedback
  Marketing
  Supply chain
  Production
  Other (write-in)


Question 2
In 2017, what share of spending on the following information technology (IT) functions at this business
was used to purchase cloud services?
Cloud services are services provided by a third party that this business accesses on-demand via the
internet.
Mark one box for each row
                                        Did not          Less than     More than       More         Not
                                        purchase as      25%           25%, but less   than 50%     applicable
                                        cloud service                  than 50%
  Security or firewall
  Servers
  Data storage and management
  (Examples: Amazon Web
  Services, IBM Bluemix, Microsoft
  Azure)
  Collaboration and file
  synchronization (Examples:
  Dropbox, OneDrive, Google
  Drive)
  Data analysis
  Billing and account management
  Customer relationship
  management
  Other (write-in)




                                                    79
Question 3
In 2017, to what extent did this business use the following technologies?
Mark one box for each row
                                  Not currently          Some           Limited use     Extensive use   Not
                                  using, but             experimental   in production   in production   applicable
                                  planning future        use            or services     or services
                                  use
  Augmented reality
  Automated guided vehicles
  (AGV) or AGV systems
  Automated storage and
  retrieval systems
  Cloud-based servers, storage
  and data management
  Machine learning
  Machine vision software
  Natural language processing
  Radio-frequency
  identification (RFID)
  inventory system
  Robotics
  Touchscreens/kiosks for
  customer interface
  (Examples: self-checkout,
  touchscreen ordering)
  Voice recognition software




                                                    80
Table A3: Summary of Recommended Changes based on Cognitive Testing


Section          Question                                Recommendation                                   Accepted? Notes
Business         For the person(s) owning the largest    Put the column designated for a name             Yes
Structure        percentage(s) in this business in 2017, before the column for percent ownership.
                 please list the percentage owned by
                 each person and his or her name.
                 In 2017, did two or more members of     Consider including "step" relationships to       No
                 one family own the majority of this     this definition.
                 business?
                 Did spouses/unmarried partners          Consider specifying what time frame is           Yes
                 jointly own this business; Was this     relevant to the questions.
                 business operated equally by both
                 spouses/unmarried partners?
Owner           What was the highest degree or level     For individuals who have received an             Yes
Characteristics of school Owner X completed prior to     associate degree, it may be helpful to
                establishing, purchasing, or acquiring   explicitly state that associate degrees are to
                this business?                           be excluded.
                 Prior to establishing, purchasing, or   Consider changing or adding to "field of the No
                 acquiring this business, what was the   highest degree completed" to include
                 field of the highest degree completed   "major" or some other simplifying term.
                 for Owner X?
                 How important to Owner X are each       Consider additional response categories to       Yes       Both
                 of the following reasons for owning     include: "carrying on the family business,"                suggested
                 this business?                          and "Helping and/or becoming more                          categories
                                                         involved in my community."                                 were
                                                                                                                    included.




                                                              81
                 Does Owner X have any of the             Add response category for "None of the        N/A   This
                 following difficulties?                  Above" to differentiate between having no           question was
                                                          disability and item nonresponse.                    not included
                                                          Additionally, specifically mention "even            in the final
                                                          when using a hearing aid" for the hearing           version.
                                                          difficulty response category.
Other Business In 2017, which of the following types   Consider adding category for workers who         No
Characteristics of workers were used by this business? receive a commission, seasonal employees,
                Select all that apply.                 workers who are on call/demand, etc.
                 In 2017, did this business use any of    Since participants selected the option for    N/A   This
                 the following to promote or conduct      "company website" even if they didn't use           question was
                 business?                                it to promote or conduct business, perhaps          not included
                                                          the words "promote" and "conduct" should            in the final
                                                          be in bold print or underlined to emphasize         version.
                                                          what this question is asking.
Business         For 2017, what was the total amount      Due to the fact that there was some           No
Financing        of money that the owner(s) personally    confusion regarding whether to report the
                 put into the business? Your best         amount that each owner put in to the
                 estimate is fine.                        company, or to sum those amounts, it may
                                                          be beneficial to bold and/or italicize the
                                                          word "total" in the question.
                 In 2017, did this business attempt to    Specify whether new financing with a bank     N/A   This
                 establish any new funding                the owner already has a relationship with           question was
                 relationships (for example, loans,       would still qualify as an affirmative               not included
                 investments, or gifts) with any of the   response. Consider adding a definition for          in the final
                 following sources?                       the term "crowdfunding."                            version.




                                                               82
For 2017, what was the total amount        Consider adding a definition for the term      Yes
of money this business received from       "angel investor."
angel investors, venture capitalists, or
other businesses in return for a share
of ownership in this business?

For 2017, what was the total amount        This question may benefit by having a list     No
of money this business borrowed from       for respondents to reference of specifically
a bank or other financial institutions,    what to include and exclude in their
including business loans, a business       response.
credit card carrying a balance, or a
business line of credit? Include all
draws on a business line of credit,
even if paid off during the year.

For 2017, what was the total amount        Instead of "total amount of money"             Yes   The term
of money this business received from       consider using "capital or investment                "investment
family, friends, and employees?            funds" from family etc.                              funds" was
                                                                                                chosen.
At any time during 2017, did this          Perhaps consider moving this question          No
business need additional financing?        sooner if including the previous question or
                                           specify not to include what was already
                                           covered by the previous question if that is
                                           the intent of this question.




                                                83
Business      For 2017, which of the following         Prior to asking this question, consider       No
Performance   negatively impacted the profitability of asking respondents first a yes/no question
              this business?                           regarding whether they experienced any
                                                       negative impacts on their profit.

                                                       Regarding the subjectivity of the question,
                                                       it may help to include a qualifier stating    Yes
                                                       something akin to "please only include
                                                       factors that impacted profit."




                                                            84
Appendix A.2 ­ Imputation of Item Non-Response and "Don't Know"
This section describes the steps and intuition for our imputation of item non-response and "Don't
Know" responses to Technology questions Q1, Q2 and Q3. For further details on the
methodology, please contact the authors.
A.2.1 Measuring Item Non-Response and "Don't Know" Across Technology Questions
A primary contribution for the paper is to develop a nationally representative set of technology
adoption and use measures based on the survey results, which in public use tabulations report
aggregate response counts for each technology question (see public use tabulations at:
https://www.census.gov/data/tables/2018/econ/abs/2018-abs-digital-technology-module.html ).
We extend the public use tabulations in two distinct ways: a.) we utilize our LBD-derived
tabulation weights that corrects for the survey non-response and more closely matches the
Business Dynamic Statistics, b.) We impute technology responses for firms with item non-
response or for firms that answered, "Don't Know". We have demonstrated that the number of
total respondents, combined with our LBD-derived tabulation weights gives us a reasonable
sample that is representative of the economy.
Surveys suffer from non-response and item non-response. Survey non-response are those cases
in which firms do not respond to the request. Survey non-response is typically handled by an
adjustment of the survey weight resulting in new tabulation weights for those firms that did
respond. Item non-response occurs when a survey respondent answers some, but not all, survey
items. We address survey non-response by adjusting to national LBD totals as documented in
Section 3. We address item non-response for the three technology questions here. We adopt a
broader definition of item non-response and include those responses that include "Don't know"
as well. Table A4 provides the rounded number of item non-response ("Missing") and "Don't
Know" responses across each of the technology questions.
Table A4: Approximate Weighted and Unweighted Firm Counts of Item Non-Response and
"Don't Know"
                                                      Unweighted (Mean)                      Weighted
                                  Missing                   45,500                            375,000
 Digital Information              Don't Know                56,000                            502,000
                              Total                        101,500                            877,000
                                  Missing                   46,000                            378,000
 Cloud Purchases                  Don't Know                91,000                            794,000
                              Total                        137,000                           1,072,000
                                  Missing                   46,000                            378,000
 Business Technologies            Don't Know                90,000                            838,000
                              Total                        136,000                           1,116,000
Note: The figures are authors' calculations. They consist of approximate means across all of the sub-categories for
each technology question (see Figures 1, 3 and 5 for more exact figures across each of the sub-categories). "Missing"
response options have very little variation across all of the sub-categories (range from 45-48,000 unweighted firm
counts across all technologies), while "Don't Know" response options have more variation (between 40,000 and
105,000 unweighted firm counts across all technologies).



                                                         85
Across the three technology questions, "Missing" and "Don't Know" make up between 17-23%
of our full set of responses. Excluding the firms from our analysis is problematic for multiple
reasons: a.) it is not accepted Census Bureau procedure to adjust weights for item non-response,
b.) the distribution of firms with "Missing" and/or "Don't Know" responses differ from the set of
responders.
Excluding the firms from our analysis is problematic, as the distribution of firms with "Missing"
and "Don't Know" responses differ from the remaining set of responses. In our analysis of the
size, industry and age distribution of firms who respond with "Missing" or Don't Know, we find
significant differences in the size distribution (but not age or sectoral distribution) relative to the
full set of responses: firms who respond with "Missing" or "Don't Know" are significantly more
likely to be large (250+ employees). These differences get more skewed at the top of the
distribution (10,000+ employees). Finally, assigning each item non-response an arbitrary value
(e.g. "no use" or "use") would bias our high-level estimates.
A.2.2 Approach for addressing Item Non-Response and Don't Know
Our approach for managing the "Missing" and "Don't Know" responses relies on utilizing the
existing responses for all of the technological categories, combined with a number of observed
firm characteristics that we can gather from linking the ABS to the LBD. These include firm
measures of size interacted with 2-digit NAICS indicator variables, age, multi-unit status, mean
payroll per employee, responses to existing technology questions and geographic controls, taken
as the location of the largest employment establishment for multi-unit firms.
We can then estimate an ordered probit 58 across the different use categories that specifically tell
us whether or not a firm used a technology. For Q1 and Q2, these categorical options include:
       ·   None
       ·   Less than 50%
       ·   More than 50%
       ·   All
       ·   Information not collected/IT function not used
While for Q3, the categorical response options include:
       ·   None
       ·   Testing
       ·   Less than 5%
       ·   5 to 25%
       ·   More than 25%
See Tables A5 ­ A7 (listed at the end of the section) to review the adoption patterns for these
response options when we remove the "Missing" and "Don't Know" answers.



58
     We also ran an ordered logit and obtained similar results

                                                            86
For each of the sub-technology categories, we estimate the LHS use category with our set of
approximately 450,000 non-missing responses. We can then predict the probability for each of
the LHS use categories for the set of "Missing" and "Don't Know" responses. More formally,
our estimating equation is:
                      12                         8

              =   ×  +   +  + ln  +  +                                                                              (1)
                     =1                         =1




Where  is each of the response options for technology j, 12  =1  ×  are 12
employment size categories (based on the 2016 Business Dynamic Statistics size categories)
interacted with a 2-digit NAICS industry indicator variable,  are 8 age indicator categories,
 is the mean payroll per employee of firm i, and a state-level indicator variable for the
location of the largest employment establishment within the firm. For the cloud computing
question, we included an indicator variable for the number of digital information types the firm
has. For business technologies, we included a similar indicator variable for both cloud computing
and digital information.
We run this estimation across each of the technologies embedded within each technology
question and obtain a set of predicted probabilities for each of the "Missing" and "Don't Know"
respondents across the extensive margin response options. We leave the responses for the firms
that answered the question in one of the 4 (or 5) allowable response options as-is. We also
estimate this equation separately for the "Missing" and Don't Know, as there are slight
differences in the size and age distribution of the firms that did not answer the question (Missing)
and those that responded with Don't Know. 59
A.2.4 Alternative Approaches
In addition to estimating the separate response categories for each of the sub-technologies, we
also ran several robustness checks on our estimation by experimenting with other estimation
types (e.g., ordered logit), removing different coefficients and separating the interactive terms,
and pooling our estimation for the "Missing" and Don't Know. The results are highly consistent,
with some minor variation in the probabilities.
The imputed probabilities are tabulated across the use and no-use categories for each sub-
technology to create the tables and figures. For the size/age regressions (Tables 8, 12 and 17),
which looked at the extensive margin for use of an entire technology group, a separate probit
imputation (1/0) was performed for the set of firms with at least one "Missing" or "Don't Know"
response. This probit contains the exact same set of covariates as the ordered probit estimation.
Part of the reason for doing this is that by summing the imputed probability of use, we may be
overstating the likelihood of usage for firms that skipped the entire section (or responded with

59
   The "Don't Know" responders tend to be slightly smaller than the "Missing" and skewed more towards smaller
firms, but larger on average than the full sample. "Missing" firms also tended to be slightly younger relative to
"Don't Know" and the full sample.

                                                        87
Don't Know) for mechanical reasons. For instance, there are 9 sub-categories for cloud usage,
and suppose a firm who skipped each cloud question has a relatively low probability of usage for
each cloud technology (say 10-15% probability). By summing the probability across the 9
categories, the firm is almost guaranteed to be counted as having using at least 1 cloud
technology, when the "true" outcome is likely to be much smaller.
A.2.3 Post-Imputation Checks (Precision and Recall)
The results from the imputation provide us with a set of probabilities to each of the usage
categories for firms that skipped a technology question or marked it with "Don't Know". When
we tabulate the distribution of the imputed results and compare them with Tables A5-A7, we find
that the shares for each of the usage categories by technology question closely matches the
shares for the non-imputed, with slightly higher levels of "All" usage for Digital Information and
Cloud Computing. This is not all too surprising as the size distribution of firms that underwent
the imputation tended to be larger than the non-imputed sample.
As a secondary check, we performed a Precision/Recall analysis on the imputed responses to
gauge the accuracy of our estimation. We performed this by doing the following: we started with
our set of non-imputed firms and randomly sampled them into two groups (Test Set (30%) and
Training Set (70%)). We then implemented the exact same estimation for the training set and
predict the probability of use for the test sample. We are then able to calculate the Precision
(share of imputed values that match the response), Recall (share of responses that were imputed
correctly) and Accuracy (share of both).
The results from our Precision and Recall checks are mixed. For digital information and cloud
computing, our precision and recall levels for each of the response 5 response options was
somewhat lower than we would have liked, despite our accuracy being pretty high. This is likely
due to having too many response options (3 separate usage responses, 1 non-use and 1 not
applicable). Admittedly, the imputation model has a difficult time distinguishing firms by their
intensive margin, thus contributing to the relatively low precision and recall rates we find for
digital information and cloud computing. When we limit the responses to use/no use, our
precision and recall rates uniformly increase to higher levels that provide greater confidence in
our imputation methodology.
For the business technologies, our precision and recall perform significantly better, but this is
mostly due to the very high levels of non-usage found across each of the categories. When we
exclude the "none" from our analysis, our precision and recall drop dramatically.
At first, our precision and recall rates may seem problematic, but we believe they represent an
interesting finding, when we remember our sampling frame and initial research question of who
adopts advanced technologies. The precision and recall rates were computed for our full sample,
which largely consists of relatively small firms, whose adoption rates are very heterogeneous.
Our data and explanatory variables are simply too crude to provide a reliable predictor for the
precise types of firms that adopt certain technologies and those that do not. While we can claim
that size is a reliable predictor of adoption, even amongst large firms, we see heterogeneous
patterns of adoption depending on the technology type. In other words, there are simply too

                                                 88
     many unknown factors that cannot be measured by traditional metrics (such as firm size, age and
     industry) that appear to drive technology adoption.
     Table A5: Pre-Imputation Usage Rates for non-Missing and non-Don't Know - Digital Information
     (Weighted)
                      Mean          Feedback    Financial   Marketing    Personnel    Production     Supply    Other
                                                                                                     Chain
  None                 21.6%         25.7%       10.6%           20.9%     18.8%          23.2%       23.2%    28.6%
  Less than 50%         9.1%         10.2%       11.5%           11.6%     15.6%           6.2%        7.1%     1.3%
  More than 50%        14.6%         12.9%       27.4%           16.5%     22.5%          10.6%       10.0%     2.7%
  All                  15.3%         13.9%       34.2%           14.2%     21.8%          11.4%        8.8%     2.9%
  Information not
  Collected            39.4%         37.4%       16.3%           36.7%     21.4%          48.7%      50.9%     64.4%


     Table A6: Pre-Imputation Usage Rates for non-Missing and non-Don't Know - Cloud Purchases
     (Weighted)
                Mean       All IT
                            Data     Billing Customer Security Servers Storage Synch. Other
                            Analysis         Service
None            30.7% 27.6%  34.2% 29.3%         32.1%   28.0%  32.6%   29.7% 27.8% 35.1%
Less than 50%   11.3% 14.4%    8.1% 13.0%        10.5%   13.6%  11.3%   12.6% 16.9% 1.6%
More than
50%                 8.5% 10.5%          6.2%     12.3%           8.4%     9.9%        8.6%    9.6%      9.4%    1.6%
All                 8.2% 7.3%           5.2%     13.6%           7.0%    12.9%       10.0%    8.6%      7.9%    1.6%
IT Function
not Used        41.2% 40.2%            46.4%     31.7%           42.0%   35.7%       37.6%   39.5%     38.0% 60.1%


     Table A7: Pre-Imputation Usage Rates for non-Missing and non-Don't Know - Business Technologies
     (Weighted)
                    Mean  Aug.    AGV    Mach. Mach.     NLP   RFID Robotics Touch Voice
                          Reality        Learn Vision                              Recog.
None                97.4% 98.7%    99.0% 96.4%     97.9% 98.3% 98.5%  98.3% 93.0% 96.8%
Testing
                    0.5%     0.4%        0.2%      0.7%           0.4%   0.4%      0.3%      0.3%      0.9%     0.7%
Less than 5%
                    0.7%     0.4%        0.3%      1.0%           0.5%   0.5%      0.4%      0.4%      1.7%     1.2%
Between 5-
25%                 0.6%     0.2%        0.2%      0.9%           0.5%   0.3%      0.3%      0.4%      1.5%     0.7%
More than 25%       0.8%     0.3%        0.3%      1.0%           0.7%   0.5%      0.4%      0.5%      2.8%     0.7%




                                                            89
Appendix A.3 ­ Unconditional Adoption Rates by Technology Type for Digital
Information and Cloud Computing
One of the challenges in computing shares of technology adoption is identifying the "correct"
denominator. For Tables 6 and 9, the shares of adoption for each of the digital information types
and cloud computing purchases were calculated conditional on the firm not responding in the
affirmative to "This type of information not collected by this business" (in the case of digital
information) or "Don't use this IT function" (in the case of cloud purchases), meaning that the
firm was "at risk" to adopt a technology, but selected not to. While Figures 2 and 4 compute
shares based on the number of firms that did not respond in the affirmative for each of the above
for all of the subcategories. We do this to minimize selection and to get a more accurate sense of,
"for the firms that would potentially use this technology, what percentage of them actually are?"
We realize that many may want the adoption rate to measure the overall pervasiveness of a
certain technology in the economy, regardless of demand, which we provide here. We start by
providing the unconditional adoption rates (all firms are in the denominator) for Tables 6 and 9
and re-do our butterfly chart figures (Figures 2 and 4) with the unconditional adoption rates.


Table A8: Use of Digital Information by Business Function ­ Unconditional

 Business Function                                            % Use                    % Intensive Use
 Financial                                                  72.2   (73.3)                 61.0   (61.7)
 Personnel                                                  59.1   (59.9)                 43.6   (44.3)
 Marketing                                                  42.3   (42.7)                 30.5   (31.1)
 Feedback                                                   36.9   (31.7)                 26.6   (23.1)
 Production                                                 27.6   (28.1)                 21.6   (21.8)
 Supply Chain                                               25.7   (26.2)                 18.7   (19.0)
 Other                                                       6.8   (6.9)                   5.6   (5.7)
Notes: "Use" is defined as having responded with "Up to 50%", "More than 50%" or "All" for the information
category listed on "Digital Share of Business". "Intensive Use" is defined as having responded with "More than
50%" or "All". Shares are computed using the LBD tabulation weights of firm counts, divided by the total number
of firms. Listed shares are imputed shares, with raw weighted values in parentheses.




                                                       90
Table A9: Cloud Service Purchases by IT Function - Unconditional


 Cloud Service Purchased                            % Use                     % Intensive Use
 Billing                                          38.0 (38.8)                  25.3 (25.7)
 Security                                         36.3 (37.0)                  22.8 (23.1)
 Synchronization                                  33.0 (33.6)                  16.8 (17.0)
 All IT                                           31.7 (32.2)                  17.6 (17.8)
 Data Storage                                     30.5 (31.1)                  18.1 (18.3)
 Servers                                          29.5 (30.1)                  18.5 (18.7)
 Customer Relations                               25.3 (25.7)                  15.0 (15.3)
 Data Analysis                                    19.5 (19.8)                  11.4 (11.6)
 Other                                             4.7 (4.8)                     3.2 (3.2)
Notes: "Use" is defined as having responded with "Up to 50%", "More than 50%" or "All" for the category listed on
"Cloud Service Purchases". "Intensive Use" is defined as having responded with "More than 50%" or "All". Shares
are computed using the LBD tabulation weights of firm counts, divided by the total number of firms. Listed shares
are imputed shares, with raw weighted values in parentheses.



        For each of the technologies within digital information and cloud computing services, the
unconditional adoption rates are on average between 10-15% lower than the conditional
counterparts. These differences are magnified for industry-specific items, such as "Supply
Chain" or "Production" data, which highlights the importance of demand in terms of adopting
certain technologies. For the butterfly charts, we see similar 10-15% drops in the aggregate
adoption rates by industry.




                                                       91
Figure A1: Extensive and Intensive Margin Measures of Digitized Information by Sector -
Unconditional




Notes: "Use" is defined as having responded with "Up to 50%", "More than 50%" or "All" for the information
category listed on "Digital Share of Business". "Intensive Use" is defined as having responded with "More than
50%" or "All". Shares are computed using the LBD tabulation weights of firm counts, divided by the total number
of firms. Sectors are defined by combined 2-digit NAICS and assigned for multi-unit firms by largest payroll
industry by firm. Original responses classified as "Missing" or "Don't Know" are imputed.




                                                       92
Figure A2: Extensive and Intensive Margin Measures of Use Rates for Cloud Service
Purchases by Sector - Unconditional




Notes: "Use" is defined as having responded with "Up to 50%", "More than 50%" or "All" for the category listed on
"Cloud Service Purchases". "Intensive Use" is defined as having responded with "More than 50%" or "All". Shares
are computed using the LBD tabulation weights of firm counts, divided by the total number of firms. Sectors are
defined by combined 2-digit NAICS and assigned for multi-unit firms by largest payroll industry by firm. Original
responses classified as "Missing" or "Don't Know" are imputed.




                                                       93
