                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       MARKET STRUCTURE AND EXTORTION:
                    EVIDENCE FROM 50,000 EXTORTION PAYMENTS

                                        Zach Y. Brown
                                       Eduardo Montero
                                     Carlos Schmidt-Padilla
                                     Maria Micaela Sviatschi

                                       Working Paper 28299
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28299


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           December 2020, Revised July 2021




We are grateful to Lauren Falcao Bergquist, Chris Blattman, Doris Chiang, Abby Córdova,
Oeindrila Dube, Thomas Fujiwara, Robert Gibbons, Rema Hanna, Benjamin Lessing, Alex Mas,
Nathan Nunn, Rohini Pande, Alison Post, Jake Shapiro, Andrei Shleifer, Santiago Tobón, and
seminar participants at Berkeley, BREAD, Latin American Network in Economic History and
Political Economy Seminar, Notre Dame, University of Michigan, University of North Carolina,
Harvard Business School, PacDev 2021, Princeton University, Queen's University, SIOE, and
University of Gothenburg. We thank Rachel Fung, Pedro Magana, Paulo Matos, and Carolina
Tojal Ramos dos Santos for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Zach Y. Brown, Eduardo Montero, Carlos Schmidt-Padilla, and Maria Micaela
Sviatschi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Market Structure and Extortion: Evidence from 50,000 Extortion Payments
Zach Y. Brown, Eduardo Montero, Carlos Schmidt-Padilla, and Maria Micaela Sviatschi
NBER Working Paper No. 28299
December 2020, Revised July 2021
JEL No. D74,K42,L10,O17

                                           ABSTRACT

How do gangs compete for extortion? Using detailed data on individual extortion payments to
gangs and sales from a leading wholesale distributor of consumer goods and pharmaceuticals in
El Salvador, we document evidence on the determinants of extortion payments, firm responses to
extortion, and effects on consumers. We exploit a 2016 non-aggression pact between gangs to
examine how collusion affects extortion in areas where gangs previously competed. While the
non-aggression pact led to a large reduction in violence, we find that it increased extortion by
15% to 20%. Much of the increase in extortion was passed-through to retailers and consumers:
we find a large increase in prices for pharmaceutical drugs and a corresponding increase in
hospital visits for chronic illnesses. The results shed light on how extortion rates are set and point
to an unintended consequence of policies that reduce competition between criminal organizations.


Zach Y. Brown                                     Carlos Schmidt-Padilla
Department of Economics                           University of California, Berkeley
University of Michigan                            210 Social Sciences Building
611 Tappan Ave                                    Berkeley, CA 94720-1950
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                               cschmidtpadilla@gmail.com
and NBER
zachb@umich.edu                                   Maria Micaela Sviatschi
                                                  Department of Economics
Eduardo Montero                                   Princeton University
Harris School of Public Policy                    128 Julis Romo Rabinowitz
University of Chicago                             Princeton, NJ 08544
1307 E 60th St                                    and NBER
Chicago, IL 60637                                 msviatschi@princeton.edu
and NBER
emontero@uchicago.edu
1    Introduction

Organized crime and associated extortion is a pervasive aspect of daily life in many coun-
tries. Extortion is a driving force behind competition and violence between gangs world-
wide, as extortion often serves as the main revenue source for various organized groups (GI-
ATOC and IC 2019; Konrad and Skaperdas 1998). In El Salvador, two main gangs compete
for territory in order to extort firms, with estimates suggesting that over 70% of businesses
are extorted in areas with gangs (Martínez et al. 2016). Despite its prevalence, extortion is
rarely reported to the police and is difficult to measure systematically.1 Due to the consider-
able challenge of measuring extortion, little is known about how gangs determine extortion
rates, how competition between gangs for territory impacts extortion, and the resulting eco-
nomic effects of extortion.
    Understanding competition between gangs for extortion is particularly important given
that governments have often facilitated cooperation between criminal organizations in order
to reduce violence. A prominent example of this policy is the controversial 2012 government-
negotiated truce between the two main gangs in El Salvador.2 In addition to government-
backed truces, gangs will often collude and negotiate non-aggression pacts on their own,
which was the case in El Salvador in 2016. While it is widely known that collusion among
criminal organizations can reduce gang violence, little is known about the consequences on
extortion and its downstream effects.
    In this paper, we provide evidence on these issues by leveraging unique administrative
data on extortion payments combined with detailed sales data for all goods shipped by a
major wholesale distributor of consumer goods and pharmaceutical drugs in El Salvador.
The data have information on over 50,000 extortion payments in which truck drivers were
stopped by gangs over the period 2012 to 2019. We link these extortion payments to sales
data for the distributor with information on the revenue and margin of each product being
delivered. We also link the data to consumer prices for pharmaceutical drugs. We use these
data to understand the business model of gangs, the economic costs of extortion, and how
competition between gangs affects extortion and prices. In particular, we exploit the 2016
non-aggression pact between gangs to provide the first causal evidence on how collusion
between gangs affects extortion. We then examine the firm response to extortion and pass-
   1 In El Salvador, only a very small fraction of extortion incidents are reported to the police due to fear of

retaliation and lack of confidence in the police response. One survey suggests that only about 15% of victims of
extortion by gangs ever report an incident to the police (FUSADES 2016). Reporting of extortion is even rarer for
those that repeatedly pay extortion (FUSADES 2016).
   2 Other examples include truces in Honduras, Haiti, South Africa, Trinidad and Tobago, Japan, and Jamaica.

See, for instance, Kan (2014) and Cockayne et al. (2017).



                                                       1
through of extortion to downstream prices.
   We start with a simple theoretical framework to highlight the role of competition in the
market for extortion. The model combines insights from the literature on competition and
conflict between gangs (e.g. Garfinkel and Skaperdas 2007; Castillo and Kronick 2020) with
the industrial organization literature on vertical markets and double-marginalization (e.g.
Spengler 1950). In the model, gangs collect extortion from firms operating in the territory
they control. The gangs compete with each other for territory using violence when the po-
tential profits from extortion are large enough. However, gangs can realize higher profits
if they can collude and agree not to compete for territory, freeing resources for collecting
extortion. The model implies that collusion between gangs increases extortion while de-
creasing violence, especially in markets where the firm being extorted faces high (inelastic)
downstream demand. The model also implies that collusion between gangs exacerbates
double-marginalization, increasing downstream prices.
   We then provide a descriptive analysis of the main correlates of extortion in order to shed
light on the role of price discrimination by gangs. We find a positive correlation between
extortion rates and the value of goods being delivered, however the correlation is modest.
This is potentially due to the fact that gangs' ability to price discriminate may be constrained
by the lack of information about the firms they extort. We find that the correlation with easy-
to-observe characteristics, including economic development in a municipality, is stronger.
Extortion rates at delivery are uncorrelated with the number of payments elsewhere on
the route. These results provide evidence that gangs set extortion rates based on observable
local characteristics. Consistent with the model, extortion is higher when local characteristics
suggest higher (or more inelastic) demand for the goods being delivered by the distributor.
We also find evidence that competition between gangs is associated with higher extortion
rates. However, as illustrated in the model, competition is endogenous given that gangs are
likely to compete over territories with larger returns from extortion.
   To provide causal estimates on the effect of competition, we focus on the March 2016 non-
aggression pact between gangs. After the pact, gangs agreed to respect each other's existing
territory rather than compete for territory over which to extort firms. In order to determine
how this collusion between the gangs affected extortion, we examine the effect of the non-
aggression pact in municipalities in which gangs previously competed compared to areas in
which only one gang was present and had a monopoly on territory. The non-aggression pact
mainly reduced violence in areas with previous competition, helping validate this difference-
in-difference approach.
   Exploiting the 2016 non-aggression pact, we find that gang collusion increased extortion



                                               2
by 15% to 20% percent in areas with previous gang competition relative to control areas.
The effect of competition on extortion rates is robust to a number of specifications, including
alternative definitions of competition. The results are especially large in areas with high
development prior to the pact, which see an increase in extortion of 24%. While we consider
a number of explanations, we find evidence that the increase in extortion is due to gangs
diverting resources to extortion collection after the truce, including increasing threats related
to extortion. This is consistent with both qualitative accounts and the theoretical framework
that highlight that it is costly for the gangs to both collect extortion and fight rival gangs,
implying that collusion allows gangs to focus resources on extortion.
   We then provide evidence on how firms respond to higher extortion rates due to the
non-aggression pact. We show that there is substantial pass-through of extortion to retailers,
especially for retailers close to the extortion location. We estimate that the increase in extor-
tion causes the cost to the nearest retailer to increases by 12%. The cost for retailers further
away from the location of the extortion payment also increase, but by less. We also find
support for the theoretical prediction that pass-through depends on downstream demand
for the good being extorted. In particular, we find larger pass-through for inelastic goods
such as staple food products, suggesting that the increase in extortion due to gang collusion
may disproportionately impact poorer households.
   To provide additional insight into the effect on consumers, we focus on pharmaceutical
markets given that we observe detailed administrative data on consumer prices at pharma-
cies. In addition, El Salvador has had among the highest drug prices in Central America,
potentially reducing access to drugs and affecting health.3 We find that the non-aggression
pact increased retail prices for drugs by 12% for those pharmacies supplied by the distrib-
utor. The increase in drug prices affects a wide range of drug classes, which we argue is
largely due to an increase in wholesale costs because of the increase in extortion. We then
examine hospital visits and find that for chronic diagnoses potentially affected by drug ad-
herence, visits increase by 8%. There is no effect for visits unaffected by high drug prices
such as injuries, indicating that the increase in visits is likely due to the increase in drug
costs. These results highlight that an increase in extortion rates for upstream firms can lead
to large negative welfare effects for consumers.
   Competition for extortion by gangs is related to the literature on competition for bribes
and other forms of corruption by government officials. Shleifer and Vishny (1993) argue
that corrupt officials should be thought of as profit maximizing agents and point out that
competition between government officials can reduce bribery.4 A related literature examines
  3 See   discussion in Yamagiwa (2015).
  4 There   is also a separate literature, starting with Becker and Stigler (1974), focusing on the principal-agent


                                                         3
how firm competition affects corruption (Bliss and Di Tella 1997; Ades and Di Tella 1999).
The role of market structure in government corruption is highlighted in empirical work by
Olken and Barron (2009) who study bribes at checkpoints and find that the payment amount
depends on the number of checkpoints, consistent with a model in which the officials at each
checkpoint act as monopolists in a vertical chain. As we discuss in Section 2, extortion by
gangs has different implications than bribes by government officials due to how extortion is
collected in our setting.5 Related work has found evidence of price discrimination by corrupt
officials (Svensson 2003; Bertrand et al. 2007; Olken and Barron 2009). While much of this
literature focuses on government officials, there is little empirical evidence on extortion by
criminal organizations and downstream effects.
    We also contribute to the literature on criminal organizations and enforcement in illicit
drug markets (e.g., Levitt and Venkatesh 2000; Dell 2015; Castillo and Kronick 2020; Blattman
et al. 2021). A related literature has examined the effect of gangs on economic development
and labor markets (Angrist and Kugler 2008; Sviatschi 2018; Melnikov et al. 2020).6 Despite
being the key revenue source for gangs in El Salvador, there is little work studying competi-
tion between gangs in the market for extortion.7 Additionally, previous work has relied on
self-reported data on whether individuals have paid extortion (FUSADES 2016; Magaloni et
al. 2020). In this paper, we leverage administrative panel data on individual extortion pay-
ments, including the amount of each payment, from a large distribution firm. This allows
us to provide new evidence on the determinants of extortion and examine the causal effect
of collusion between gangs. In addition, we provide new evidence on how firms respond to
changes in extortion, which is important for understanding the incidence of extortion.
    Cooperation between gangs is also related to the broader industrial organization liter-
ature on collusive agreements between firms. There is a long history of comparing non-
aggression pacts and peace agreements to collusive agreements between firms (Waltz 1979).
In the case of criminal organizations in El Salvador, these parallels are even more stark given
that the gangs are thought to be essentially profit-maximizing entities deriving the majority

problem in the context of corruption or extortion. See Konrad and Skaperdas (1997) and Garoupa (2000) for
examples related to extortion.
   5 Unlike bribes by government officials along main highways, which is the setting of Olken and Barron (2009),

gangs in El Salvador generally do not collect extortion from trucks passing through an area on main roads, rather
they extort firms when making a delivery. Given this distinction, paying extortion in one location does not affect
the ability to make deliveries on the rest of a route. Consistent with this, we find that extortion payments are
independent of the number of deliveries on the route.
   6 There is also a literature focused on the Italian mafia examining how criminal organizations affect political

and economic outcomes (e.g., Bandiera 2003; Pinotti 2015; Alesina et al. 2019; Acemoglu et al. 2020).
   7 Unlike gangs in other settings (e.g. Blattman et al. 2021), gangs in El Salvador rely primarily on extortion

for financing and do not collect significant revenue through the drug trade. Additionally, gangs in El Salvador
generally do not provide public goods themselves (Melnikov et al. 2020).



                                                        4
of their revenue from extortion. Like Salvadoran gangs, collusion between firms in stan-
dard markets may involve assigning exclusive territory (Rey and Stiglitz 1995). Despite the
fact that collusive agreements between firms are often surreptitious, a number of empiri-
cal studies have examined cartels convicted by antitrust authorities or cartels operating in
a jurisdiction in which they are legal (e.g. Porter 1983; Röller and Steen 2006; Asker 2010).8
Firms may use violence or threats of violence to enforce collusion or deter entry when in-
cumbents collude (e.g. Clark and Houde 2013; Clark et al. 2018). A growing literature has
also examined issues related to collusion and competition in developing countries (Houde
et al. 2020; Bergquist and Dinerstein 2020). We provide new empirical evidence on collusion
in an illegal market where gangs compete for territory. Unlike collusion in standard set-
tings, collusion between criminal organizations reduces violence, allowing gangs to increase
extortion rates.
      The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background
information on gang violence, collusion, and extortion in El Salvador, and describes the
distributor's sales and extortion data. Section 3 presents the theoretical framework. Section 4
provides a descriptive analysis of the main determinants extortion. Section 5 presents the
estimates of the the non-aggression pact on extortion. Section 6 presents the pass-through
estimates using the distributor data. Section 7 presents the effects on pharmaceutical prices
and hospital visits. Section 8 concludes.


2     Background, Institutional Setting, and Data Sources

In this section, we first provide background information on gang violence and extortion in
El Salvador and describe the 2016 non-aggression pact. We then present relevant details on
the wholesale distributor that provided us with sales and extortion data. We explain the
firm's business model, how extortion payments work in this setting, and describe the data
on sales and extortion. Finally, we provide information on additional data sources we use in
the subsequent analysis.


2.1    Gang Violence, Extortion, and Collusion in El Salvador

El Salvador is known as one of the most violent peacetime countries in the world. In 2015, El
Salvador had a murder rate of 103 per 100,000 people--the highest murder rate worldwide
(Gagne 2016). This violence is due to the territorial reach of highly organized gangs. The
majority of the murders in El Salvador can be attributed to gangs, and these gangs are
    8 Also   see Levenstein and Suslow (2006) for a review of the empirical literature on collusion.


                                                           5
estimated to be present in 247 out of the country's 262 municipalities (ICG 2017b). The two
main gangs in El Salvador, Mara Salvatrucha (MS-13) and Barrio 18, account for 87% of gang
membership and are estimated to have over 60,000 members and a support base of 500,000,
equal to 8% of El Salvador's population (Aguilar et al. 2006, ICG 2017b).9
    The high violence in El Salvador is largely due to territorial wars in which the two major
gangs fight to dominate extortion rackets (Papadovassilakis and Dudley 2020). Extortion
represents the largest share of gang income, and is described as the "economic engine"
behind the gangs and violence (ICG 2017a).10 Estimates suggest that gangs extort about 70%
of all the businesses in the territories where they are present, with distribution and transport
firms being particularly affected (Martínez et al. 2016). Information on gang earnings is
sparse, however, wiretapped conversations revealed that MS-13 earned about $600,000 in a
single week of 2016 (Martínez et al. 2016). Estimates from the Salvadoran Central Bank count
the direct cost of extortion to businesses at over $700 million a year, equivalent to 3% GDP,
and the indirect costs of criminality at upwards of $4 billion a year (16% of GDP) (Peñate
Guerra et al. 2016). These estimates are based on surveys and police reports, which have
significant limitations.
    Part of gangs' success at territorial control, violence, and extortion owes to their decen-
tralized organizational structure. Both MS-13 and Barrio 18 have national leaders (ranfleros)
that often dictate and negotiate larger gang policies, including the 2012 truce and 2016 non-
aggression pact. Operations on the ground are organized around neighborhood cliques (cli-
cas). A clique, which may comprise ten to hundreds of members, is tied to a set geographic
perimeter within a municipality, often a neighborhood (colonia) in urban settings (Dudley et
al. 2018). In large urban areas, such as the capital San Salvador, there are often numerous
cliques from both MS-13 and Barrio 18.11
    To combat gang violence and extortion, the government of El Salvador has alternated be-
tween violent confrontations and direct negotiations with gangs (ICG 2017a; Holland 2013).
Most prominently, the government negotiated a controversial truce between the two main
gangs--MS-13 and Barrio 18--in March 2012. The immediate effect was less violence, with
homicides falling by more than half (see Figure 1).
    The 2012 truce was officially called off by the government in June 2013 in response to
   9 For a discussion of the history of gangs in El Salvador and the role of deportations, see Sviatschi (2019).
  10 Gangs  in El Salvador also earn revenue from drug-trafficking and sales, but this is thought to be much lower
than the revenue from extortion. This is because, unlike gangs in neighboring countries, gangs in El Salvador do
not have direct control over the drug trade and are thought to only have sporadic "sub-contractual relationship"
with drug traffickers (ICG 2017b).
  11 In our context, the delivery firm may pay extortion to multiple cliques from the same gang within one

municipality.



                                                        6
                                                                  Figure 1
                                                    Homicides and Collusion Between Gangs


                                           900



                      Reported Homicides   700



                                           500



                                           300



                                           100


                                             2010     2011   2012   2013   2014  2015   2016   2017   2018   2019
                                                                               Month


              Notes: Chart shows reported homicides in El Salvador by month. Vertical
              lines show start of gang truce (March 2012) and non-aggression pact (April
              2016).


both growing opposition within the government and across civil society as the 2014 election
neared (Vukovi´
              c and Rahman 2018). Following the 2014 election, the newly elected gov-
ernment returned to a policy of violent confrontation with the gangs, and violence between
gangs subsequently increased. However, gang representatives from MS-13 and Barrio 18
continued to meet informally using the meeting venues and dialogue mechanisms originally
put in place to negotiate the truce (Martínez 2016a).12
    On March 26, 2016, the leaders of the main gangs in El Salvador unexpectedly announced
a non-aggression pact that prohibited the invasion of other gangs' territories and violence
targeting members of rival gangs (Ditta 2016; Martínez 2016a). Unlike the 2012 truce, the
2016 non-aggression pact was negotiated directly between gang representatives without the
aid of government intermediaries and was not supported by the government.13 In many
ways the pact resembled a classic collusive agreement. For instance, the gangs set up a
12-member "coordinating committee" that would continue to meet to coordinate action and
maintain exclusive territories (Martínez 2016a). As one gang representative described the
pact and the role of the committee: "At present, we have a non-aggression pact between us,
  12 Specifically, the 2012 truce was negotiated with the help of religious leaders. These religious leaders contin-

ued to host informal meetings of gang representatives following the 2012 truce (Martínez 2016a).
  13 The pact may have been negotiated in response to increased enforcement measures being debated by the

government at the time (Ditta 2016).



                                                                             7
the idea being that boundaries will be respected. There are always problems that have to be
resolved. It is not perfect. There's always someone that shoots, but that is why we are here"
(Martínez 2016a).
      Following the announcement of the non-aggression pact, homicides immediately fell by
nearly half in the three subsequent months, as seen in Figure 1. This drop in homicides was
mainly due to less violence between gangs: an MS-13 spokesman said at the time that "if you
have seen the reduction in homicides, it is because the [gangs] are not attacking each other"
(Martínez 2016a). There is little information about the status of the non-aggression pact in
subsequent years; however, the homicide rate has remained low relative to the period before
the pact. This has led many to speculate that the non-aggression pact was still in place as of
the end of our sample period (Papadovassilakis 2020).
      While it is well known that both the 2012 truce and 2016 non-aggression pact affected
homicides, it is also possible that extortion rates were affected. Some have speculated that
cooperation between the gangs could allow gangs to grow stronger and increase extortion.
For instance, Dudley (2013) notes that "one theory [is] that the gang truce was really an
effort by larger criminal interests to grant the MS-13 and Barrio 18 more breathing room for
their operations." Collecting extortion requires constant monitoring of trucks and retailers,
negotiating payment amounts, and credibly threatening violence (Neu 2019). MS-13 and
Barrio 18 have a limited number of gang members, and there is anecdotal evidence that when
they compete for territory, they have fewer resources to collect extortion.14 In particular, the
truce may have freed up gang members to more credibly threaten violence, increasing the
ability of gangs to request high extortion payments. In addition, it may be more dangerous
to collect extortion when gang members are being targeted by a rival gang. These issues
suggest that it is costly for gangs to both compete for territory and collect extortion. After
the non-aggression pact, gangs may have been able to focus their resources on collecting
extortion (ICG 2020). We explore these issues in the theoretical framework we present in
Section 3 and empirically in Section 5.4.


2.2    Extortion and Sales for Distribution Firm

We use extortion payment data and sales data for all goods delivered by a leading wholesale
distributor in El Salvador for the period 2012 to 2019.15 The distributor is a major sup-
plier of both consumer products and pharmaceuticals. The company buys these goods in
bulk from manufacturers--often from abroad--and resells the products to local retailers and
  14 Martínez (2016b) gives an example of a school that faces low extortion because it is in disputed gang territory,

unlike surrounding area.
  15 Due to a confidentiality agreement with the firm, we do not name the firm.



                                                         8
pharmacies. The firm has exclusive licensing rights with certain major international brands,
allowing them to be the sole distributor of these goods in El Salvador.
    For the distribution of products, the company operates primarily under a sub-contractor
system for drivers and trucks. Each day, a truck is assigned a route with a predetermined
number of stops. Per company policy, all trucks leave the San Salvador Metropolitan Area in
the morning and must return at the day's end. These trucks tend to be midsize box trucks,
often bare of visible advertisement or company identification. Over the sample period, the
trucks go on 93,387 trips, making 2.2 million deliveries to retailers and pharmacies.
    The extortion payment data contain records on the amount and location of each payment
made to a gang on each route from 2012 to 2019.16 The data also contain information on
the date and shipment route, allowing us to link extortion to information about deliveries.
These data were collected after the firm set up a robust security team headed by an ex-senior
police officer to monitor trucks and negotiate with gangs. Other firms in El Salvador often
use a similar approach (Martínez et al. 2016).
    According to conversations with the firm's security team, extortion payments work as
follows. Prior to making a delivery in gang-controlled territory, a driver will stop and meet
with a gang representative who collects extortion. At this point they must call the security
team, put them through with the gang representative, and have both the representative and
the driver confirm the receipt of payment and the payment amount. This is done to reduce
fraudulent claims of payments by drivers, or coordination between the driver and a gang
representative. The security team then records the payment amount and the location of pay-
ment.17 In some cases, the extortion amount is pre-negotiated for a given period, often a
month or less. While gangs are known to use violence or confiscate goods when negoti-
ations break down, the gangs generally prefer consistent extortion payments over extreme
measures that deter trucks from returning to an area in the future. Over the sample period,
the distributor noted that they were generally successful at avoiding violent confrontation
with the gangs, ensuring that drivers were safe and could make timely deliveries.18 We
provide additional details on the mechanics of extortion in Appendix A.
    It is important to note that extortion payments generally give the distributor rights to
deliver to retailers rather than rights to pass through a territory. Trucks are often stopped
  16 Information on extortion is missing for 1/2013, 2/2013, 4/2013, 5/2013, 4/2014, 4/2015, 11/2017, and

12/2017. Only two of these months are during our main period of analysis surrounding the non-aggression
pact.
  17 In addition to using these records for their own accounting, the distributor reports extortion payments to

the Attorney General's office.
  18 Prior to 2010, there were cases in which the firm used armored trucks and heavy security details when

delivering in gang territory in order to avoid paying extortion. This was an expensive and dangerous approach.



                                                      9
                                              Figure 2
                                        Geography of Extortion




on side streets prior to a delivery rather than on a main road, implying that a firm could
pass through the area without paying extortion if they did not make a delivery. This can be
contrasted with government bribes at police checkpoints which allow firms the right to pass
through an area (e.g. Olken and Barron 2009). In general, gangs have exclusive control of
territory, and the distributor does not choose which gang to pay when making a delivery. In
this way, gangs compete over territory rather than directly compete to provide "protection."
Competition is particularly intense in municipalities that have a border between territory
controlled by different gangs. While the distributor only pays one gang at a time in a given
location, the gang that they pay may change over time depending on who controls the
location. These features of extortion in El Salvador guide our model in Section 3.
    Figure 2 shows a map of all the extortion payments recorded by the company's security
team between March, 2012 and March, 2019--a total of 51,576 extortion payments. While
many extortion payments occur in the San Salvador Metropolitan Area, the firm frequently
makes extortion payments across many different regions of the country.19 Table 1 presents
summary statistics for the extortion data (Panel A) for the sample period a year before and
after the 2016 non-aggression pact, a period with 24,342 extortion payments. Individual ex-
tortion payments to the gang vary between $0.50 and $140. Conditional on paying extortion,
the average truck pays $14 per route in a day, equal to roughly half the daily labor cost of a
truck driver.
    The sales data have detailed information on what was delivered by each truck over the
period 2009 to 2019. The unit of observation is a product type delivered to a retailer or
pharmacy on a given trip. The data include the revenue amount for each product delivered,
  19 Appendix Figure A-1 presents a map of total and average extortion paid by the firm across municipalities.
The data does not include information on which gang received the extortion payment.



                                                     10
the cost paid by the firm to obtain each product, and the corresponding gross margin for
each product delivered--the difference between the cost paid to acquire the product and the
amount charged to the retailer at delivery. The data also includes the product name, retailer
name, and retailer addresses where the product was delivered. Table 1 presents summary
statistics for the sales data (Panel B).20
      We combine the sales data with the extortion data from the firm's security team using
information on the route, truck, and location. Extortion payments are often made in close
proximity to a delivery location. To provide a visual example of the combined data set,
Figure 3 presents a map of all of the deliveries made by the firm on a single day in 2016.
The map shows the vast geographic scope of the firm's operations within a day and the
prevalence of extortion payments made across El Salvador.

                                            Figure 3
                Example Routes, Deliveries, & Extortion Payments on a Single Day




      Notes: Map shows example of all truck routes, deliveries to retailers, and extortion pay-
      ments to gangs on a single day in December, 2016.



2.3     Additional Data Sources

2.3.1    Homicides

Individual-level homicide data for the years 2010 to 2017 was obtained from the National
Civil Police (PNC) of El Salvador through a "freedom of information" request. The data
include information on the date and location of each homicide recorded by the El Salvador
police. The data also include information on which gang committed the homicide if the
police were able to make a determination. Gang information is unknown for about 82% of
homicides. Table 1 Panel C presents summary statistics for the homicides data aggregated
  20 Appendix Figure A-2 presents a map of total and average delivery values across municipalities for deliveries
made by the firm. Deliveries occur in almost all municipalities of El Salvador.


                                                       11
to the municipality-month level for the sample period a year before and after the 2016 non-
aggression pact. There are 262 municipalities in El Salvador. On average, a municipality
experienced four homicides per month during the sample period.


2.3.2     Pharmacy Sales and Hospital Visits

In order to examine the downstream effects of extortion on consumers, we focus on retail
prices at pharmacies and health outcomes. The distributor is a major supplier of drugs
to pharmacies, and, unlike other retail goods, there are detailed administrative data on
pharmacy sales and health outcomes.
   Retail pharmacy sales data for the years 2014 to 2017 are provided by the National Direc-
torate of Medicines (DNM) of El Salvador. Due to high drug prices relative to comparable
countries, the government started collecting sales data from pharmacies in 2014 with the in-
tent of monitoring drug prices and increasing price transparency for consumers.21 Starting
in 2014, the sales data were collected at the semi-annual level, however, this was increased
to the monthly level in 2016.
   The data contain information on quantity and revenue by pharmacy for each pharmaceu-
tical product. There are over 10,000 unique products, defined as a specific molecule-brand-
size. Since different size pill packs for the same drug are defined as separate products, we
standardize quantity by dividing by the number of pills per pack (or number of milliliters
or grams). Drug products are then defined as a molecule-brand. Products that cannot be
standardized, constituting 29 percent of the sample, are removed. The sample of pharmacies
includes all pharmacies for which the government was able to collect data over the period.
Data collection was focused on the largest pharmacies and some smaller pharmacies are not
included in the sample. We discuss the sample of pharmacies in more depth in Section 7.
Table 1 presents summary statistics for the pharmacy data (Panel D) for the sample period
a year before and after the 2016 non-aggression pact.
   In order to examine how changes in pharmaceutical prices affect health, we use individual-
level data on hospital visits at public health facilities for the years 2012 to 2019 obtained from
the Health Ministry of El Salvador (MINSAL) and Salvadoran Social Security Institute (ISSS).
MINSAL is the main public hospital system and operates 30 hospitals, while ISSS operates
11 hospitals and covers workers in the formal sector and their dependents. The data do not
include information for the approximately 30 private hospitals in El Salvador; however, only
5% of the population has private health insurance and can readily access private hospitals.
Records have information on the hospital, municipality, visit date, patient characteristics (age
 21 The   data were used for a price transparency website administered by the government starting in May 2015.


                                                      12
                                              Table 1
                                          Summary Statistics

                                                             Mean           SD                Min         Max
Panel A. Extortion payments:
  Extortion payment                                           8.10        10.62             0.50       140.0
  Total extortion by trip                                    15.60        19.07             1.00       290.0
  Total extortion by route-month                            127.12       129.97             1.00       745.0
  Total observations                                                               50,695

Panel B. Distributor sales by retailer-product-trip:
 Amount charged to retailer                                  31           369               0.0 189, 276
 Cost                                                        26           335               0.0 187, 317
 Amount by trip                                          3, 467        9, 548               0.0 357, 849
 Cost by trip                                            2, 921        8, 154               0.0 293, 858
 Amount by route-month                                 107, 362      264, 033              28.8 2, 773, 948
 Cost by route-month                                    90, 444      211, 085              23.4 2, 117, 466
  Unique products                                                                   6,038
  Unique retailers                                                                 36,020
  Total trips                                                                      93,387
  Total observations                                                             10,552,876

Panel C. Homicides by municipality-month:
 Homicides by MS-13                                           0.69         1.26             0           17
 Homicides by Barrio-18                                       0.55         1.23             0           15
 Total homicides                                              4.06         5.63             1           75
  Total observations                                                               2,411

Panel D. Pharmacy sales by drug-pharmacy-month:
 Revenue (all pharmacies)                                    20.7         61.4              0.0     16, 171
 Cost (all pharmacies)                                        4.0         36.9              0.0     11, 703
 Price (all pharmacies)                                      14.5         20.2              0.0      2, 620
 Revenue (pharmacies supplied by distributer)                19.8         65.3              0.0     13, 894
 Cost (pharmacies supplied by distributer)                    3.8         33.1              0.0      6, 596
 Price (pharmacies supplied by distributer)                  14.3         20.9              0.0      2, 446
  Unique pharmacies                                                                  323
  Unique drugs                                                                      10,756
  Total observations                                                              1,935,960

Panel E. Hospital visits by municipality-month:
 Hospital visits                                            143          225                1        2, 314
 Hospital visits (injuries)                                   8           12                0           106
 Hospital visits (diabetes)                                   4            8                0           115
 Hospital visits (respiratory)                                1            2                0            52
 Hospital visits (hypertension)                               2            4                0            39
 Hospital visits (coronary)                                   1            2                0            40
  Total observations                                                               18,611

Panel F. Municipality characteristics:
 Nightlights                                                  0.86         2.11             0           17
 Population density                                           4.21         9.04             0           64
 Age                                                         26.93         1.72            23           34
 Female share                                                 0.52         0.01             0            1
 Literate share                                               0.91         0.05             1            1
 Employed share                                               0.29         0.10             0            1
 Educated                                                     1.51         0.07             1            2
  Total observations                                                                263




                                                       13
and gender), and diagnosis code as defined by the International Classification of Diseases
(ICD-10).22 Table 1 (Panel F) presents summary statistics for the hospital visit data for the
sample period a year before and after the 2016 non-aggression pact.


2.3.3   Municipality Characteristics

We use various sources to construct municipality characteristics that might be correlated
with extortion payments. We construct yearly municipality-level measures of nightlight
intensity and population density using data from National Oceanic and Atmospheric Ad-
ministration (2020) and WorldPop (2020), respectively. Additionally, we use the 2007 pop-
ulation census of El Salvador to calculate municipality-level literacy and employment rates
(Dirección General de Estadística y Censos 2007). We present summary statistics for these
municipality characteristics in Table 1 (Panel F) for the sample period a year before and after
the 2016 non-aggression pact.
    Finally, we provide a description of ancillary household survey and crime data in Ap-
pendix B.


3    Model of Gang Competition and Collusion

To motivate our empirical analysis, we start with a simple theoretical framework. The model
is informed by discussions with our partner firm and fieldwork. In the model, gangs play
a repeated game in which they extort a monopolist. We then examine non-cooperative
and cooperative equilibria, shedding light on the incentives for gangs to collude and the
resulting effects of collusion. This is related to theoretical work by Castillo and Kronick
(2020) examining competition and cooperation in the drug trade, as well as the broader
theoretical literature on contest models (Skaperdas 1996; Garfinkel and Skaperdas 2007).
    We model gangs as upstream duopolists charging extortion to a downstream firm deliv-
ering to a buyer. This vertical structural is related to the canonical model of supply-chains
proposed by Spengler (1950). We allow for the upstream firms--the gangs--to potentially
engage in collusion. This is related to the industrial organization literature studying collu-
sion by upstream firms in standard vertical markets (e.g. Nocke and White 2007; Gu et al.
2019). However, as noted by Castillo and Kronick (2020), while there are important paral-
lels between standard oligopoly models and competition between gangs, gangs differ from
standard firms due to the fact that they compete using violence. In addition to providing
  22 We observe admission date in the MINSAL data and discharge date in the ISSS data. Otherwise, the two

data sources have the same information.



                                                   14
insight into extortion rates and downstream prices, the model helps highlight the connection
between extortion and violence between gangs.


3.1      Model Setup

A downstream firm is the sole supplier of a homogeneous good. In the empirical setting,
this firm is a distributor that sells goods to retailers.23 The downstream firm has marginal
cost normalized to zero and faces linear demand Qd ( pd ) = d -  pd in each period, where
pd is the price and Q is total quantity.24 Demand may differ across municipalities indexed
by d and the firm may set a different price, pd , in different municipalities.
      We now consider extortion and prices within a municipality, omitting index d for nota-
tional simplicity. If gang g operates in the municipality, they charge extortion rate e gt to the
quantity sold by the downstream firm at time t in the municipality. The firm must pay given
the threat of violence by the gang. While we restrict the gang's strategy to linear prices, we
discuss the implications of a fixed fee in Section 3.5.
      The downstream firm chooses its price (or output quantity) to maximize profit, ~ gt , after
                                                                                                ~ gt
the gang commits to an extortion rate. The first-order condition for the firm,                  p gt   = 0, implies

                                            1                                 1
                          pgt ( e gt ) =      ( + e gt ),    qgt ( e gt ) =     ( - e gt ).                     (1)
                                           2                                  2

      Assume there are two identical gangs that may operate in a municipality. Each gang
chooses violence level, h gt , and the extortion rate, e gt . Following Maskin and Tirole (1988), we
assume they play an alternating-moves game, i.e. one gang chooses extortion and violence in
odd periods and the other gang chooses in even periods. The sequential timing may reflect
lags in information or implementation.25 The sequential timing assumption makes the model
tractable but is not essential--simultaneous timing would yield similar conclusions in this
setting.
      When gangs compete, they use violence to obtain exclusive territory. Territory share is
increasing in chosen violence but there are decreasing returns to violence. This assumption
is common in the theoretical literature on conflict and gangs (Skaperdas 1996; Castillo and
Kronick 2020). For simplicity, we assume that territory share is given by s gt = h1/2
                                                                                  gt in periods
in which gang g moves. This yields simple analytical expressions for equilibrium extortion;
however, the main conclusions of the model hold more generally for s gdt = f (h gt ) where
 23 Inthe context of the model, the retailers are assumed to be perfectly competitive.
 24 Toensure that the equilibrium behaves properly, we assume  > 0 and 1            d 2
                                                                               2  ( 12 )  1.
 25 Maskin and Tirole (1988) also offer additional justifications for the timing assumption.




                                                        15
f                2 f
h gt   > 0 and    h2
                        < 0. In periods in which the rival gang moves (defensive periods), territory
                   gt
share is given by s gt = 1 - s- gt for s- gt  1/2, where s- gt is the territory acquired by the
rival gang.26 A gang that controls territory share s gt of the municipality at time t can apply
extortion to all goods sold in that portion of the territory.27 Quantity sold in the territory
controlled by gang g is given by q gt = s gt Q( p gt ).
       Gang cost is increasing in violence and extortion. Furthermore, motivated by the discus-
sion in Section 2.1, a key assumption is that there are diseconomies of scope. Gangs may
have a limited number of gang members that specialize in activities, making it costly to both
engage in extortion and fight for territory. In addition, conflict with a rival gang makes all
activities more dangerous, effectively increasing the cost of collecting extortion. We assume
that gang cost is given by  h gt e gt where 0 <  < 1 is a cost shifter representing police
enforcement.
       Gang profits are determined by extortion revenue in their territory, s gt e gt q gt (e gt ), minus
cost. In general, gangs wish to choose the vector of violence, h g , and extortion, e g , in the
periods in which they move in order to maximize discounted profit over an infinite horizon
given by
                                         
                                                1 1/2
                                max  t-1         h e gt ( - e gt ) - h gt e gt .                          (2)
                                h g ,e g t =1   2 gt

       Assume there is a fixed cost of entry, F, for gangs to operate in a municipality. A gang
will operate in the municipality when the variable profit exceeds this fixed cost. We now
consider three cases.


3.2      One Gang (Monopoly)
                       NC when two gangs compete in a municipality and  M when there is
If variable profit is  gt                                              gt
                                                                              NC -  M < F .
only one gang, then a second gang will not wish to enter in a territory when  gt   gt
                                                                       
In this case, a monopolist gang will charge extortion rate            2 .   Extortion is partially passed-
                                                     3                          
through to downstream prices, which are              4   with extortion and    2   without. Since there is
a single gang that does not face competition, extortion is not affected by a non-aggression
pact. Areas with a gang monopoly form our control group in our empirical analysis.
  26 The assumptions that 1       2                 1
                          2  ( 12 )  1 ensures that 2  s gt  1. In periods in which a rival gang moves, a
gang maintains its previous extortion level.
  27 We assume the downstream firm may charge different prices, p , in territory controlled by different gangs
                                                                 gt
depending on the extortion rate.




                                                       16
3.3     Non-Collusive Equilibrium with Two Gangs
                                NC -  M > F , so there are two gangs that can profitable
Now consider the case in which  gt   gt
enter a municipality. We start by examining the competitive equilibrium in which gangs
maximize profits in the stage-game. In a period in which a gang chooses violence and
                                      NC = (1/2) h1/2 e (  -  e ) -  h e . The first-order
extortion, non-collusive profits are  gt          gt gt        gt     gt gt
                  NC
                 gt                NC
                                   gt
conditions,      h gt   = 0 and   e gt   = 0, imply

                                                  2
                                    NC                        NC                NC        2
                                  h gt =              ,     e gt =     ,      p gt =        .                      (3)
                                            6                        3                    3
      When a gang is on the offensive, they use violence to expand their territory and obtain
territory share /(6). In the next period, their rival takes it back. This results in gang profits
of O    3                                              D      3    2
   gt =  / (108 ) when a gang is on the offensive and  gt = (  - 36 ) / (108 ) when
on the defensive. Relative to the case with no gangs, extortion increases downstream prices
by /(6 ).


3.4     Collusive Equilibrium with Two Gangs
                                                                                                                   1
If identical gangs collude and maximize joint profit then they split the market (s gt =                            2 ),
which we assume can be maintained without costly violence. Collusive profits for gang g
are given by
                                               C           1
                                               gt =          e gt ( - e gt ).                                      (4)
                                                           4
                                    C
                                   gt
The first-order condition,        e gt   = 0, implies eC
                                                       gt =
                                                                     
                                                                    2 ,   the same as the case with a monopolist
                                                2
gang. This results in gang profits of           32  ,     higher than the case when gangs compete.
      When do gangs have an incentive to collude? Assume that gangs sustain tacit collusion
by punishing a deviation from the collusive equilibrium using a infinite reversion to the
competitive equilibrium.28 A gang has an incentive to collude if the discounted sum of
profits from colluding are greater than the profit from deviating and increasing territory,
then reverting to the equilibrium of the stage game:29

                                                                              
                                t-1 gt
                                    C
                                                              t -1  O
                                                                    gt +               t-1  gt
                                                                                            D
                                                                                               .                   (5)
                              t =1               t=1,3,...                 t=2,4,...

                                                                                 (8-27)
      It is helpful to define the critical discount factor,                   82 -27+2882
                                                                                          ,        for which the above

  28 Although  we focus on tacit collusion here, we note that collusion is explicit if firms exchange information or
communicate an agreement to play a tacitly collusive equilibrium, which is the case in our empirical setting.
  29 Without loss of generality, assume gang g moves in odd periods.




                                                              17
                                                        Figure 4
                          Simulated Extortion, Prices, and Violence as a Function of Demand
                                         Under Competition and Collusion


               One gang             Two gangs                 One gang             Two gangs                        One gang             Two gangs




                                                                                                 Downstream Price
                                                  Extortion
 Violence




                            c                                             c                                                      c
                      Demand Shifter ()                              Demand Shifter ()                                     Demand Shifter ()

                Competition           Collusion                Competition           Collusion                       Competition              Collusion

                  a. Violence (h gt )                            b. Extortion (e gt )                                     c. Price ( p gt )

            Notes: Charts show simulated outcomes for  = 1,  = 0.2, and F = 17. The x-axis shows
            log() for  in interval [6, 12]. The vertical line shows the threshold, c , for entry by a
            second gang.


inequality holds. This is often used as a measure of the ease of collusion (e.g. Friedman
1971). As can be seen by the critical discount factor, relatively inelastic demand (higher )
increases the minimum discount rate that can sustain collusion. Conversely, an increase in 
decreases the critical discount factor, implying that policing can facilitate collusion.


3.5           Model Implications and Discussion

The first implication of the model is that municipalities with low demand, i.e.  below a
threshold c , will only have a single gang collecting extortion since it is not profitable for a
second gang to enter. In these municipalities, collusion between the gangs has no effect on
violence, extortion rates, or downstream prices. This can be seen in Figure 4, which shows
that these outcomes are the same under gang competition and collusion when  < c .
            In municipalities with high demand, there is incentive for both gangs to enter. In this
case, collusion decreases violence relative to the case with gang competition. Specifically,
violence declines by ( 6  2
                         ) if gangs can maintain the cooperative equilibrium. This is consis-
tent with the large and well-documented reduction in homicides and other violence after the
start of both the 2012 truce and 2016 non-aggression pact. The model implies that violence
is a byproduct of competition over extortion territory and is unnecessary when gangs can
agree on an allocation of territory. Furthermore, violence under competition is increasing in
, which corresponds to demand that is relatively less elastic. In other words, there is greater
incentive for the gang to fight rivals for territory when there are larger returns due to more
inelastic demand. This can be seen graphically in Figure 4 Panel a when  > c .


                                                                         18
                                                                                                            
    Relative to the case with gang competition, collusion increases extortion by                           6     in ar-
eas where both gangs are present. Loosely speaking, when gangs collude, they focus on
extracting extortion from firms in their territory rather than expanding territory. This in
                                                        
turn increases downstream prices by                    12    since the downstream firm effectively has higher
marginal cost. In general, the degree of pass-through of extortion to downstream prices
depends on the specific demand function and is ultimately an empirical question.
    Gangs may price discriminate when demand differs across markets or products. Figure 4
Panel b and Panel c show extortion and prices as a function of . When the demand curve
in a market is more inelastic, there is more scope for the gang to charge high extortion. This
effect is exacerbated when gangs collude. An important caveat is that gangs may lack full
information about demand, making it difficult to perfectly price discriminate.
    An important feature of the model is double-marginalization, a coordination failure that
arises in vertical markets when a downstream firm and upstream firm have market power
and set margins independently (Spengler 1950). Double marginalization implies that down-
stream prices are higher than what would be set by gangs if they set prices directly. Con-
sequently, double marginalization induces deadweight loss from extortion, especially when
gangs collude.30
    In principle, double-marginalization can be eliminated using non-linear pricing (Oi 1971).
In particular, the gang could charge a single annual fixed fee equal to the downstream firm's
          2
profit,   4 ,   rather then charge extortion in each territory. The literature has identified a num-
ber of reasons why non-linear pricing may be difficult to implement in practice including
information constraints (Maskin and Riley 1984), contracting frictions (Iyer and Villas-Boas
2003) and risk aversion (Rey and Vergé 2008). Gangs are particularly likely to lack informa-
tion about the firm they extort, including information about their profits, potentially making
it difficult to use a fixed fee.31 If gangs were to charge the firm a fixed fee, there would
be no reason to price discriminate across markets. In addition, the model would imply
that collusion between gangs would only affect the distributor's profits and not downstream
prices.
  30 Without                                    2                                                                22
                extortion, deadweight loss is   8 .   Under gang competition and collusion, deadweight loss is   9    and
92
32  respectively.
   31 In addition,
                it may be difficult for the gang to charge the firm a single fixed fee for all operations in the
country and then credibly commit to distribute the earnings to all gang members.




                                                               19
4     Descriptive Analysis

We begin by providing a descriptive analysis of the determinants of extortion. We first ex-
amine route-level extortion and deliveries and explore how the extortion varies with respect
to the value of each delivery along a route. In line with accounts from the company's secu-
rity team, we show two main results. First, extortion is higher for higher value deliveries.
Second, gangs use local and observable characteristics when setting extortion rates. These
results shed light on how gangs use price discrimination across locations. We then ana-
lyze what municipality-level characteristics are correlated with extortion rates. These results
provide initial correlational evidence consistent with the theoretical model in Section 3 and
motivate our empirical strategy.


4.1   Route-Level Analysis of Extortion

We use the route-level data that combines deliveries and extortion payments to examine the
correlates of extortion payment amounts made by the distribution firm. Figure 5 presents
binscatter charts showing the relationship between the log extortion payment made by the
firm upon a delivery and the log value of the nearest delivery (a.) and the log value of all
goods in the truck at the time of the nearest delivery (b.).


Finding 1: Extortion is increasing in delivery values

Figure 5 a. shows that there is a positive relationship between the value of the goods being
delivered and the extortion payment. This result implies that extortion is not a fixed fee per
delivery but varies according to what is being delivered. Furthermore, it suggests that gangs
have some information about demand for the good being delivered and, consistent with the
model presented in Section 3, set an extortion rate accordingly. Consistent with a change in
 in the model, higher demand for a good is associated with higher extortion. This is also
consistent with the distributor's account of how gangs price discriminate and set extortion.
However, the correlation between extortion and delivery values is modest. The estimated
elasticity of extortion with respect to the value of the delivery implies that a 1% increase in
the value of delivery is associated with a 0.04% increase in extortion.


Finding 2: Extortion rates depend on local observable characteristics

What characteristics do gangs use to proxy for demand and price discriminate across loca-
tions? First, we ask whether gangs set local extortion rates based on all deliveries made on
a route on a given day (including outside gang territory) or based on local characteristics of

                                               20
                                                                       Figure 5
                                                Relationship Between Extortion Rates and Delivery Values


                                1.75

                                                                                                                                    1.75
    Log Extortion Amount Paid




                                1.70




                                                                                                               Log Extortion Paid
                                                                                                                                    1.70



                                1.65
                                                                                                                                    1.65



                                1.60
                                                                                                                                    1.60



                                                            Coefficient Estimate: 0.040; t-statistic: 2.334                                                     Coefficient Estimate: -0.0098; t-statistic: -0.4867
                                1.55                                                                                                1.55
                                       1          2                  3                        4                                            3            4             5                    6                   7
                                               Log Value of Goods at Delivery                                                                  Log Total Value of Goods Remaining in Truck

                                           a. Value of Goods at Delivery                                                                         b. Value of Goods in Truck
                 Notes: The figure presents binscatters between the log of the extortion amount paid by the firm upon
                 delivery and the value of goods delivered (a.) and the total value of goods delivered by the truck on
                 the date (b.). The unit of observation is an extortion payment-delivery pair. The bottom-right of each
                 figure presents the estimated bivariate coefficient and t-statistic. Standard errors are clustered at the
                 delivery route level.


the deliveries/retailers. To explore this, Figure 5 b. examines whether there is a relationship
between extortion and the value of goods remaining in the truck. We find that there is little
relationship between the total value of goods remaining in the truck upon delivery and the
extortion payment paid by the firm. This suggests that gangs do not generally set extortion
based on the trucks' contents. This is consistent with conversations with the firm, where
they noted that gangs rarely look inside the firm's truck before setting an extortion demand.
Instead, they noted that gangs focus more on proxies of the value of a delivery (e.g. vehicle
or the characteristics of the retailer that is receiving the delivery) instead of vehicle contents.
    To investigate the extent to which variation in extortion can be explained by local char-
acteristics, Table A-1 presents regression estimates for the relationship between extortion
amounts and the value of deliveries when we include various fixed effects. Column 1
presents estimates with no fixed effects, while columns 2-4 sequentially include munici-
pality, route, and retailer fixed effects, respectively. Conditioning on these time-invariant
characteristics increases the adjusted R2 from less than 0.01 in column 1 to over 0.54 in col-
umn 4 once we condition on retailer fixed effects. The results in Table A-1 suggest that
retailer characteristics explain a considerable amount of the variation in extortion amounts,
consistent with gangs using local proxies for product demand to price discriminate.32
  32 Additionally, in line with the use of observable proxies, Figure A-12 shows that extortion rates tend to be
higher for deliveries made in newer vehicles.


                                                                                                              21
Finding 3: Extortion is unrelated to extortion payments elsewhere on a route

How are extortion payments related to the number of extortion payments made along a
route? If gangs set extortion rates using local characteristics (rather than the delivery firm's
characteristics), then we would expect the amount of extortion paid to be unrelated to extor-
tion payments elsewhere on a route. However, if gangs set extortion in a centralized manner
using knowledge of the firm's delivery routes, they might extract higher extortion payments
along routes facing fewer extortion payments (compared to routes with more extortion pay-
ments). Likewise, if gang extortion acts as a vertical chain of "tolls", then we would expect
that gangs extract more extortion along routes with fewer extortion payments. We examine
whether there is a relationship between extortion payment amounts and the number of ex-
tortion payments made on a route in Figure A-11. We find that there is little relationship
between the number of extortion payments made elsewhere and the extortion payment paid
by the firm. The result suggests that gangs do not set extortion based on characteristics of
the firm's delivery routes, and is consistent with our previous finding that gangs instead set
extortion based on local characteristics. Furthermore, the result is consistent with conversa-
tions with the security team, who described extortion as allowing firms the right to deliver
to an area rather than acting as a chain of "tolls" along their routes.


4.2     Municipality-Level Analysis of Extortion

To provide additional insight into the correlates of extortion, we examine which municipality-
level characteristics are correlated with extortion rates. First, we examine how municipality-
level proxies for development are correlated with extortion. We then explore how extortion
is correlated with gang violence and gang competition.


Finding 4: Extortion is positively correlated with proxies for downstream demand

We examine how municipality-level proxies for economic development are correlated with
extortion. We regress the log of the average extortion paid by the firm in a municipality
per year on various municipality-level characteristics related to firm delivery values and
economic development.
      Table 2 presents the regression estimates. In column 1, we explore the relationship be-
tween extortion and delivery values. In line with the findings in Section 4.1, extortion is
higher in municipalities with higher delivery values. Column 2 of Table 2 examines how
economic development is correlated with extortion. The independent variables included are
the log of average nightlights per year, the log of population density per year, the percent of


                                               22
the population that is literate, and the percent of the population that is employed (according
to the 2007 census). The results show that higher levels of economic development, which is
likely correlated with higher demand for goods, are associated with higher extortion. This
result provides initial evidence that gangs set extortion rates that depend on downstream
demand. Given that development is endogenous to gangs, we next examine how extortion
is related to gang competition. This motivates our empirical strategy in Section 5.1.
                                                            Table 2
                              Relationship between Extortion Rates & Municipality Characteristics

                                                     log(Extortion)   log(Extortion)   log(Extortion)   log(Extortion)
               Delivery Characteristics:
                 log(Value Delivered Per Year)           0.571                                              0.019
                                                        (0.282)                                            (0.182)

               Development Characteristics:
                 log(Nightlights)                                         1.221                             1.153
                                                                         (0.252)                           (0.230)
                 log(Population Density)                                  0.594                             0.452
                                                                         (0.291)                           (0.266)
                 % Literate                                               4.669                             3.382
                                                                         (3.681)                           (3.463)
                 % Employed                                               4.698                             1.855
                                                                         (2.193)                           (2.023)

               Violence Characteristics:
                 log(Homicides Per Year)                                                   1.694            0.897
                                                                                          (0.182)          (0.148)
                 1(Homicides By Both MS-13 & B18)                                        -1.118           -1.344
                                                                                         (0.390)          (0.297)

               Outcome Mean                              0.78              1.95             0.79            1.96
               Adjusted R2                               0.021            0.514            0.343            0.575
               Observations                               231              231              230              230

              Notes: The unit of observation is a municipality. 1(Homicides By Both MS-13 & B18) is an indicator
             variable equal to 1 if a municipality has homicides committed by both MS-13 and Barrio 18 in an
             average year. Robust standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




Finding 5: Extortion is positively correlated with higher gang violence and competition

Figure 6 presents binscatter charts showing the relationship between (a.) the average (yearly)
extortion paid by the company in a municipality and average homicides, and (b.) the share
of homicides committed by MS-13 (for homicides committed by either MS-13 or Barrio 18).33
Figure 6 a. shows that there is a positive relationship between extortion and homicides. This
relationship appears to be non-linear: extortion is particularly higher in places with very
high levels of violence. However, from Figure 6 a. only, it is unclear whether extortion is high
in places with more violence due to one gang having a monopoly of violence (and extortion),
  33 Both   binscatter charts fit a quadratic relationship which provides a better fit to the underlying data in both
cases.


                                                                 23
or higher gang competition. In Figure 6 b. we examine how extortion is correlated with a
measure of gang competition -- the share of MS-13 or Barrio 18 homicides committed by MS-
13 -- and find that higher gang competition is associated with higher extortion. In particular,
extortion appears to be highest in municipalities where both gangs commit an equal share of
homicides, and decreases in municipalities where gangs compete less. Columns 2 and 4 of
Table 2 presents regressions estimates for how gang violence and competition is correlated
with extortion amounts.34 This result is broadly consistent with the correlation between
competition and extortion found in surveys (Magaloni et al. 2020).
                                                                                Figure 6
                                                         Relationship Between Extortion Rates and Gang Violence


                             8                                                                                                             4
                                     Coefficient Estimate: -0.95 and 0.48; t-statistic: -2.52 and 6.19
    Log Extortion Per Year




                                                                                                                  Log Extortion Per Year
                             6                                                                                                             3




                             4                                                                                                             2




                             2                                                                                                             1




                             0                                                                                                                     Coefficient Estimate: 2.45 and -4.48; t-statistic: 0.79 and -1.83
                                                                                                                                           0
                                 0               1                 2                 3                   4   5                                 0               .2                .4                .6                  .8   1
                                                         Log Homicides Per Year                                                                            Share Homicides Comittted By MS-13

                                                            a. Homicides                                                                                 b. Share Committed by MS-13
               Notes: The figure presents binscatters between the log of the extortion amount paid by the firm upon
               delivery and the log of the number of homicides per year (a.) and the average share of homicides
               committed by MS-13 out of homicides committed by MS-13 or Barrio 18 (b.). Both figures fit a
               quadratic relationship. The unit of observation is a municipality. The text on the top-right of figure
               (a.) and bottom-right of figure (b.) presents the estimated coefficients and t-statistics.


    However, from these descriptive results, it is difficult to determine whether gang compe-
tition causes higher levels of extortion, or whether some omitted variables determine both
extortion rates and gang competition (e.g. downstream demand). In particular, the model
presented in Section 3 implies that in markets with high , there is greater incentive for
gangs to both charge higher extortion and compete for territory using violence. This is con-
sistent with the positive correlation between gang competition, homicides, and extortion.
Yet, the model also predicts that a reduction in gang competition due to collusion will cause
an increase in extortion. Therefore, even though there is a positive correlation between com-
petition and extortion rates across municipalities, the causal effect of collusion could imply
  34 Interestingly,
                 the results in column 4 suggest that much of the variation in extortion across municipalities
can be explained by the various municipality-level characteristics included in the regression.


                                                                                                                 24
that competition has a negative effect on extortion. In Section 5 we present an identification
strategy to provide causal evidence on the role of competition between gangs by examining
the non-aggression pact.


5     Effects of the Non-Aggression Pact on Extortion

To examine the causal effect of a change in competition between gangs, we focus on the
2016 non-aggression pact between gangs. We first detail our baseline empirical strategy and
show that the non-aggression pact did induce a significant decrease in gang competition
as measured by gang-related homicides. We then show how the 2016 non-aggression pact
impacted extortion rates. In Section 6 and Section 7 we use the same variation to examine
the downstream effects.


5.1   Empirical Strategy

We exploit two sources of variation to estimate the causal effect of gang competition on
extortion and prices: the unexpected timing of the 2016 non-aggression pact between the
two main gangs of El Salvador, and cross-sectional variation in gang competition prior to
the pact. This is motivated by the fact that the pact did not affect areas in which one gang
already had a monopoly on extortion. The baseline difference-in-difference specification is
given by
                     ydt = ( NonAggrt × Compd ) +  Xdt + t + d +        dt                     (6)

where ydt is the outcome of interest (e.g. extortion amounts) in municipality d at month t;
NonAggrt is an indicator variable equal to 1 if month t follows the non-aggression pact agree-
ment made on April, 2016, and zero otherwise; Compd is an indicator variable equal to 1 if
the municipality d had gang competition prior to the pact, defined in more detail in the next
paragraph. We include municipality fixed effects, d , which control for time-invariant factors
that may be correlated with extortion rates and prices. We also include month fixed effects,
t , which control for time-varying factors that may be correlated with aggregate changes in
extortion or prices across time. Specifications also include time-varying municipality-level
controls, Xdt --including nightlight intensity, population density, and 2007 census munici-
pality characteristics (gender, age, literate, educated, employment) interacted with year--to
improve precision, but we show results with and without these controls. Finally,    dt   is a vec-
tor of idiosyncratic random errors. To account for correlation within a municipality across
time in extortion and prices, standard errors are clustered at the municipality level.



                                              25
    To create our measure of whether there is gang competition in a municipality prior to
the non-aggression pact, we construct the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) in each mu-
nicipality. There is very limited information about the location of gangs over the period.
Therefore, we use homicides committed by gangs prior to 2016 to define our primary mea-
sure of competition as these are an observable outcome of gang competition. To construct the
gang HHI, we define sd,ms13 and sd,b18 as the share of homicides in municipality d commit-
ted by MS-13 or Barrio 18 in the three years prior to the non-aggression pact.35 We remove
municipalities with one or fewer homicides given that gangs may not be present in these
areas and competition is not well-defined. We construct the HHI for a municipality d as
HH Id =  g=ms13,b18 s2
                     d, g . Appendix Figure A-4 presents the histogram of our homicide HHI
measure and Figure A-1 presents maps of homicides and homicide HHIs across municipal-
ities. For our baseline specification, Compd is defined as an indicator for gang competition
that is equal to 0 if HH Id is in the top quartile of the HHI for municipalities and 1 otherwise.
    We validate this measure of gang competition in a number of ways. In Section 5.2 we
show that the non-aggression pact primarily affected violence in areas defined as having
competition in the pre-period, consistent with the idea that the non-aggression pact should
have little or no effect in areas without gang competition prior to the pact. In addition,
we show that the homicide HHI measure is strongly correlated with an alternative HHI
measures constructed using the affiliation and arrest location of all inmates in prison in
El Salvador prior to the non-aggression pact (see Appendix Section B-3 and Figure A-9).
We also examine whether results are robust to alternative definitions of gang competition,
including alternative cutoffs and a continuous measure of competition.
    The coefficient of interest in equation (6), , is interpreted as the change in yd,t due to
the change in gang competition following the non-aggression pact. The primary outcomes
that we examine are violence, extortion, and distributor gross margins. The main identifying
assumptions are that in the absence of the non-aggression pact, these outcomes would follow
common trends in areas with and without competition. We focus on a relatively short period
around the non-aggression pact, June 2015 to January 2018, to address concerns about other
policies that may have affected competition or longer-run effects of the non-aggression pact.
We also use a number of methods to examine the validity of the common trends assumption,
including examining trends prior to the non-aggression pact and a falsification test. In
addition, for equation (6) to identify an effect of gang competition on extortion or prices,
  35 Barrio 18 split into two faction in the early 2010s: Revolucionarios and Sureños. However, the data do not

separate homicides committed by Revolucionarios or Sureños prior to 2015. Additionally, other gangs in El Sal-
vador commit a very small share of homicides. For these reasons, we focus on competition between Barrio 18
and MS-13.



                                                      26
                                                                           Figure 7
                                                                Homicides by Gang Competition


              800                                                                          200                                                                100




                                                                  Homicides Perpetrators




                                                                                                                                          Homicides Victims
              600                                                                          150
  Homicides




              400                                                                          100                                                                 50



              200                                                                          50



               0                                                                            0                                                                   0
                    2015         2016        2017        2018                               2015        2016         2017       2018                            2015        2016         2017       2018
                                         Month                                                                   Month                                                               Month
                           Competition       Low/No Competition                                    Competition       Low/No Competition                                Competition       Low/No Competition


                           a. All Homicides                                 b. MS-13 or Barrio 18 Perpetrator                                                   c. MS-13 or Barrio 18 Victim

                Notes: Charts show homicides in municipalities with gang competition and without gang competition
                as defined by the homicide Herfindahl­Hirschman Index. In panel b. and c., the sample includes
                homicides in which police found MS-13 or Barrio 18 to be either the perpetrator or victim. Vertical
                line shows start of non-aggression pact (April 2016).


the non-aggression pact must have meaningfully decreased competition between gangs. We
start by examining this issue in Section 5.2.


5.2                 Validating the Competition Measure

Figure 7 presents the number of reported homicides in municipalities with gang competition
and without gang competition as defined using the homicide HHI. Figure 7 a. presents all
homicides committed in El Salvador. Figure 7 b. limits the sample to homicides where the
police were able to identify that the homicide was committed by one of two main gangs, MS-
13 and Barrio 18. Figure 7 c. limits the sample to homicides in which the police determined
that the victim was a member of one of the gangs.
              A number of patterns emerge from the homicides data presented in Figure 7. First, mu-
nicipalities with gang competition according to our HHI definition consistently have higher
levels of homicides compared to municipalities without competition.36 This suggests that
our definition of whether a municipality has gang competition is meaningfully capturing
differences in gang competition that cause violence. Second, following the reductions in
gang competition due to the non-aggression pact in April 2016, there is a decrease in homi-
cides; this decrease is larger in municipalities with gang competition. In areas defined as
not having competition, there is very little change in the number of homicides in which
the two gangs were either perpetrators or victims, helping validate the fact that there was
   36 Despite being lower, homicides involving gangs still occur in municipalities without competition. This is

likely due to the fact that there are other reasons for homicides besides competition between gangs, e.g. enforcing
extortion or engaging in other criminal activities.


                                                                                                               27
little change in violence between the gangs in these municipalities. Finally, municipalities
with and without gang competition according to our definition seem to have been on similar
trends prior to the non-aggression pact.
      Table A-3 presents the estimates from our baseline equation (6) on various measures of
crime: number of homicides in a municipality, number of homicides committed by MS-13
or Barrio 18, and the number of homicides in which MS-13 or Barrio 18 was the victim. The
estimates imply that the non-aggression pact significantly reduced homicides by 24.5% (rel-
ative to a mean of 4.75 homicides per month), MS-13 or Barrio 18 homicides by 23.7%, and
gang victims by 11.7% in municipalities with prior gang competition. The results provide
evidence that the non-aggression pact meaningfully reduced gang competition in munici-
palities with prior competition relative to control areas.
      We also examine the effect on other crimes that are less likely to be associated with gang
competition, including theft, robberies, and domestic violence. Table A-4 shows that point
estimates are small and are not statistically significant for these crimes, suggesting that the
non-aggression pact mainly affected gang competition and not crime levels more generally.


5.3     Effect on Extortion

Figure 8 presents the main results for extortion comparing municipalities with and with-
out gang competition before and after the non-aggression pact. Figure 8 b. presents the
estimated effect of the non-aggression pact on extortion by quarter with municipality and
year fixed effects and the full set of controls.37 We find that in the quarters before the non-
aggression pact, there is no significant difference in extortion in municipalities with gang
competition and those without competition. This provides evidence that the municipalities
with competition had similar trends in the period prior to the non-aggression pact as munic-
ipalities without competition, supporting the parallel trends assumption.38 Once the gangs
agreed to the non-aggression pact, extortion increased in municipalities where gangs previ-
ously competed relative to those where gangs did not previously compete. Interestingly, the
increase in extortion was gradual and becomes significant in the third quarter following the
non-aggression pact, suggesting that there might be adjustment costs for gangs and firms.
The effect on extortion initially increases over time, leading to a 20% increase in extortion,
before reducing slightly in later periods.
      Table 3 presents the average effect on extortion amounts following the non-aggression
pact. In the preferred specification following equation (6) (column 4), we find that collusion
  37 The specification used for Figure 8 b. is log( extortion ) =
                                                             dt   t  t ( Quartert × Compd ) +  Xdt + t + d + dt .
The interaction with the quarter prior to the non-aggression pact is omitted. Covariates include nightlights,
population density, and census municipality characteristics--percent literate and percent employed--interacted


                                                       28
                                                                  Figure 8
                                                       Extortion by Gang Competition

                                           0.4




                     Effect (log points)
                                           0.2




                                           0.0




                                           -0.2
                                                  -2        0            2           4          6
                                                            Quarters Since Nonaggression Pact




              Notes: Vertical line shows start of non-aggression pact (April 2016). Figure shows
              point estimates for each quarter using the difference-in-difference baseline specifica-
              tion (6) on mean extortion amounts paid across municipalities with gang competition
              and without gang competition as defined by the homicide Herfindahl­Hirschman In-
              dex. The omitted period is the quarter prior to the start of the non-aggression pact
              between MS-13 and Barrio 18. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals using
              standard errors clustered at the municipality level.


between gangs increases extortion by 19.2%. An alternative specification without covariates
implies a 20.9% increase in extortion (see column 2).39 Finally, in columns 5 and 6, we
include route fixed effects to control for potential changes in delivery routes after the pact
and find that results are robust to their inclusion, implying a 15% increase of extortion.40
    We find suggestive evidence that the non-aggression pact also had an effect on the exten-
sive margin. Results, presented in Table A-12, imply that the pact increased the probability
of at least one extortion in a municipality-route by 5.2%. The results without route fixed

with year.
   38 Figure A-10 presents the raw trends on extortion for municipalities with gang competition and without gang

competition as defined using the homicide HHI.
   39 The covariates in the baseline specification include nightlights, population density, and census municipality

characteristics (literacy and employment) interacted with year. Note that some of these covariates might be `bad
controls' if they are also affected by the non-aggression pact; however, their inclusion does not significantly
change the estimated magnitude or significance of the main effect.
   40 Additionally, recent work by de Chaisemartin and D'Haultfoeuille (2020) has highlighted that two-way fixed

effects estimators estimate weighted sums of the average treatment effects in each period, where weights might
be negative in the presence of treatment heterogeneity. Following their recommendations, we compute the
regression weights for our estimator. We find that out of 490 average treatment effects, only 9 have negative
weights, suggesting that treatment effect heterogeneity is unlikely to be a major concern in our setting.



                                                                        29
effects are smaller, implying a 3.7% increase in the probability of extortion. While these re-
sults are significant at the 5% level, specifications without covariates are only significant at
the 10% level. These results suggest that not only did gangs increase extortion rates after the
pact, they also began collecting extortion in new areas.

                                                        Table 3
                                      Effect of Non-Aggression Pact on Extortion
                                       in Municipalities with Gang Competition

                             Extortion     log(Extortion)    Extortion     log(Extortion)    Extortion     log(Extortion)
      NonAggrt × Compd         1.539           0.209           1.571           0.192           1.227            0.150
                              (0.333)         (0.048)         (0.482)         (0.065)          (0.575)         (0.056)

      Municipality FEs          Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes
      Month FEs                 Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes
      Covariates                No              No              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes
      Route FEs                 No              No              No              No              Yes              Yes
      Outcome Mean             7.49            1.60             7.49            1.60             7.49            1.60
      Adjusted R2             0.113           0.188            0.114           0.191            0.169           0.272
      Observations            15,001          15,001           15,001          15,001          15,001          15,001
  Notes: The unit of observation is an extortion payment. Covariates include nightlights, population density, and census
  municipality characteristics interacted with year. The sample period is 6/2015 to 1/2018. Standard errors clustered at the
  municipality level in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




5.4      Understanding the Increase in Extortion

Overall, the results in Section 5.3 show that extortion payments substantially increase when
gangs collude. The model and qualitative evidence highlight that gangs may shift resources
towards extortion when gangs collude given that it is costly to both collect extortion and
fight rival gangs. In this section, we examine this mechanism empirically using a number of
approaches.
      First, as a proxy for the amount of resources gangs devote to extortion collection, we
examine whether reports of violent threats by gangs increase following the non-aggression
pact.41 We find a significant increase in reports of gang-related threats in Table 4 and no
increase in non-gang related threats. This suggests that gangs devote more resources to
threaten violence following the non-aggression pact, allowing them to increase extortion
rates.42 This is consistent with Olken and Barron (2009), who find that proxies for the threat
of violence ­ such as the number of officers at checkpoints or whether officers have guns ­
are associated with higher extortion payments.
      Second, if gangs are able to devote more resources to extortion, then they might begin
to charge extortion in more municipalities. The results in the previous section document
 41 In   Appendix A, we discuss how gangs use threats to ensure compliance and maximize extortion demands.
 42 We    also find an increase in the number of kidnappings following the non-aggression pact. See Table A-7.


                                                             30
                                                     Table 4
                               Effect of Non-Aggression Pact on Arrests for Threats

                                              All                      Gang-related                Non-gang related
                                    Arrests         Arrests        Arrests       Arrests        Arrests        Arrests
        NonAggrt × Compd            -0.005          -0.018          0.892         0.881         -0.081         -0.093
                                    (0.096)         (0.097)        (0.441)        (0.468)       (0.099)        (0.098)

        Municipality FEs              Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
        Month FEs                     Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
        Covariates                    No              Yes           No             Yes            No             Yes
        Outcome Mean                  1.21           1.21           0.10          0.10           1.11           1.11
        Observations                  4,495          4,495          2,945         2,945          4,495          4,495
        Clusters                       145            145             95            95            145            145
      Notes: Results from Poisson regressions in which the outcome is the number of arrests for threats ("amenazas") in
     a municipality-month. Covariates include nightlights, population density, and census municipality characteristics
     interacted with year. Standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, ***
     p < 0.01.



an increase in the probability of at least one extortion in a municipality-route are consistent
with this mechanism (see Table A-12).
    Third, we examine whether the degree of price discrimination by gangs changes fol-
lowing the non-aggression pact. If gangs are dedicating more resources to their extortion
business, gangs might have better information on retailers and the associated demand for
delivered goods, and might be able to better price discriminate. We present the results in
Table A-8; we find that after the pact, gangs increase extortion more for deliveries at retailers
with higher delivery values.
    Fourth, we explore how firm delivery times change following the pact. If gangs are
devoting more resources to negotiating high extortion rates, it is possible that delivery times
will increase given that these negotiations often take time. We present the results in Table A-
9; we find suggestive evidence that the time between extortion payments and deliveries
increases following the pact.
    We also explore alternative mechanisms that could explain the increase in extortion fol-
lowing the pact. First, the model and the results in Section 4.2 highlight that higher down-
stream demand is associated with higher extortion. Therefore, extortion might have in-
creased if the reduction in violence due to the non-aggression pact considerably increased
downstream demand. In Appendix Tables A-6 and A-5, we directly examine the effect of
the non-aggression pact on per-capita household incomes, expenditures, and nightlights and
find no statistically significant effect in our sample period. This suggests that downstream
demand did not increase substantially in the short-run following the pact.43
  43 Note   that our main specification focuses on a relatively short time window before and after the pact. How-
ever, it is possible that demand could increase in the longer-run.



                                                              31
      Second, we also explore whether the results might be explained by the firm adjusting
delivery locations or routes following the non-aggression pact. We find little evidence that
the firm adjusted the retailers served following the pact. In particular, we explore how the
firm responds to the increase in extortion in detail in Section 6 and find that the distributor
firm mostly adjusts via prices rather than along the extensive margin following the non-
aggression pact. This is because the firm often has enduring delivery contracts with retailer.
These firm-level findings suggests that changes in the composition of retailers served is
unlikely to explain the findings.44
      Finally, it could be the case that, when there is competition, firms choose the gang that
provides protection for the lowest cost. However, conversations with the distributor high-
light that the firms paying extortion cannot choose which gang to pay for protection; instead,
firms must pay whichever gang is in control of the territory where they are making a deliv-
ery. For these reasons, we argue that the increase in extortion was primarily due to gangs
colluding to respect territories, allowing the gangs to focus resources on extortion rather
than fighting for territory.


5.5     Heterogeneous Effects on Extortion

One implication of the theoretical model is that collusion between gangs is predicted to have
a larger effect on extortion in markets with higher demand for the goods being extorted. In
order to examine this, we estimate separate regressions by geographic characteristics that
are likely to reflect demand conditions.
      Figure 9 shows the estimated effect on extortion by geographic characteristics. First,
we examine the results by municipality development as measures by nightlights. The non-
aggression pact is estimated to increase extortion by 24% in municipalities with above me-
dian development, but the effect is not statistically significant in municipalities with below
median development. Similarly, there is a larger effect on extortion in municipalities with
high population density. Finally, we examine total sales in the surrounding canton. The
non-aggression pact has a larger effect in areas with above median total sales, although the
difference is not statistically significant.
      Taken together, these results suggest that the non-aggression pact allowed gangs to in-
crease extortion most in regions with higher (or more inelastic) demand, consistent with the
theoretical predictions in Figure 4 Panel B.
  44 Additionally,the effects on extortion are robust to route fixed effects, suggesting that the findings are also
not driven by the additions of new routes.




                                                        32
                                               Figure 9
                              Effect of Non-Aggression Pact on Extortion
                          Heterogeneous Effect by Geographic Characteristics


                                                  0.5



                                                  0.3
                            Effect on Extortion


                                                  0.1



                                                  -0.1



                                                  -0.3


                                                         Low    High   Low     High   Low      High
                                                         Development    Pop Density    Total Sales

       Notes: Shows point estimates and 95% confidence intervals for difference-in-difference model. Stan-
       dard errors are clustered at the municipality level. Low (high) characteristics are defined as being
       below (above) the median value in the pre-period. Standard errors are clustered at the municipal-
       ity level. All specifications include municipality fixed effects, month fixed effects, and controls for
       nightlights, population density, and census municipality characteristics interacted with year.


5.6     Robustness and Alternative Specifications

One of the primary concerns is that results are driven by the definition of gang competition
prior to the non-aggression pact. We address this concern by estimating specifications using
alternative measures of competition.
      The cutoff used to define competition in our baseline estimates was chosen to reflect the
areas most likely to be affected by the non-aggression pact. However, we examine how the
estimated effect on extortion differs for a wide range of cutoffs for defining competition. The
estimates, presented in Appendix Table A-14, are quite similar to the baseline, ranging from
17% (50th percentile) to 24% (80th percentile).
      It is possible that areas defined as not having competition are still somewhat affected
by the pact, leading to an underestimate of the effect. Rather than use a binary measure of
competition, we also estimate an alternative model using HH Id as a continuous treatment
in the difference-in-difference model. The results, which are qualitatively similar to the
baseline specification, are presented in Appendix Table A-15. The point estimates, which
are all significant, imply that if a municipality were to go from a duopoly in which the two
gangs split the market equally ( HH Id = 1/2) to fully collusive ( HH Id = 1), extortion would
increase by approximately 30% to 50%.
      Finally, to address the concern that gang competition varies within a municipality, we


                                                                       33
replicate our analysis using smaller geographic units of analysis. The 262 municipalities
are subdivided into 2,286 cantons. Using the address of each homicide, we determine the
canton for the event and construct our measure of gang competition at the canton level rather
than the municipality level. We then replicate our previous analysis at the canton level and
present the results in Appendix Section D. Despite concern about measurement error due
to geocoding, estimates are largely similar to the baseline specification at the municipality
level. Point estimates imply an increase in extortion of between 10% and 17%, similar to
the baseline specification. These results provide further confirmation that the results are not
driven by the definition of competition.


6      Firm Response to Extortion

It is important to understand how extortion affects downstream firms and consumers in
order to understand who bears the cost of extortion. In order to shed light on this issue, we
begin by using the distributor sales data to examine the effect of the non-aggression pact on
downstream retailers. In this section, we focus on how the margin over the manufacturer
cost is affected by an increase in extortion.45 In Section 7 we directly examine the effect on
consumer prices for a subset of the goods using administrative data from pharmacies.
      Using the distributors sales data, we show that the 2016 non-aggression pact and result-
ing increase in extortion led to an increase in distributor gross margins, increasing costs for
retailers. We find no increases in the procurement costs paid by the distributor, implying
that the increase in gross margins is driven by increases in delivery prices. We also find
no significant change in the number of retailers served by the distribution firm, suggesting
that, in response to higher extortion, distributors adjust mostly by increasing their prices,
passing-through part of the extortion increase to downstream retailers in the form of higher
prices.


6.1     Effects of Extortion on Distributor Margins

To examine the causal effect of gang competition and extortion on downstream outcomes,
we first examine the reduced-form effects of lower gang competition. To take advantage of
the richness of the distributor sales data, we modify our baseline difference-in-differences
specification to estimate impacts on the company's gross margin at the retailer-municipality-
    45 Althoughwe examine both how the distributor adjusts prices and the number of retailers served, conversa-
tions with the firm suggest that prices are the most likely adjustment channel. This is because the firm often has
long-standing delivery contracts with retailers.




                                                       34
month level.46 We include retailer fixed effects to control for time-invariant unobservables at
a finer level.47 We use this modified specification to causally identify how the reduction in
gang competition following the 2016 non-aggression pact affected delivery prices faced by
retailers.48
    A limitation of the distributor sales data is that we do not observe prices; however, we
calculate the distributor's gross margin on each delivery--the difference between revenue
amount (paid by the retailer to the distributor) and procurement cost (paid by the distributor
to the manufacturer) for a given product. We focus on the distributor margin as our main
outcome of interest. From the perspective of retailers, the distributor margin can be thought
of as the delivery fee for a given product.
    Table 5 presents the estimated effect of the 2016 non-aggression pact and the subsequent
increase in extortion on the distribution firm's gross margin. In Table 5 we focus on retailers
closest to an extortion payment, who are the most likely to be affected by an increase in
extortion. In addition, because an extortion payment may also affect prices for multiple
nearby retailers, we examine retailers 1km and 5km away from an extortion payment in
Table A-10.49
    Columns 1 and 2 of Table 5 present the reduced-form effect of the 2016 non-aggression
pact on the firm's gross margin. The estimates imply a 11.6% increase in the gross margin
for deliveries that occur closest to extortion payments. The results provide evidence that
the reduction in gang competition increased the firm's gross margin for retailers nearest to
the extortion payments. Retailers further from the extortion saw a smaller increase in gross
margins.50
    These results provide additional evidence that extortion is not simply a lump-sum fee.
If gangs used a lump-sum fee, theory predicts that the distributor would not adjust its pric-
ing and downstream retailers would not be affected since the lump-sum fee would simply
  46 Specifically,   we estimate the following specification:

                                ydjt =  NonAggrt × Compdj +  Xdt + t + d +  j +      djt

where ydjt is the outcome of interest (e.g. gross margin) in municipality d at month t for retailer j and  j are
retailer fixed effects. The rest of the variables are defined as in equation (6). To account for correlation within
delivery routes across time in extortion and prices, standard errors are clustered at the route level.
  47 We include retailer fixed effects rather than route fixed effects because retailer fixed effects are more robust

to concerns that delivery routes changed due to the 2016 non-aggression pact.
  48 Figure A-5 presents trends in the firm's revenue and cost across municipalities with and without competition

prior to the non-aggression pact. We do not find evidence of differential trends in the firm's prices and margins
prior to the non-aggression pact.
  49 In all cases, we link extortion and retailers for deliveries occurring on the same date and same route.
  50 We find a 5.1% increase in the gross margin for deliveries within 5km of extortion payments, but the estimates

are imprecisely estimated for sales that are further away. See Table A-10.



                                                           35
                                                   Table 5
                        Effect of Extortion on Distribution Margin for Nearest Sale
                           Instrumental Variable Difference-in-Difference Model

                                         Reduced-Form                First-Stage                   IVDD
                                  Distributor                                        Distributor
                                   Margin          log(Margin)        Extortion       Margin          log(Margin)
        NonAggrt × Compd              1.369            0.117            1.647
                                     (0.719)          (0.054)          (0.637)
        Extortion                                                                        0.831             0.072
                                                                                        (0.243)           (0.023)
        Outcome Mean                  4.17             1.03             7.41             4.17              1.03
        Adjusted R2                   0.566            0.443            0.464
        F-Stat                                                                           22.8              22.2
        Observations                 34,963           34,571           34,963           34,963            34,571
       Notes: Distributor margin is defined as the difference between wholesale price and manufacturer price.
      All specifications include municipality fixed effects, month fixed effects, retailer fixed effects, and controls
      for nightlights, population density, and census municipality characteristics interacted with year. Standard
      errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.


increase the distributor's fixed cost. In contrast, the assumption of linear pricing in the the-
oretical model presented in Section 3 implies that extortion leads to double-marginalization,
increasing cost for retailers.
    To quantify how extortion increases are passed through to distributor margins, we use
an instrumental variable difference-in-difference (IVDD) approach. An important identify-
ing assumption for this IVDD specification is that our instrument for extortion, NonAggrt ×
Compd , must only affect the company's gross margin through its effect on extortion. While
the results should be interpreted carefully given the exclusion restriction assumption, we use
a number of strategies to provide support to the validity of this assumption. First, because
the reduction in violence might have led to a change in the retailers served, we include re-
tailer fixed effects in the main specification. Second, the reduction in violence might have led
to a change in demand that could have affected prices in the absence of extortion. However,
as discussed in Section 5.3, we do not find evidence that demand increased in the short-
run in affected municipalities.51 These results provide evidence in support of the exclusion
restriction.52
  51 In addition to the results discussed in Section 5.3, we also conduct a falsification test and show in Appendix

Table A-2 that the average manufacturer procurement price paid by the firm across municipalities with and with-
out competition does not change following the non-aggression pact. This suggests that the products delivered
across these municipalities did not meaningfully change due to the reduction in gang competition. Similarly,
Appendix Figure A-6 plots total costs across time for deliveries in municipalities with and without competition,
and shows that costs are similar for these municipalities before and after the non-aggression pact.
  52 Finally, it is still possible that distributor margins could be affected in the absence of the increase in extortion.

This could be the case, for instance, if the decrease in violence lowered the firm's delivery cost directly. In this
case, the estimated pass-through would be an underestimate.



                                                            36
      Column 3 of Table 5 presents the first-stage estimates for the IVDD approach. Consistent
with the results in Section 5.3, the non-aggression pact significantly increased extortion.
Columns 4 and 5 present the second stage estimates. The estimates imply that a $1 increase
in extortion increases the firm's gross margin by $0.84 for the deliveries closest to extortion
payments. Likewise, the estimates in Table A-10 imply that a $1 increase in extortion leads
to a $0.23 and $0.18 increase in the firm's gross margin for deliveries 1km and 5km away,
respectively, from the extortion payment.53 These results provide evidence that increases
in extortion due to reductions in gang competition are partially passed-through to retailers,
consistent with the model presented in Section 3.
      In addition to adjusting prices, the distributor may respond to extortion by changing
the number of deliveries. We examine the effect of the truce on the number of monthly
deliveries made by the distributor using the same difference-in-difference specification. The
results, presented in Appendix Table A-13, are small and insignificant. This is consistent
with fact that the distributor is contractually obligated to make deliveries and is often the
exclusive distributor for certain products. When extortion increases in a municipality, the
distributor increases prices rather than adjusting deliveries.


6.2     Heterogeneous Effects of Extortion on Distributor Margins

One implication of the theoretical model is that collusion between gangs is predicted to
have a larger effect for products with relatively inelastic demand. In order to examine this,
we estimate separate regressions by product groups that are likely to differ in their demand
elasticity. To define product groups, we focus on the 500 most common products delivered by
the distribution firm and divide them into five categories: staple food products, non-staple
foods, cleaning supplies, toiletries, and non-pharmaceutical health products.54 Figure 10
shows the estimated reduced-form effects on extortion and distributor margins by product
groups. Figure 10 a. presents the effects on extortion, while Figure 10 b. presents the
effects on distributor margins. The results in Figure 10 a. suggest that there is little evidence
of heterogeneous effects on extortion by product type: the increase in extortion following
the 2016 non-aggression pact is very similar across the product groups. These results are
consistent with the idea that gangs use observable characteristics of overall demand to set
extortion (such as the characteristics examined in Figure 9) but do not set product-specific
extortion rates.
  53 Interestingly, the estimated pass-through appears to decay for sales further away from extortion payments,

consistent with the descriptive results in Section 4 that find that extortion is a very local phenomenon.
  54 We exclude pharmaceutical health products as we examine these directly in the Section 7.




                                                      37
                                                                      Figure 10
                                         Effect of Non-Aggression Pact on Extortion and Distribution Margins
                                                          Heterogeneous Effects by Product



                                                                                                                 0.30
                         0.6


                                                                                                                 0.20

                         0.4
   Effect on Extortion




                                                                                              Effect on Margin
                                                                                                                 0.10

                         0.2
                                                                                                                 0.00


                         0.0
                                                                                                                 -0.10



                         -0.2                                                                                    -0.20
                                Staple      Non-Staple   Cleaning   Toiletries   Non-Pharma                              Staple   Non-Staple   Cleaning   Toiletries   Non-Pharma
                                Foods         Foods      Supplies                  Health                                Foods      Foods      Supplies                  Health


                                                   a. Extortion                                                                      b. Gross Margin
                Notes: Shows point estimates and 95% confidence intervals for difference-in-difference model. Stan-
                dard errors are clustered at the municipality level. Distributor margin is defined as the difference
                between wholesale price and manufacturer price. All specifications include municipality fixed ef-
                fects, month fixed effects, retailer fixed effects, and controls for nightlights, population density, and
                census municipality characteristics interacted with year.


   However, the results in Figure 10 b. show evidence of heterogeneous adjustment effects
by the distributor by product groups. In particular, the estimated effect on distributor margin
is largest for staple food goods and smallest for toiletries and non-pharma health products.
We also explore heterogeneity in the IVDD estimated extortion pass-through and present the
results in Figure A-13. We examine extortion pass-through by retailer size and product type.
Similar to the heterogeneity in the reduced-form estimates presented in Figure 10, we find
that distributor margins increase the most for more good that likely have inelastic demand.
   Taken together, the results presented in Figure 10 suggest that the non-aggression pact
did not lead to heterogeneous increases in extortion by product type, but did induce hetero-
geneous downstream adjustments by the distributor. In particular, the non-aggression pact
and subsequent increase in extortion led to larger increases in distributor margins for inelas-
tic products, consistent with the theoretical predictions in Figure 4 Panel C. Additionally, by
affecting staple food products the most, the results suggest that increases in extortion due
to gang collusion may disproportionately negatively impact poorer households, potentially
exacerbating inequality and reducing economic development.




                                                                                          38
7      Effect on Pharmacies & Hospital Visits

In order to provide further insight into how extortion affects consumers, we focus on phar-
macy sales, a subset of the market with detailed information at the retail level. The distrib-
utor is a major supplier of both drugs from local manufacturers and international pharma-
ceutical companies. Drug prices in El Salvador have historically been substantially higher
than in comparable countries, making drug prices the focus of much political debate. It is
important to understand whether extortion is a factor driving high drug prices, especially
given the potential implications for health.


7.1     Effect on Pharmacy Prices

We employ a similar identification strategy as our baseline specification and examine the
reduced-form effect of the 2016 non-aggression pact on pharmacy prices. Columns 1 and 2
of Table 6 present the effect for all drugs at all pharmacies in the sales sample. The estimates
imply that gang collusion resulted in a 7.8% increase in retail prices for pharmaceutical
drugs. Many of the pharmacies in the sample are supplied by other distributors. While
these other suppliers may also pay extortion to gangs, we are particularly interested in the
set of pharmacies supplied by the distributor for which we observe distributor sales data
and extortion.55 Focusing on this sample in Columns 3 and 4, the effect on prices is larger.
The non-aggression pact results in a 12.1% increase in prices for this sample. To address
the concern that results may be driven by changes in the set of drugs or pharmacies over
time, we also show results are robust to the inclusion of pharmacy by drug fixed effects.56
Furthermore, Figure A-14 a. presents the estimated effect by period and shows no evidence
of differences in trends in the pre-period.
      We also examine the subset of drugs that are important for managing chronic diseases,
including diabetes, hypertension, and coronary heart disease. The cost of diabetes drugs
are of particular concern given that 9% of the Salvadorean population has diabetes, almost
double the world average.57 There is concern that many drugs to treat chronic conditions
are unaffordable given high drug prices in El Salvador relative to incomes. For this sample
of drugs, we also find a positive and significant effect on prices due to the nonaggression
    55 Weidentify this subset using the name and location of pharmacies. Note that these pharmacies may have
drugs supplied by multiple distributors, however, we are not able to identify the specific drugs supplied by the
distributor given that the distributor sales data do not contain a comparable drug identifier.
  56 This alternative specification controlling for pharmacy by drug fixed effects is presented in Appendix Ta-

ble A-16. In this specification, the effect of the non-aggression pact on pharmacy prices is significant, however
the magnitudes are somewhat smaller.
  57 See WHO Diabetes Country Profile.




                                                       39
                                                 Table 6
                     Effect of Non-Aggression Pact on Consumer Prices at Pharmacies

                                                       Pharmacies/Brands Supplied        Drugs for Managing
                               All Pharmacies              by Distribution Firm          Chronic Diagnoses
                             Price      log(Price)      Price         log(Price)         Price      log(Price)
  NonAggrt × Compd          0.036         0.078         0.074           0.121           0.021         0.075
                            (0.015)       (0.030)      (0.034)         (0.056)          (0.009)      (0.029)

  Municipality FEs           Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes
  Drug FEs                   Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes
  Month FEs                  Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes
  Covariates                 Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes
  Outcome Mean                1.11         -1.11        1.08            -1.18            0.94         -0.93
  Adjusted R2                0.820         0.870        0.773           0.865           0.975         0.823
  Observations             1,755,366     1,755,366     348,955         348,955         122,100       122,100

 Notes: The unit of observation is a drug-pharmacy-month. For the period prior to January 2016, data is at
the semi-annual level and the unit of observation is a drug-pharmacy-semi-year. The outcome is the price
per unit (pill, milliliter, or gram depending on the product). Specifications include controls for nightlights,
population density, and census municipality characteristics interacted with year. Standard errors clustered at
the municipality level in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.


pact. As shown in Table 6 Column 6, prices increased by 7.5%. In Appendix Table A-18 we
examine individual drug categories and also find a significant increase price.
    We argue that the results are largely due to pass-through of upstream extortion to fi-
nal consumer prices for pharmaceutical drugs. The percent increase in wholesale prices is
similar to the percent increase in retail prices after the nonaggression pact, implying a high
degree of pass-through of extortion to retail prices.58 One concern with this interpretation
is that pharmacies could be directly affected by the nonaggression pact. For instance, the
nonaggression pact could have affected the extortion that pharmacies pay to gangs directly.59
However, according to the Ministry of Health, which oversees pharmacies, direct extortion
of pharmacies is less common than extortion of suppliers. Other policies that were aimed at
lowering drug prices are also unlikely to explain the result given our identification strategy.60
  58 In Appendix Table A-17 we directly examine the effect of the nonaggression pact on distributor pharma-
ceutical margins and sales revenue. Point estimates imply an increase in margins and sales revenue of 10.6%
and 13.3% respectively, however, results are marginally significant. We focus on retail pharmaceutical prices
given that the data are more detailed and quantity-adjusted price can be computed, increasing the precision of
estimates.
  59 As discussed previously in Section 6, we rule out other potential channels for how collusion may lead to

an increase in prices, such as a decrease in general crime levels and changes in demand. To the extent that the
non-aggression pact affects demand directly due to lower violence, this is unlikely to explain the magnitude of
the effect on pharmaceutical prices.
  60 The government implemented price caps on drugs in 2013. In practice, we find that these price caps are

often not binding. The government also implemented a price transparency website with information about drug
prices in May 2015. To the extent that the website lowered drug prices, it affected all municipalities and would
be absorbed into month fixed effects.




                                                      40
                                                   Table 7
                               Effect of Non-Aggression Pact on Hospital Visits

                                                                                                 Chronic Diagnoses
                                                 All                                                Affected by
                                              Diagnoses                       Injuries            Drug Adherence
                                       Visits         Visits          Visits         Visits      Visits     Visits
          NonAggrt × Compd              0.017         0.010          -0.017         -0.015       0.083       0.081
                                       (0.014)       (0.012)         (0.023)        (0.024)      (0.031)    (0.028)

          Municipality FEs              Yes               Yes          Yes               Yes      Yes        Yes
          Month FEs                     Yes               Yes          Yes               Yes      Yes        Yes
          Covariates                    No                Yes          No                Yes      No         Yes
          Outcome Mean                 233.11        233.11           12.29              12.29   13.27       13.27
          Observations                 4,588         4,588            4,588              4,588   4,588       4,588
          Clusters                      148           148              148                148     148         148
        Notes: Results from Poisson regressions in which the outcome is the number of inpatient visits in a
       municipality-month. Covariates include nightlights, population density, and census municipality charac-
       teristics interacted with year. Standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses. * p < 0.10,
       ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.


7.2     Effect on Health Outcomes

In order to examine whether the increase in prices due to extortion affected health outcomes,
we examine visits to public hospitals in Table 7. Given that the outcome of interest is number
of visits, we employ Poisson regressions. We first examine visits for all diagnoses and find a
small, statistically insignificant effect. This is not surprising given that many hospital visits
are unlikely to be affected by drug prices. In addition, the decrease in violence due the non-
aggression pact may have decreased visits, counteracting the effect due to higher drug prices.
Focusing on visits related to injuries, we find a negative effect on visits, albeit insignificant.
      Focusing on visits for chronic conditions treated by the drugs analyzed in Table 6, we
find that hospital visits increase by about 8%. As seen in Column 5 and 6, this result is
significant and robust to including controls for demographic characteristics. In Appendix
Table A-19 we estimate the effect on visits for individual diagnoses that may be affected by
an increase in drug prices. We find point estimates implying a 3% to 12% increase in visits.
      The results are particularly large and significant for diabetes, a common illness in El
Salvador. This is consistent with the fact that, if untreated, diabetes can cause kidney failure,
heart attacks, blindness, and stroke. Other diagnoses are less prevalent than diabetes. For
other diagnoses, the effect on visits is positive but estimates are imprecise.
      The fact that there is a significant effect on hospital visits for diagnoses plausibly affected
by high drug prices and not for other diagnoses, such as injuries, helps confirm that the
increase in visits is due to the effect of the non-aggression pact on drug prices. Finally,
Figure A-14 b. examines the effect on visits for chronic conditions by period. Results imply


                                                                41
that the effects are not driven by trends prior to the non-aggression pact.
      Extortion may impose a large cost on consumers by increasing prices across a range of
goods. We highlight that in the important case of pharmaceutical drugs, there was signif-
icant pass-through to consumer prices, potentially exacerbated by double-marginalization.
While the non-aggression pact drastically reduced violence, the evidence implies health was
indirectly affected by this increase in prices.


8      Conclusion

In countries with organized crime, governments have often facilitated cooperation between
criminal organizations in order to reduce violence, an important externality of gang competi-
tion. In addition, criminal organizations may agree on exclusive territories on their own, also
reducing the violence that results from competition. While some have advocated for truces
to reduce violence, these truces tend to lack popular support or face political backlash.61
      In this paper, we highlight an additional effect of cooperation between gangs that has
been largely ignored. When criminal organizations are able to collude, they significantly
increase extortion. While we focus on the 2016 non-aggression pact that was negotiated
between the gangs given our data on extortion, the results may also have implications for
understanding the 2012 truce, its backlash, and other pacts among criminal entities world-
wide.
      We also shed light on the broader economic consequences of extortion. We find that con-
sumers bear a large burden from upstream extortion given the pass-through to retailers and
consumer prices. Consistent with theory, we present evidence that gangs price discriminate,
charging extortion rates that differ depending on downstream demand. This has implica-
tions for the incidence of extortion. The results suggest that the non-aggression pact led
to larger price increases for goods with inelastic demand, such as staple foods and phar-
maceutical drugs for chronic conditions, implying that extortion may particularly impact
poorer households and exacerbate unequal access to healthcare. Given that gangs often tar-
get upstream firms, double-marginalization may imposes additional efficiency losses when
extorted firms have market power.
      Extortion is present in many countries and there is a need to develop policies that target
the root causes of extortion. We argue that considering the market structure for extortion is
important for understanding extortion rates and the downstream consequences. Our model
and findings also suggest that goods with inelastic demand, such as staple products, are
    61 For
       example, in a public opinion survey conducted in El Salvador, 47% of Salvadorans said that the 2012
truce mainly benefited the gangs while only 16% said it benefited the general population (Cawley 2013).


                                                   42
more likely to be lucrative targets of extortion, and protecting these goods from extortion
could reduce gang profits and the incentives to compete for territory. Overall, these results
show how insights from industrial organization can inform our understanding of criminal
organizations and extortion.




References
Acemoglu, Daron, Giuseppe De Feo, and Giacomo Davide De Luca, "Weak States: Causes and
  Consequences of the Sicilian Mafia," The Review of Economic Studies, 2020, 87 (2), 537­581.
Ades, Alberto and Rafael Di Tella, "Rents, Competition, and Corruption," American Economic Review,
  1999, 89 (4), 982­993.
Aguilar, Jeannette, Lissette Miranda, Lourdes Hum, Leslie Ramos, Ivan Monzón, Marlon Carranza,
  and Wendy Lucía Bellanger Rodríguez, Maras y Pandillas en Centroamérica: Las Respuestas de la
  Sociedad Civil Organizada. Volumen IV, San Salvador, El Salvador: Universidad Centroamericana,
  2006.
Alesina, Alberto, Salvatore Piccolo, and Paolo Pinotti, "Organized Crime, Violence, and Politics,"
  The Review of Economic Studies, 2019, 86 (2), 457­499.
Angrist, Joshua D and Adriana D Kugler, "Rural Windfall or a New Resource Curse? Coca, Income,
  and Civil Conflict in Colombia," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2008, 90 (2), 191­215.
Asker, John, "A Study of the Internal Organization of a Bidding Cartel," American Economic Review,
  2010, 100 (3), 724­62.
Bandiera, Oriana, "Land Reform, the Market for Protection, and the Origins of the Sicilian Mafia:
  Theory and Evidence," Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 2003, 19 (1), 218­244.
Becker, Gary S and George J Stigler, "Law Enforcement, Malfeasance, and Compensation of En-
  forcers," The Journal of Legal Studies, 1974, 3 (1), 1­18.
Bergquist, Lauren Falcao and Michael Dinerstein, "Competition and entry in agricultural markets:
  Experimental evidence from Kenya," American Economic Review, 2020, 110 (12), 3705­47.
Bertrand, Marianne, Simeon Djankov, Rema Hanna, and Sendhil Mullainathan, "Obtaining a
  Driver's License in India: An Experimental Approach to Studying Corruption," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (4), 1639­1676.
Blattman, Christopher, Gustavo Duncan, Benjamin Lessing, and Santiago Tobón, "Gang Rule:
  Understanding and Countering Criminal Governance," 2021. Working Paper.
Bliss, Christopher and Rafael Di Tella, "Does Competition Kill Corruption?," Journal of Political
  Economy, 1997, 105 (5), 982­993.
Castillo, Juan Camilo and Dorothy Kronick, "The Logic of Violence in Drug War," American Political
  Science Review, 2020, pp. 1­14.
Cawley, Marguerite, "Gangs Gain Most from El Salvador Truce: Opinion Poll," 2013. InSight Crime
  Report.


                                               43
Clark, Robert and Jean-François Houde, "Collusion with Asymmetric Retailers: Evidence from a
  Gasoline Price-Fixing Case," American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2013, 5 (3), 97­123.
  , Decio Coviello, Jean-François Gauthier, and Art Shneyerov, "Bid Rigging and Entry Deterrence
  in Public Procurement: Evidence from an Investigation into Collusion and Corruption in Quebec,"
  The Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 2018, 34 (3), 301­363.
Cockayne, James, John de Boer, and Louise Bosetti, "Going Straight: Criminal Spoilers, Gang Truces
  and Negotiated Transitions to Lawful Order," 2017. United Nations University Centre for Policy
  Research.
de Chaisemartin, Clément and Xavier D'Haultfoeuille, "Two-Way Fixed Effects Estimators with
  Heterogeneous Treatment Effects," American Economic Review, 2020, 110 (9), 2964­2996.
Dell, Melissa, "Trafficking Networks and the Mexican Drug War," American Economic Review, 2015,
  105 (6), 1738­1779.
Dirección General de Estadística y Censos, "VI Censo de Población y V de Vivienda 2007," 2007. El
  Salvador Ministerio de Economía.
Ditta, Elise, "El Salvador Gang Leaders Order End to Killing," 2016. InSight Crime Brief.
Dudley, Steven, "El Salvador's Gang Truce: Positives and Negatives," 2013. InSight Crime Report.
  , Héctor Silva Ávalos, and Juan José Martínez, "MS-13 in the Americas: How the World's Most
  Notorious Gang Defies Logic, Resist Destruction," InSight Crime, 2018.
Friedman, James W, "A Non-Cooperative Equilibrium for Supergames," The Review of Economic Stud-
  ies, 1971, 38 (1), 1­12.
FUSADES, "Extortiones a la Micro y Pequeña Empresa de El Salvador," 2016. Fundación Salvadoreña
  para el Desarrollo Económica y Social (FUSADES).
Gagne, David, "Balance de InSight Crime Sobre Homicidios en Latinoamérica en 2015," 2016. InSight
  Crime Analysis.
Garfinkel, Michelle R and Stergios Skaperdas, "Economics of Conflict: An Overview," Handbook of
  defense economics, 2007, 2, 649­709.
Garoupa, Nuno, "The Economics of Organized Crime and Optimal Law Enforcement," Economic
  Inquiry, 2000, 38 (2), 278­288.
Global Initiative Against Transnational Organized Crime and InSight Crime, "A Criminal Culture:
  Extortion in Central America," 2019.
Gu, Dingwei, Zhiyong Yao, Wen Zhou, and Rangrang Bai, "When is Upstream Collusion Prof-
 itable?," The RAND Journal of Economics, 2019, 50 (2), 326­341.
Holland, Alisha C, "Right ON Crime? Conservative Party Politics and Mano Dura Policies in El
 Salvador," Latin American Research Review, 2013, pp. 44­67.
Houde, Jean-François, Terrence Johnson, Molly Lipscomb, and Laura Schechter, "Imperfect Com-
 petition and Sanitation: Evidence from randomized auctions in Senegal," 2020. Working Paper.
International Crisis Group, "El Salvador's Politics of Perpetual Violence," 2017. Latin America
  Report N o 64.
  , "Mafia of the Poor: Gang Violence and Extortion in Central America," 2017. Latin America Report
  N o 6.
  , "Miracle or Mirage? Gangs and Plunging Violence in El Salvador," 2020. Latin America Report
  N o 81.
Iyer, Ganesh and J Miguel Villas-Boas, "A Bargaining Theory of Distribution Channels," Journal of
  Marketing Research, 2003, 40 (1), 80­100.
Kan, Paul Rexton, "Malicious Peace: Violent Criminal Organizations, National Governments and
  Truces," International Journal of Criminology and Sociology, 2014, 3, 125­132.
Konrad, Kai A and Stergios Skaperdas, "Credible Threats in Extortion," Journal of Economic Behavior


                                                44
  & Organization, 1997, 33 (1), 23­39.
Konrad, Kai I and Stergios Skaperdas, "Extortion," Economica, 1998, 65 (260), 461­477.
Levenstein, Margaret C and Valerie Y Suslow, "What Determines Cartel Success?," Journal of Eco-
  nomic Literature, 2006, 44 (1), 43­95.
Levitt, Steven D and Sudhir Alladi Venkatesh, "An Economic Analysis of a Drug-Selling Gang's
  Finances," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2000, 115 (3), 755­789.
Magaloni, Beatriz, Gustavo Robles, Aila M Matanock, Alberto Diaz-Cayeros, and Vidal Romero,
 "Living in Fear: The Dynamics of Extortion in Mexico's Drug War," Comparative Political Studies,
 2020, 53 (7), 1124­1174.
Martínez, Carlos, "Gangs Find Common Ground in El Salvador Crackdown," 2016. InSight Crime
 Analysis.
Martínez, Óscar, "Los Salvadoreños Cruzan Fronteras de Guerra a Aiario," El Faro, 2016.
 , Efren Lemus, Carlos Martínez, and Deborah Sontag, "Killers on a Shoestring: Inside the Gangs
 of El Salvador," The New York Times, 2016.
Maskin, Eric and Jean Tirole, "A Theory of Dynamic Oligopoly, I: Overview and Quantity Compe-
 tition with Large Fixed Costs," Econometrica, 1988, pp. 549­569.
   and John Riley, "Monopoly with Incomplete Information," The RAND Journal of Economics, 1984,
  15 (2), 171­196.
Melnikov, Nikita, Carlos Schmidt-Padilla, and Maria Micaela Sviatschi, "Gangs, Labor Mobility,
 and Development," 2020. NBER Working Paper #27832.
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, "VIIRS Day/Night Band Nighttime Lights,"
  2020. Earth Observation Group, NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI).
Neu, Dean, "Accounting for Extortion," Accounting, Organizations and Society, 2019, 76 (C), 50­63.
Nocke, Volker and Lucy White, "Do Vertical Mergers Facilitate Upstream Collusion?," American
 Economic Review, 2007, 97 (4), 1321­1339.
Oi, Walter Y, "A Disneyland Dilemma: Two-part Tariffs for a Mickey Mouse Monopoly," The Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 1971, 85 (1), 77­96.
Olken, Benjamin A and Patrick Barron, "The Simple Economics of Extortion: Evidence from Truck-
  ing in Aceh," Journal of Political Economy, 2009, 117 (3), 417­452.
Papadovassilakis, Alex, "Are El Salvador's Gangs Behind Historic Murder Drop?," 2020. InSight
  Crime Analysis.
  and Steven Dudley, "The "Protection Racket," Gangs and Violence in San Salvador," 2020. InSight
  Crime Investigation.
Peñate Guerra, Margarita Isabel, Kenny Mendoza de Escobar, José Arnulfo Quintanilla Deras, and
  César Antonio Alvarado Zepeda, "Estimación del Costo Económico de la Violencia en El Salvador
  2014," 2016. Departamento de Investigación Económica y Financiera, Banco Central de Reserva de
  El Salvador.
Pinotti, Paolo, "The Economic Costs of Organised Crime: Evidence from Southern Italy," The Eco-
  nomic Journal, 2015, 125 (586), F203­F232.
Ponce, Carlos, "Street corner decisions: an empirical investigation of extortionist choices in El Sal-
  vador," Global Crime, 2021, 22 (2), 143­165.
Porter, Robert H, "A Study of Cartel Stability: The Joint Executive Committee, 1880-1886," The Bell
  Journal of Economics, 1983, pp. 301­314.
Rey, Patrick and Joseph Stiglitz, "The Role of Exclusive Territories in Producers' Competition," The
  RAND Journal of Economics, 1995, pp. 431­451.
   and Thibaud Vergé, "Economics of Vertical Restraints," Handbook of Antitrust Economics, 2008, 353,
  390.


                                                 45
Röller, Lars-Hendrik and Frode Steen, "On the Workings of a Cartel: Evidence from the Norwegian
  Cement Industry," American Economic Review, 2006, 96 (1), 321­338.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W Vishny, "Corruption," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1993, 108
  (3), 599­617.
Skaperdas, Stergios, "Contest Success Functions," Economic Theory, 1996, 7 (2), 283­290.
Spengler, Joseph J, "Vertical Integration and Antitrust Policy," Journal of Political Economy, 1950, 58
  (4), 347­352.
Svensson, Jakob, "Who Must Pay Bribes and How Much? Evidence from a Cross Section of Firms,"
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (1), 207­230.
Sviatschi, Maria Micaela, "Making a Narco: Childhood Exposure to Illegal Labor Markets and
  Criminal Life Paths," Manuscript, Department of Economics, Princeton University., 2018.
  , "US Criminal Deportations and Human Capital in Central America," in "AEA Papers and Pro-
  ceedings," Vol. 109 2019, pp. 239­42.
      c, Sinisa and Eric Rahman, "The Gang Truce in El Salvador," 2018. Oxford Research Group.
Vukovi´
Waltz, Kenneth N, Theory of International Politics, Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 1979.
WorldPop, "The Spatial Distribution of Population, El Salvador," 2020. WorldPop and Center for
 International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN), Columbia University. Global High Res-
 olution Population Denominators Project.
Yamagiwa, Takayoshi Jose, "El Salvador: The New Law on Medicines and its implementation," 2015.
  World Health Organization.




                                                  46
                                          Online Appendix



A     Extortion Logistics in El Salvador

Extortion is a complex activity that requires gangs to continually identify potential victims
and collect extortion while evading authorities and credibly threatening violence or other
repercussions if victims do not pay. In El Salvador, gangs rely on their extensive territorial
control ­ often of whole urban neighborhoods ­ and an extensive network of collaborators
and informants, to identify victims and continually collect extortion payments (Dudley et
al. 2018; GIATOC and IC 2019). Given that extortion is a key revenue source sustaining
gang members, their families, and their collaborators, extortion plans are carefully arranged
and executed.62 This often implies that gangs have to invest in a "relationship" with their
victims, so they can maintain future extortion payments (Ponce 2021). Since "[v]ictims assess
the seriousness of the threat at every contact to determine if it is safe to report the crime
or not," the relegation of an extortion process to collaborators can, at best, mean lower
extortion revenue, and at worst, the filing of a police complaint (Ponce 2021). For these
reasons, collecting extortion is not a trivial task and can require a significant number of gang
members and expertise.
    After a gang identifies a potential victim, its members or collaborators often gather in-
formation on them that might become useful. An extortion demand is often coupled with
threats meant to not only scare the potential victim, but also make it clear that they have no
other option but to cede to it, or risk significant material damage or physical violence (Neu
2019). The wholesale distributor that is the focus of this paper uses trucks that do not identify
the name of the company in order to try to have some anonymity. However, the company
told us that certain gang cliques implied they knew where they had their warehouse and
could inflict material damage if they did not agree to extortion demands.
    It is useful to consider victim statements in court to illustrate a typical extortion incident.
The following victim account is from an extortion-related sentence given in the First Court
of Sentencing in San Salvador:

       "At approximately 5:28pm, [the victim] received WhatsApp messages through
  62 Since extortion has become a part of daily life in countless neighborhoods in El Salvador, it has also lead to

numerous copycats in which opportunistic individuals, usually non-gang members, imitate the gangs' extortion
tactics (GIATOC and IC 2019). However, this is often less successful than extortion by gangs.


                                                        47
      which a person wrote that they had to deliver the amount of seventy five dollars,
      for Wednesday, April 4 of the year two thousand and eighteen, otherwise they
      would receive their two children in black bags and that they should not dare to
      report what was happening to the police, because if they did, the victim would
      also appear bagged like their children, telling them in the messages that he knew
      where the victim worked, where their children studied and all the information of
      their relatives and that they had no way of escaping from them [sic]"63

The more information gangs have on their potential victims, coupled with their territorial
control, the more credible the threat of repercussions if they fail to pay. Likewise, repeated
interaction with and threats toward their victims can ensure greater on-time payment and
higher extortion payments.


B     Supporting Data Sources

B-1    Household surveys

From DIGESTYC, we obtained the microdata for the annual household surveys (EHPM)
administered between 2014 and 2018. Each year, DIGESTYC surveys around 15 thousand
households. The surveys include a comprehensive set of questions related to demographic
and socioeconomic household characteristics. To measure possible changes in demand, we
analyze the information on household income and expenditure per capita. These variables
draw from individual-level questions on income and expenditures, and are aggregated to
the household level by DIGESTYC.


B-2    Crime Reports

The homicide data described in Section 2.3.1 ends in early 2017. We complement it with data
from "scene of the crime" reports collected by the PNC from 2017 to 2019. These reports
on homicides differ slightly from the homicide data described in Section 2.3.1, as the former
is recorded as an event happens and the latter is an ex-post recollection.64 Aside from this
reporting difference, there are no major differences in the data sources: both collect the same
variables, including date, time, geographic location, and potential gang involvement.
    From the PNC, we also obtained event data on other crimes, including theft, robberies,
and domestic violence. These data cover the decade from 2010 to 2017 and detail the date
  63 The original text comes from sentence 238-3-2018 from the First Court of Sentence in San Salvador available
through El Salvador's Judicial Documentation Center (accessed on July 13, 2021).
  64 Our results hold just using homicide data prior to 2017.



                                                      48
and municipality of occurrence.


B-3    Incarceration Records

From the Ministry of Justice and Public Security, we obtained anonymous information on all
incarcerated individuals in 2015. These data include information on general demographics,
crimes committed or accused, gang affiliation, and municipality and department of birth and
residence. Sub-setting to the individuals with gang affiliation and incarcerated in the three
years prior to the 2016 non-aggression pact, we constructed an alternate HHI following the
procedure described in Section 5.1 using inmates' department and municipality of residence.


C     Additional Figures and Tables

                                        Figure A-1
             Extortion, Homicides, and Gang Competition Across Municipalities




               a. Average Extortion Payment                 b. Total Extortion




                   c. Yearly Homicides                        d. Gang HHI

      Notes: Gang HHI defined using MS-13 and Barrio-18 homicides.




                                               49
                                      Figure A-2
                 Delivery Frequencies and Values Across Municipalities




               a. Number of Deliveries                                b. Deliveries Per Month




               c. Total Delivery Value                             d. Monthly Delivery Value

Notes: Data is from 2012-2019.




                                             Table A-1
                          Relationship between Extortion & Delivery Values

                                  log(Extortion)     log(Extortion)     log(Extortion)    log(Extortion)
       log(Value of Delivery)         0.040              0.023              0.014              0.022
                                     (0.017)            (0.011)            (0.008)            (0.006)

       Municipality FEs                No                  Yes               Yes                Yes
       Route FEs                       No                  No                Yes                Yes
       Retailer FEs                    No                  No                No                 Yes
       Outcome Mean                    1.66               1.66              1.66               1.65
       Adjusted R2                    0.0013             0.1889            0.3630             0.5444
       Observations                   62,798             62,787            62,783             59,965
       Clusters                        119                 119               115                113
      Notes: The unit of observation is a delivery on a route. Standard errors clustered at the route level
     in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                      50
                                                                                                  Figure A-3
                                                                                Municipality-Level Correlates of Extortion Rates


                         4                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10
                                                                                                                                            8
Log Extortion Per Year




                                                                                                                   Log Extortion Per Year




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Log Extortion Per Year
                                                                                                                                            6
                         3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                                            4
                         2

                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                         1
                                                                                                                                            0


                                                          Coefficient Estimate: 0.5714; t-statistic: 2.0237                                                             Coefficient Estimate: 1.4405; t-statistic: 9.3806                                                              Coefficient Estimate: 1.9037; t-statistic: 15.2144
                         0                                                                                                                  -2                                                                                                           -5
                              2              3                4                      5                        6                                  0        1         2                  3               4                    5                                 -3         -2       -1                  0                 1                   2
                                        Log Value of Goods at Delivery Per Year                                                                                Log Homicides per Year                                                                                            Log Nightlights


                                       a. Value of Deliveries                                                                                                 b. Homicides                                                                                                    c. Nightlights

                             Notes: The figure presents binscatters between the log of the average extortion amount paid
                             by the firm in a municipality per year and the log of the average value of deliveries (a.),
                             the log of the average number of homicides per year (b.), and the log of average nightlights
                             per year (c.). The unit of observation is a municipality. The bottom-right of each figure
                             presents the estimated bivariate coefficient and t-statistic. Standard errors are clustered at
                             the municipality level.




                                                                                  Figure A-4
                                                            Histogram of Homicide HHI prior to Non-Aggression Pact


                                   8                                                                                                                                                  20




                                   6                                                                                                                                                  15
                         Density




                                                                                                                                                                            Density




                                   4                                                                                                                                                  10




                                   2                                                                                                                                                   5




                                   0                                                                                                                                                   0
                                       .5            .6                         .7                            .8                                     .9            1                        .5                         .6                                          .7            .8                        .9                         1
                                                                                         HHI                                                                                                                                                                            HHI



                                                          a. Municipality level                                                                                                                                                 b. Canton level

                             Notes: Vertical line shows preferred cutoff for defining areas with competition.




                                                                                                                                                                        51
                                                                         Figure A-5
                                                       Delivery and Sales Trends by Gang Competition


                         3000                                                                                                300


                         2500                                                                                                250




                                                                                                   Total Shipments (1000s)
                         2000                                                                                                200
Total Trips




                         1500                                                                                                150


                         1000                                                                                                100


                          500                                                                                                 50


                              0                                                                                                0
                                   2015m7     2016m1       2016m7         2017m1         2017m7                                        2015m7      2016m1        2016m7          2017m1         2017m7
                                                           Month                                                                                                 Month

                                             Competition            Low/No Competition                                                            Competition              Low/No Competition



                                                 a. Total trips                                                                                   b. Total shipments


                         20                                                                                                  3.0


                                                                                                                             2.5
                         15
                                                                                                   Unique Products (1000s)
Unique Clients (1000s)




                                                                                                                             2.0


                         10                                                                                                  1.5


                                                                                                                             1.0
                         5
                                                                                                                             0.5


                         0                                                                                                   0.0
                                  2015m7    2016m1         2016m7         2017m1         2017m7                                        2015m7     2016m1         2016m7          2017m1         2017m7
                                                           Month                                                                                                 Month

                                            Competition             Low/No Competition                                                            Competition             Low/No Competition



                                            c. Unique retailers                                                                                   d. Unique products


                         8000                                                                                                10000



                                                                                                                              8000
                         6000
                                                                                                   Total Value ($1000s)
Total Cost ($1000s)




                                                                                                                              6000

                         4000

                                                                                                                              4000


                         2000
                                                                                                                              2000



                              0                                                                                                    0
                                   2015m7     2016m1       2016m7         2017m1         2017m7                                          2015m7     2016m1        2016m7         2017m1         2017m7
                                                           Month                                                                                                  Month

                                             Competition            Low/No Competition                                                             Competition             Low/No Competition



                                                 e. Total cost                                                                                      f. Total revenue

               Notes: Vertical line shows start of non-aggression pact (April 2016). Competition defined at
               the municipality level.


                                                                                                  52
                                                                                                    Figure A-6
                                                                                      Demeaned Total Cost by Gang Competition

                                                                              1500


                                                                              1000
                                               Demeaned Total Cost ($1000s)




                                                                               500


                                                                                 0


                                                                               -500


                                                                              -1000


                                                                              -1500
                                                                                      2015m7                                                                 2016m1               2016m7                                         2017m1                                                 2017m7
                                                                                                                                                                                  Month

                                                                                                                                                            Competition                                     Low/No Competition


                             Notes: Shows cost after subtracting mean cost by product by retailer.




                                                                      Figure A-7
                                             Municipality Level Correlation between Extortion Reported by
                                                   Delivery Firm and Extortion Reported to Police
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Log Imberton Extortion Mean Amount
                                                                                                             Log Imberton Extortion Total Amount




                         8                                                                                                                         10                                                                                                                     2.2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2.0
Log Imberton Extortion




                         6                                                                                                                          8

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.8

                         4                                                                                                                          6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.6



                         2                                                                                                                          4                                                                                                                     1.4



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.2
                                                     Coefficient Estimate: 0.7906; t-statistic: 7.2689                                                                       Coefficient Estimate: 0.9029; t-statistic: 7.4285                                                                   Coefficient Estimate: 0.1239; t-statistic: 2.8359
                         0                                                                                                                          2
                             0           2                                       4                       6                                              0              2                        4                                6                                              0          2                        4                                6
                                  Log Reported Extortion from Police                                                                                             Reported Extortion from Police                                                                                      Reported Extortion from Police


                                     a. Frequency                                                                                                               b. Total Amount                                                                                                     c. Mean Amount




                                                                                                                                                                           53
                                                    Table A-2
                      Falsification Test Examining Effect of Non-Aggression Pact on Cost
                                    in Municipalities with Gang Competition

                                Cost                log(Cost)              Cost        log(Cost)          Cost       log(Cost)
   NonAggrt × Compd             1.602                 0.018             0.629            0.013            1.063        0.013
                               (3.003)               (0.022)           (3.263)          (0.021)          (3.088)      (0.015)

   Municipality FEs               Yes                  Yes                  Yes             Yes            Yes          Yes
   Route FEs                      Yes                  Yes                  Yes             Yes            Yes          Yes
   Month FEs                      Yes                  Yes                  Yes             Yes            Yes          Yes
   Product FEs                    No                   No                   No              No             Yes          Yes
   Covariates                     No                   No                   Yes             Yes            Yes          Yes
   Outcome Mean                  26.38                 1.24              26.38            1.24             26.34        1.24
   Adjusted R2                   0.107                 0.510             0.107            0.510            0.481        0.730
   Observations               10,241,439            10,241,439        10,241,439       10,241,439       10,241,227   10,241,227
 Notes: Covariates include nightlights, population density, and census municipality characteristics interacted with year. The
sample period is 6/2015 to 1/2018. Standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05,
*** p < 0.01.




                                             Figure A-8
                        Histogram of Inmate HHI prior to Non-Aggression Pact


                                           8




                                           6
                                 Density




                                           4




                                           2




                                           0
                                               .5     .6         .7               .8   .9           1
                                                                      HHI



      Notes: Vertical line shows top quartile, the baseline cutoff used for defining areas with
      competition with the homicide HHI.




                                                                      54
                                     Figure A-9
         Municipality Level Correlation between Homicide HHI and Inmate
                                        HHI


                                                   0.90




                                                   0.80
                                 HHI - Homicides




                                                   0.70




                                                                                       Coefficient Estimate: 0.523; t-statistic: 7.091
                                                   0.60

                                                        0.50    0.60            0.70         0.80                 0.90              1.00
                                                                                  HHI - Inmates




                                                                     Figure A-10
                                                           Extortion by Gang Competition

                                              14

                                              12
                      Mean Extortion Amount




                                              10

                                                   8

                                                   6

                                                   4

                                                   2

                                                   0
                                                       2015m7   2016m1          2016m7             2017m1             2017m7
                                                                                   Month

                                                                  Competition                  Low/No Competition



Notes: Vertical line shows start of non-aggression pact (April 2016). Figure shows mean extortion
amounts paid across municipalities with gang competition and without gang competition as defined
by the homicide Herfindahl­Hirschman Index.




                                                                                  55
                                   Figure A-11
     Relationship Between Extortion Rates and Number of Extortion Payments

                                                    1.80


                                                    1.75




                               Log Extortion Paid
                                                    1.70


                                                    1.65


                                                    1.60


                                                    1.55

                                                                                    Coefficient Estimate: 0.033; t-statistic: 0.963
                                                    1.50
                                                                 1                   2                          3                        4
                                                           Log Number of Total Extortion Payments on Route


       Notes: The figure presents binscatters between the log of the extortion amount paid
       by the firm upon delivery and the log number of extortion payments made on a
       route on the same day. The unit of observation is an extortion payment-delivery pair.
       The regressions include route fixed effects. The bottom-right of each figure presents
       the estimated coefficient and t-statistic. Standard errors are clustered at the delivery
       route level.




                                   Figure A-12
          Relationship Between Extortion Rates and Vehicle Characteristics


                                            1.80



                                            1.75
                       Log Extortion Paid




                                            1.70



                                            1.65



                                            1.60


                                                                                    Coefficient Estimate: 0.0271; t-statistic: 2.6585
                                            1.55
                                                2010                 2012              2014                   2016                    2018
                                                                            Year Vehicle Manufactured



Notes: The figure presents binscatters between the log of the extortion amount paid by
the firm upon delivery and the year the vehicle used to deliver was manufactured. The
unit of observation is an extortion payment-delivery pair. The bottom-right of each figure
presents the estimated bivariate coefficient and t-statistic. Standard errors are clustered at
the delivery route level.




                                                                                  56
                                                                                      Table A-3
                                                                    Effect of Non-Aggression Pact on Homicides
                                                                      in Municipalities with Gang Competition

                                                                 All Homicides                MS-13 or Barrio 18 Perpetrator              MS-13 or Barrio 18 Victim
                                                    Homicides            log(Homicides)       Homicides           log(Homicides)       Homicides        log(Homicides)
  NonAggrt × Compd                                      -1.483              -0.247             -0.654                 -0.234            -0.361                 -0.117
                                                        (0.340)             (0.049)             (0.133)               (0.058)            (0.072)               (0.049)

  Municipality FEs                                       Yes                  Yes                    Yes               Yes                 Yes                   Yes
  Year FEs                                               Yes                  Yes                    Yes               Yes                 Yes                   Yes
  Outcome Mean                                            4.71                1.08                1.43                  0.62               0.76                 0.33
  Adjusted R2                                             0.72                0.59               0.33                   0.29               0.29                 0.23
  Observations                                           1,875               1,875               1,875                 1,118              1,875                 882
  Clusters                                                146                 146                 146                   132                146                  125

 Notes: The unit of observation is a municipality-month. The sample period is 6/2015 to 1/2018. All specifications
control for nightlights, population density, and census municipality characteristics interacted with year. Standard errors
clustered at the municipality level in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                      Figure A-13
                                                Heterogeneous Effect of Extortion on Distribution Margin
                                                 Instrumental Variable Difference-in-Difference Model

                                       2.5

                                       2.0

                                       1.5
              Estimated Pass-Through




                                       1.0

                                       0.5

                                       0.0

                                       -0.5

                                       -1.0

                                       -1.5

                                              Small            Large                        Food           Cleaning    Toiletries     Dietary        OTC
                                              Clients          Clients                    Products         Supplies                 Supplements    Medicines

     Notes: Shows point estimates and 95% confidence intervals for instrumental variable difference-in-
     difference model. Standard errors are clustered at the municipality level. Distributor margin is
     defined as the difference between wholesale price and manufacturer price. All specifications include
     municipality fixed effects, month fixed effects, retailer fixed effects, and controls for nightlights, pop-
     ulation density, and census municipality characteristics interacted with year.




                                                                                               57
                                                       Table A-4
                                    Effect of Non-Aggression Pact on Other Crime
                                       in Municipalities with Gang Competition

                                                                                                Domestic        log(1+Domestic
                           Theft       log(1+Theft)       Robbery         log(1+Robbery)        Violence           Violence)
  NonAggrt × Compd         0.035         -0.030             0.106            -0.029             -0.133                -0.016
                          (0.225)        (0.042)           (0.175)           (0.034)            (0.194)               (0.059)

  Municipality FEs          Yes             Yes              Yes                Yes                Yes                  Yes
  Year FEs                  Yes             Yes              Yes                Yes                Yes                  Yes
  Outcome Mean              0.66            0.23             0.51               0.19               0.28                0.15
  Adjusted R2               0.44            0.54             0.35               0.51               0.37                0.33
  Observations             3,880           3,880            3,880              3,880              3,880                3,880
  Clusters                  148             148              148                148                148                  148

 Notes: The unit of observation is a municipality-month. All specifications control for nightlights, population density,
and census municipality characteristics interacted with year. The sample period is 6/2015 to 1/2018. Standard errors
clustered at the municipality level in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

                                                   Table A-5
                         Effect of Non-Aggression Pact on Development and Population

                                         Nightlights     log(Nightlights)     Pop Density      log(Pop Density)
                 NonAggrt × Compd           0.003            -0.030             -0.048             -0.003
                                           (0.053)           (0.020)            (0.101)            (0.007)

                 Municipality FEs            Yes               Yes                Yes                 Yes
                 Year FEs                    Yes               Yes                Yes                 Yes
                 Covariates                  Yes               Yes                Yes                 Yes
                 Outcome Mean                1.32              -0.41              6.21                1.08
                 Adjusted R2                 0.99              0.99               1.00                1.00
                 Observations                740                740               740                 740
                 Clusters                    148                148               148                 148
               Notes: The unit of observation is a municipality-year. Covariates include census municipality char-
              acteristics interacted with year. The sample period is 2014 to 2018. Standard errors clustered at the
              municipality level in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.


                                             Table A-6
                Effect of Non-Aggression Pact on Household Income and Expenditure

                                            Household          Income          Household          Expenditure
                                             Income           Per Capita       Expenditure         Per Capita
                 NonAggrt × Compd              4.337             3.408             1.075              0.366
                                              (9.190)           (3.169)           (5.683)            (1.719)

                 Municipality FEs                  Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes
                 Year FEs                          Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes
                 Covariates                        Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes
                 Outcome Mean                  514.77           159.98            349.28             109.27
                 Adjusted R2                    0.06             0.06              0.13               0.12
                 Observations                  88,255           88,255            88,255             88,255
                 Clusters                       136              136               136                136
               Notes: The unit of observation is a household-municipality-year. Covariates include
              census municipality characteristics interacted with year. The sample period is 2014 to
              2018. Standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses. * p < 0.10, **
              p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.



                                                              58
                                            Table A-7
                  Effect of Non-Aggression Pact on Criminal Cases Related to
                             Deprivation of Liberty and Kidnapping

                                     Combined                     Kidnapping            Deprivation of liberty
                                Cases         Cases          Cases          Cases       Cases             Cases
   NonAggrt × Compd              0.112         0.086         1.492          2.009        0.098            0.073
                                (0.065)       (0.064)        (0.827)       (1.186)      (0.062)          (0.062)

   Municipality FEs              Yes           Yes              Yes          Yes         Yes               Yes
   Month FEs                     Yes           Yes              Yes          Yes         Yes               Yes
   Covariates                    No            Yes              No           Yes         No                Yes
   Outcome Mean                   1.51         1.51             0.01         0.01       1.50              1.50
   Observations                  4,526        4,526             621          621        4,526             4,526
   Clusters                       146          146               27           27         146               146
 Notes: Results from Poisson regressions in which the outcome is the number of criminal cases commenced in
a municipality-month. The counts only include consummated crimes, not conspiracy to or attempted crimes.
Covariates include nightlights, population density, and census municipality characteristics interacted with
year. Standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                           Table A-8
                 Effect of Non-Aggression Pact on Price Discrimination by Gangs

                                               log(Extortion)          log(Extortion)     log(Extortion)
         NonAggrt × Compd                          0.090                   0.124                 0.304
                                                  (0.103)                 (0.088)               (0.088)
         NonAggrt × Compd × Valuer                 0.125                   0.129                 0.129
                                                  (0.058)                 (0.054)               (0.036)

         Municipality FEs                             Yes                   Yes                   Yes
         Month FEs                                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes
         Route FEs                                    No                    No                    Yes
         Covariates                                   No                    Yes                   Yes
         Outcome Mean                               1.59                   1.59                  1.59
         Adjusted R2                                0.283                 0.290                  0.380
         Observations                              36,810                 36,810                36,807
       Notes: The unit of observation is an extortion payment. Valuer is the value of deliveries for retailer
      r in $1,000s. Covariates include nightlights, population density, and census municipality character-
      istics interacted with year. The sample period is 6/2015 to 1/2018. Standard errors clustered at the
      municipality level in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                        59
                                       Table A-9
           Effect of Non-Aggression Pact on Time between Extortion Payments

                                         Delivery Time         Delivery Time          Delivery Time
          NonAggrt × Compd                   6.868                  7.816                   7.444
                                            (4.891)                (3.661)                 (2.717)

          Municipality FEs                   Yes                     Yes                     Yes
          Month FEs                          Yes                     Yes                     Yes
          Route FEs                          No                      No                      Yes
          Covariates                         No                      Yes                     Yes
          Outcome Mean                       59.91                  59.91                  59.91
          Adjusted R2                        0.108                  0.111                  0.122
          Observations                       7,785                  7,785                  7,781
       Notes: The unit of observation is an extortion payment. The dependent variable is the time
      between extortion payments in minutes as recorded by the wholesaler. Covariates include
      nightlights, population density, and census municipality characteristics interacted with year.
      The sample period is 6/2015 to 1/2018. Standard errors clustered at the municipality level in
      parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

                                          Table A-10
           Effect of Extortion on Distribution Margin by Distance to Nearest Sale
                    Instrumental Variable Difference-in-Difference Model

                                   Reduced-Form                First-Stage                   IVDD
                             Distributor                                       Distributor
                              Margin          log(Margin)       Extortion       Margin             log(Margin)
                                           Panel A. Sale within 1km
  NonAggrt × Compd              0.639            0.130            2.998
                               (0.237)          (0.055)          (0.780)
  Extortion                                                                        0.213              0.045
                                                                                  (0.067)            (0.012)

  Outcome Mean                  3.81               0.99           8.21             3.81               0.99
  Adjusted R2                   0.465              0.444          0.589
  F-Stat                                                                           65.8               60.0
  Observations                 40,945           40,447           40,945           40,945             40,447
                                           Panel B. Sale within 5km
  NonAggrt × Compd              0.237            0.051            1.488
                               (0.277)          (0.061)          (0.390)
  Extortion                                                                        0.160              0.034
                                                                                  (0.059)            (0.011)

  Outcome Mean                  3.76               0.99           8.63             3.76               0.99
  Adjusted R2                   0.492              0.439          0.284
  F-Stat                                                                           42.1                41.8
  Observations                144,683           143,194          144,683         144,683             143,194
 Notes: Distributor margin is defined as the difference between wholesale price and manufacturer price.
All specifications include municipality fixed effects, month fixed effects, retailer fixed effects, and controls
for nightlights, population density, and census municipality characteristics interacted with year. Standard
errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.



                                                       60
                                            Table A-11
                           Effect of Extortion on Distribution Margin
                     Instrumental Variable Difference-in-Difference Model
                                   Controlling for Homicides

                                   Reduced-Form                First-Stage                   IVDD
                            Distributor                                        Distributor
                             Margin          log(Margin)        Extortion       Margin          log(Margin)
                                            Panel A. Nearest Sale
  NonAggrt × Compd              1.371            0.118            1.640
                               (0.718)          (0.055)          (0.629)
  Extortion                                                                        0.836             0.072
                                                                                  (0.245)           (0.023)

  Outcome Mean                  4.17             1.03             7.41             4.17              1.03
  Adjusted R2                   0.566            0.443            0.464
  F-Stat                                                                           22.5              22.5
  Observations                 34,963           34,571           34,963           34,963            34,571
                                          Panel B. Sale within 1km
  NonAggrt × Compd              0.661            0.131            3.227
                               (0.239)          (0.057)          (0.791)
  Extortion                                                                        0.205             0.042
                                                                                  (0.089)           (0.022)

  Outcome Mean                  3.81             0.99             8.21             3.81              0.99
  Adjusted R2                   0.465            0.444            0.590
  F-Stat                                                                           16.6              15.9
  Observations                 40,945           40,447           40,945           40,945            40,447
                                          Panel C. Sale within 5km
  NonAggrt × Compd              0.248            0.053            1.518
                               (0.280)          (0.062)          (0.406)
  Extortion                                                                        0.163             0.035
                                                                                  (0.186)           (0.041)

  Outcome Mean                  3.76             0.99             8.63             3.76              0.99
  Adjusted R2                   0.492            0.440            0.284
  F-Stat                                                                           14.0               14.2
  Observations                144,683           143,194          144,683         144,683            143,194
 Notes: Distributor margin is defined as the difference between wholesale price and manufacturer price.
All specifications include municipality fixed effects, month fixed effects, retailer fixed effects, and controls
for homicides, nightlights, population density, and census municipality characteristics interacted with year.
Standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                      61
                                                      Table A-12
                            Effect of Non-Aggression Pact on Extensive Margin of Extortion

                                                          Has Extortion              Has Extortion              Has Extortion
                            NonAggrt × Compd                     0.065                    0.037                     0.052
                                                              (0.037)                     (0.017)                  (0.026)

                            Municipality FEs                     Yes                       Yes                         Yes
                            Route FEs                            No                        No                          Yes
                            Month FEs                            Yes                       Yes                         Yes
                            Covariates                           No                        Yes                         Yes
                            Outcome Mean                         0.98                      0.98                     0.98
                            Adjusted R2                          0.20                      0.18                     0.21
                            Observations                         2,328                    2,328                     2,328
                            Clusters                               66                       66                       66
                          Notes: The unit of observation is a route-municipality-month. Covariates include
                         census municipality characteristics interacted with year. The sample period is
                         6/2015 to 1/2018. Standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parenthe-
                         ses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

                                                          Table A-13
                                          Effect of Non-Aggression Pact on Number of
                                                          Deliveries

                                                                           Number of             Number of
                                                                           Deliveries            Deliveries
                                           NonAggrt × Compd                  -0.295                 -1.047
                                                                             (1.658)                (1.494)

                                           Municipality FEs                     Yes                     Yes
                                           Month FEs                            Yes                     Yes
                                           Covariates                           No                      Yes
                                           Outcome Mean                       36.87                    36.87
                                           Adjusted R2                        0.818                    0.818
                                           Observations                       54,259                   54,259
                                         Notes: The unit of observation is a municipality-month.
                                        Covariates include census municipality characteristics in-
                                        teracted with year. The sample period is 6/2015 to
                                        1/2018. Standard errors clustered at the municipality
                                        level in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

                                                              Table A-14
                                              Effect of Non-Aggression Pact on Extortion
                                               in Municipalities with Gang Competition
                                   Specifications with Alternative Cutoffs for Defining Competition

                                50th Percentile                60th Percentile                       70th Percentile                80th Percentile
                         Extortion     log(Extortion)   Extortion        log(Extortion)     Extortion         log(Extortion)   Extortion   log(Extortion)
 NonAggrt × Compd           1.421          0.171           1.585             0.192            1.571               0.192          1.705         0.237
                           (0.484)        (0.063)         (0.487)           (0.067)          (0.482)             (0.065)        (0.474)       (0.053)

 Municipality FEs            Yes            Yes            Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes           Yes            Yes
 Month FEs                   Yes            Yes            Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes           Yes            Yes
 Covariates                  Yes            Yes            Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes           Yes            Yes
 Outcome Mean               7.49            1.60           7.49              1.60              7.49               1.60           7.49          1.60
 Adjusted R2                0.114           0.190          0.114             0.191             0.114              0.191          0.114         0.191
 Observations              15,001          15,001         15,001            15,001            15,001             15,001         15,001        15,001
 Notes: The unit of observation is an extortion payment. Covariates include nightlights, population density, and census municipality characteristics
interacted with year. The sample period is 6/2015 to 1/2018. Standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses. * p < 0.10, **
p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.



                                                                           62
                                                  Table A-15
           Effect of Non-Aggression Pact on Extortion in Municipalities with Gang Competition
                     Alternative Specification with Continuous Measure of Competition

                            Extortion       log(Extortion)   Extortion     log(Extortion)     Extortion          log(Extortion)
     NonAggrt × HHId         -7.511           -1.033         -7.725           -0.969          -5.506               -0.605
                              (1.549)          (0.261)        (2.660)          (0.369)         (2.333)             (0.282)

     Municipality FEs          Yes               Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes                  Yes
     Month FEs                 Yes               Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes                  Yes
     Covariates                No                No             Yes             Yes              Yes                  Yes
     Route FEs                 No                No             No              No               Yes                  Yes
     Outcome Mean              7.49             1.60            7.49             1.60           7.49                 1.60
     Adjusted R2              0.113            0.188            0.114           0.191           0.169               0.271
     Observations             15,001           15,001          15,001          15,001          15,001               15,001
    Notes: The unit of observation is an extortion payment. Covariates include nightlights, population density, and census
   municipality characteristics interacted with year. The sample period is 6/2015 to 1/2018. Standard errors clustered at
   the municipality level in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                   Table A-16
                        Effect of Non-Aggression Pact on Consumer Prices at Pharmacies
                          Alternate Specification with Pharmacy by Drug Fixed Effects

                                                                Pharmacies/Brands Supplied
                                       All Pharmacies                by Delivery Firm                     Diabetes Drugs
                                 Price          log(Price)       Price           log(Price)             Price          log(Price)
   NonAggrt × Compd              0.025            0.054          0.002             0.043                0.015            0.052
                                (0.006)           (0.004)       (0.023)           (0.008)              (0.004)          (0.014)

   Pharmacy×Drug FEs              Yes              Yes             Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
   Month FEs                      Yes              Yes             Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
   Covariates                     No               Yes             No                 Yes                Yes                Yes
   Outcome Mean                   1.11             -1.11         1.08              -1.20                 0.94            -0.95
   Adjusted R2                   0.894             0.931         0.850             0.924                0.990            0.900
   Observations                1,617,314         1,617,314      313,893           313,893              112,325          112,325
 Notes: The unit of observation is a drug-pharmacy-month. For the period prior to January 2016, data is at the semi-annual
level and the unit of observation is a drug-pharmacy-semi-year. The outcome is the price per unit (pill, milliliter, or gram de-
pending on the product). Covariates include nightlights, population density, and census municipality characteristics interacted
with year. Standard errors clustered at the Pharmacy×Drug level in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                              63
                                        Table A-17
            Effect of Non-Aggression Pact on Distributor Pharmaceutical Margins

                                       Margin         log(Margin)     Amount         log(Amount)
            NonAggrt × Compd            6.346            0.106          4.303            0.133
                                       (4.483)          (0.078)        (2.436)          (0.080)

            Municipality FEs             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
            Retailer FEs                 Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
            Month FEs                    Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
            Covariates                   Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
            Outcome Mean                19.24             1.60          140.29           3.47
            Adjusted R2                 0.175            0.421          0.996           0.474
            Observations               639,151          629,112        639,151         639,151
          Notes: Distributor margin is defined as the difference between wholesale price and man-
         ufacturer price. All specifications include municipality fixed effects, month fixed effects,
         retailer fixed effects, and controls for nightlights, population density, and census munic-
         ipality characteristics interacted with year. Standard errors clustered at the municipality
         level in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                       Table A-18
             Effect of Non-Aggression Pact on Consumer Prices at Pharmacies
                                   By Drug Categories

                                 Diabetes Drugs             Hypertension Drugs          Coronary Drugs
                               Price     log(Price)         Price     log(Price)      Price       log(Price)
  NonAggrt × Compd             0.024        0.055            0.014      0.122         0.011         0.079
                             (0.009)       (0.023)          (0.017)    (0.058)       (0.010)       (0.033)

  Municipality FEs             Yes             Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes              Yes
  Drug FEs                     Yes             Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes              Yes
  Month FEs                    Yes             Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes              Yes
  Covariates                   Yes             Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes              Yes
  Outcome Mean                0.97          -1.10            1.48       -0.38         0.84          -0.87
  Adjusted R2                0.982         0.877            0.952      0.778         0.946          0.770
  Observations               56,820        56,820           23,169     23,169        53,863        53,863
 Notes: The unit of observation is a drug-pharmacy-month. For the period prior to January 2016, data is at
the semi-annual level and the unit of observation is a drug-pharmacy-semi-year. The outcome is the price
per unit (pill, milliliter, or gram depending on the product). Specifications include controls for nightlights,
population density, and census municipality characteristics interacted with year. Standard errors clustered
at the municipality level in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                       64
                                                                          Table A-19
                                                       Effect of Non-Aggression Pact on Hospital Visits
                                                                Additional Diagnosis Categories

                                                              Diabetes Diagnosis         Hypertension Diagnosis                                Coronary Diagnosis
                                                              Visits          Visits     Visits                             Visits             Visits               Visits
                              NonAggrt × Compd                 0.117          0.122      0.030                               0.018             0.077             0.092
                                                             (0.032)          (0.030)   (0.057)                             (0.054)           (0.074)           (0.065)

                              Municipality FEs                  Yes            Yes                 Yes                       Yes                 Yes                 Yes
                              Month FEs                         Yes            Yes                 Yes                       Yes                 Yes                 Yes
                              Covariates                        No             Yes                 No                        Yes                 No                  Yes
                              Outcome Mean                      1.72           1.72       4.69                               4.69               1.34                 1.34
                              Observations                     4,588          4,588      4,588                              4,588              4,557                4,557
                              Clusters                          148            148        148                                148                147                  147
                           Notes: Results from Poisson regressions in which the outcome is the number of visits in a municipality-
                          month. Covariates include nightlights, population density, and census municipality characteristics inter-
                          acted with year. Standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05,
                          *** p < 0.01.




                                                                Figure A-14
                                     Effect of Non-Aggression Pact on Drug Prices and Associated Visits
                                                              Dynamic Effects


                      0.30
                                                                                                               0.20



                      0.20
                                                                                                               0.10
Effect (log points)




                                                                                         Effect (log points)




                      0.10
                                                                                                               0.00



                      0.00                                                                                     -0.10



                      -0.10                                                                                    -0.20
                                -4       -2          0         2          4      6                                     -2         0             2            4               6
                                          Quarters Since Nonaggression Pact                                                     Quarters Since Nonaggression Pact




                                            a. Drug Prices                                                                      b. Hospital Visits

                      Notes: Shows point estimates for each period using the difference-in-difference model. Fig-
                      ure a. shows the effect on pharmaceutical prices. Figure b. shows the effect on hospital
                      visits for chronic conditions affected by drug adherence. The omitted period is the quarter
                      prior to the start of the non-aggression pact between MS-13 and Barrio 18. Standard errors
                      are clustered at the municipality level. All specifications include municipality fixed effects,
                      month fixed effects, and controls for nightlights, population density, and census municipal-
                      ity characteristics interacted with year. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals using
                      standard errors clustered at the municipality level.




                                                                                        65
D    Canton Level Analysis of Non-Aggression Pact

                                           Figure A-15
                   Extortion, Homicides, and Gang Competition Across Cantons




                 a. Average Extortion Payment                                        b. Total Extortion




                        c. Yearly Homicides                                            d. Gang HHI

    Notes: Gang HHI defined using MS-13 and Barrio-18 homicides.


                                                        Table A-20
                                         Effect of Non-Aggression Pact on Extortion
                                      using Gang Competition Defined at Canton Level

                             Extortion       log(Extortion)      Extortion       log(Extortion)      Extortion      log(Extortion)
    NonAggrt × Compd           2.044             0.175             1.927             0.116             1.792             0.096
                              (0.935)           (0.076)           (0.778)           (0.079)           (0.526)           (0.051)

    Municipality FEs            Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
    Month FEs                   Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
    Route FEs                   No                No                No                No                Yes               Yes
    Covariates                  No                No                Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
    Outcome Mean                8.39              1.68             8.39              1.68              8.39              1.68
    Adjusted R2                0.147              0.193           0.164              0.223            0.246              0.333
    Observations               13,486            13,486           13,486            13,486            13,484            13,484
 Notes: The unit of observation is an extortion payment. Covariates include nightlights, population density, and census municipality
characteristics interacted with year. Standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, ***
p < 0.01.




                                                                 66
                                                             Figure A-16
                                            Delivery Frequencies and Values Across Cantons




                                    a. Number of Deliveries                                                                 b. Deliveries Per Month




                                     c. Total Delivery Value                                                           d. Monthly Delivery Value

              Notes: Shows number of deliveries, deliveries per month, total delivery value, and monthly
              value by canton using geocoded addresses from the distributor sales data over the period
              2012 to 2019.

                                                              Figure A-17
                                                    Extortion by Gang Competition
                                            using Gang Competition Defined at Canton Level


                        14                                                                                      0.3

                        12
Mean Extortion Amount




                                                                                                                0.2
                        10
                                                                                          Effect (log points)




                        8
                                                                                                                0.1
                        6

                        4
                                                                                                                0.0

                        2

                         0                                                                                      -0.1
                        2015m7   2016m1          2016m7         2017m1          2017m7                                 -2         0           2           4          6   8
                                                   Month                                                                         Quarters Since Nonaggression Pact
                                   Competition             Low/No Competition



                                          a. Trends                                                                             b. Effect by Quarter

              Notes: Vertical line shows start of non-aggression pact (April 2016). Figure a. shows mean
              extortion amounts paid across cantons with gang competition and without gang compe-
              tition as defined by the homicide Herfindahl­Hirschman Index. Figure b. shows point
              estimates for each quarter using the difference-in-difference specification (6) at the canton
              level. The omitted period is the quarter prior to the start of the non-aggression pact be-
              tween MS-13 and Barrio 18. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals using standard
              errors clustered at the canton level.


                                                                                         67
                                           Table A-21
                          Effect of Extortion on Distribution Margin
                    Instrumental Variable Difference-in-Difference Model
                      using Gang Competition Defined at Canton Level

                                  Reduced-Form                First-Stage               IVDD
                           Distributor                                       Distributor
                            Margin          log(Margin)       Extortion       Margin         log(Margin)
                                               Nearest Sale
  NonAggrt × Compd             1.394           0.154            1.892
                              (0.757)         (0.042)          (0.330)
  Extortion                                                                     0.737           0.082
                                                                               (0.189)         (0.020)

  Outcome Mean                 4.40            1.06             7.81            4.40             1.06
  Adjusted R2                  0.570           0.451            0.474
  F-Stat                                                                        31.1             31.1
  Observations                27,750           27,750           27,750         27,750           27,750
                                             Sale within 1km
  NonAggrt × Compd             0.589           0.076            2.313
                              (0.126)         (0.028)          (0.677)
  Extortion                                                                     0.255           0.033
                                                                               (0.073)         (0.011)

  Outcome Mean                 4.01            1.02             8.66            4.01             1.02
  Adjusted R2                  0.459           0.452            0.582
  F-Stat                                                                        57.3             57.3
  Observations                37,753           37,753           37,753         37,753           37,753
                                             Sale within 5km
  NonAggrt × Compd             0.358           0.064            1.603
                              (0.143)         (0.028)          (0.419)
  Extortion                                                                     0.224           0.040
                                                                               (0.053)         (0.009)


  Outcome Mean                 3.89            1.01             8.88            3.89             1.01
  Adjusted R2                  0.489           0.438            0.302
  F-Stat                                                                        56.8             56.8
  Observations               136,333          136,333          136,333        136,333          136,333
 Notes: Distributor margin is defined as the difference between wholesale price and manufacturer price.
All specifications include municipality fixed effects, month fixed effects, retailer fixed effects, and con-
trols for nightlights, population density, and census municipality characteristics interacted with year.
Standard errors clustered at the route level in parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                    68
