                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                PARALLEL DIGITAL CURRENCIES AND STICKY PRICES

                                          Harald Uhlig
                                           Taojun Xie

                                       Working Paper 28300
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28300


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2020




We thank participants at the CEPR-Bank of Finland Joint Conference 2020 for helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Harald Uhlig and Taojun Xie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Parallel Digital Currencies and Sticky Prices
Harald Uhlig and Taojun Xie
NBER Working Paper No. 28300
December 2020
JEL No. E30,E52

                                          ABSTRACT

The recent rise of digital currencies opens the door to their use in parallel alongside official
currencies ("dollar'') for pricing and transactions. We construct a simple New Keynesian
framework with parallel currencies as pricing units and sticky prices. Relative prices become a
state variable. Exchange rate shocks can arise even without other sources of uncertainty. A one-
time exchange rate appreciation for a parallel currency leads to persistent redistribution towards
the dollar sector and dollar inflation. The share of the non-dollar sector increases when prices in
the dollar sector become less sticky and when firms can choose the pricing currency.


Harald Uhlig
Dept. of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and CEPR
and also NBER
huhlig@uchicago.edu

Taojun Xie
Asia Competitiveness Institute
Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy
National University of Singapore
18 Evans Road
Singapore 259364
tjxie@nus.edu.sg
1     Introduction
The proliferation of cryptocurrencies and digital payment facilities has facilitated trans-
actions in various currencies. Some currencies are pegged to the official one, such as
bank deposits and stablecoins, while some are not, such as reward points and cryptocur-
rencies. Others such as Diem are somewhere in between. This raises several issues and
concerns. In this paper, we examine the role of these currencies as a unit of account,
i.e., the possibilities that firms may choose to price their products in one of several avail-
able currencies. With sticky prices in these currencies, new phenomena and implications
for monetary policy arise. To examine these issues, we extend a basic New Keynesian
(NK) framework as described in Gal´     i (2015) by allowing for multiple parallel currencies.
The classic exchange rate indeterminacy result by Kareken and Wallace (1981) applied
to our framework then implies that exogenous exchange rate shocks can arise, even if
there are no other sources of uncertainty. These exchange rate shocks in turn have real
consequences due to the stickiness of prices.
     Our focus lies in the macroeconomic implications and monetary policy consequences
of these exchange rate shocks. On purpose, we take a bird's-eye view with respect to the
underlying technology and abstract from otherwise important details such as blockchain
implementation, consensus formation, reliability and regulation. While the analysis here
may also be applied to the situation of dollarization in some developing countries, it is
most suited to the examination of the future use of private cryptocurrencies in advanced
countries: central banks there are committed to low inflation and the value of the pri-
vate cryptocurrency may fluctuate for random reasons outside the control of some other
government agency such as a foreign central bank.
     By nature, this is a forward-looking paper. Currently, the regulatory framework for
private cryptocurrencies is still under much debate, and regulators so far seem to push
against their widespread introduction. The technology and inherent possibilities are in-
triguing enough, however, that more widespread adoption of private cryptocurrencies may
well still come to pass. It is therefore important to examine the resulting macroeconomic
effects and challenges to monetary policy ahead of time.
     Our primary finding is that exchange rate shocks among these parallel currencies add
a new source of macroeconomic volatility More specifically, a one-time appreciation
of the non-official currency will lead to a persistent expansion in the sector using the
official currency and a persistent decline in the nominal interest rate, with some caveats
concerning the initial period and the details of the monetary policy rule. It is worth
highlighting three key results. First, the nominal exchange rate between any pair of par-
allel currencies is a random-walk process, given that all currencies are perfect substitutes


                                              2
in providing liquidity services. Second, the price in each currency sector relative to the
general price level is a state variable in an NK economy. This is a consequence of price
rigidity that delays the process of prices converging to their desired levels after an ex-
change rate shock. The relative price also explains the persistent distributional output
effects and the sectoral inflation dynamics. Third, an exchange rate shock is not neutral
if it arises from a currency sector in which price adjustments are infrequent.
     We finally endogenize the currency choice using a discrete choice model building on
McFadden (1974) and examine the consequences of a change in price rigidity. We find
that an increase of the price flexibility in the dollar sector leads to a persistent increase
of the output in the non-dollar sector as a share of the economy, as well as vice versa. An
flexibility increase in either sector induces a persistent fall in the nominal interest rate
and aggregate inflation because it induces a persistent boost of the output gap.
     Our paper advances the literature in a number of ways. Perhaps the paper closest
to ours is Gopinath et al. (2020). Like us, they consider the issue of pricing in different
currencies and the macroeconomic and monetary policy consequences in an NK frame-
work. Different from them, we examine the consequences of parallel currencies within
the same country rather than issues of international trade. The parallel currencies may
not be under the control of a foreign central bank and may be subject to exogenous
exchange rate shocks, in contrast to the analysis in Gopinath et al. (2020). To the best
of our knowledge, we are the first to examine the consequences in the context of a New
Keynesian model. Our analysis of the endogenous choice of a currency extends beyond
Gopinath et al. (2010), allowing for random preferences and providing an interior solution
rather than an either-or choice as in their paper.
     More broadly, this paper contributes to are three strands of the literature. The
most closely related is the emerging literature on the economics of private monies and
cryptocurrencies. Following the rise of bitcoin and blockchain technology, the recent
macroeconomic-oriented literature, such as Berentsen (1998), Chiu and Koeppl (2019),
Garratt and Wallace (2018), Brunnermeier and Niepelt (2019), Fern´     andez-Villaverde and
Sanches (2019), Schilling and Uhlig (2019b), Schilling and Uhlig (2019a), Benigno (2019),
Biais et al. (2020), Baughman and Flemming (2020) and Benigno et al. (2019), has
analyzed cryptocurrencies by focusing on their role as a medium of exchange. By contrast,
we focus on the unit-of-account role of currencies, i.e., their role in pricing decisions by
producers. The literature on cryptocurrencies is considerably broader, of course, touching
on many issues outside the analysis here: for an excellent book treatment, see Sch¨    ar and
Berentsen (2020). Asimakopoulos et al. (2019); Barrdear and Kumhof (2016); George
et al. (2020); Grossa and Schillerb (2020); Ferrari et al. (2020) construct or estimate NK
DSGE models with both private and central bank cryptocurrencies as competing media


                                             3
of exchange. Schilling and Uhlig (2019b) emphasize the random walk nature of exchange
rates, building on the classic contributions by Kareken and Wallace (1981) and Manuelli
and Peck (1990). This gives rise to the key shock that is the focus of much of our analysis.
Our paper is related to the literature on currency substitution, with classic contributions
by Girton and Roper (1981) and Matsuyama et al. (1993). Gopinath et al. (2010) examine
endogenous choice between local currency pricing and producer currency pricing: we build
on that analysis in Section 7. Like us, Adrian and Mancini-Griffoli (2019), Duffie (2019)
and Brunnermeier et al. (2019) stress the increased currency competition arising from
the digitalization of money. The third strand of the literature is the multi-sector NK
framework such as Cienfuegos (2019), Barsky et al. (2007), Sterk (2010), Pasten et al.
(2018) and Rubbo (2020). While these papers focus on sector-specific technology shocks
and network effects in the presence of s a single currency, our focus is on exchange rate
shocks in the presence of multiple currencies. For ease of exposition, we have chosen to
abstract from network considerations in our analysis..
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the model
setup for our analyses. Section 3 presents the key linearized equations. Section 4 discusses
two baseline cases, including dynamics under homogeneous price rigidity and with one
flexible-price sector. Section 5 analyzes equilibrium dynamics under three alternative
Taylor rules in detail. Section 6 relaxes the assumption of homogeneous price rigidity.
Section 7 allows endogenous currency choice and examines transition dynamics as price
rigidity changes. Section 8 concludes.


2     The Model
The model extends the basic NK framework presented in Chapter 3 of Gal´     i (2015). We
introduce two departures. First, multiple types of money provide liquidity services to
households. This is modelled with a money-in-utility setup. Particularly, all monies are
perfect substitutes in providing liquidity services. Second, different firms fix prices in
different currencies. As a result, firms have to consider exchange rate dynamics when
setting the optimal price, in contrast to a conventional NK setup. In consequence, the
monetary policy rule can take a variety of forms.


2.1    Currencies and Price Indices
There is a total of J parallel currencies circulating in the economy. Each currency j has
money supply Mj,t in period t. Among them, there is one centralized currency, the money
supply of which is managed by a central bank and J - 1 currencies, which are created by


                                             4
private entities. Without loss of generality, the centralized currency is indexed by j = 1,
and is named dollar. The price of currency j in terms of the dollar in period t or exchange
rate is denoted by Ej,t . The price of currency j in terms of a different currency j can
then be calculated as the ratio between Ej,t and Ej ,t . For formal reasons, we also define
the exchange rate of a dollar to a dollar per E1,t = 1.
    There is a continuum of goods i  [0, 1], each produced by a monopolistically com-
petitive firm i  [0, 1]. Each firm fixes its price in only one of the J currencies. Let
(V1,t , . . . , VJ,t ) be a partition of [0, 1] and let j,t be the measure of set Vj,t . We assume
that firm i  Vj,t fixes or has fixed the price for its good in units of currency j , up to date
t. For now, we shall consider this partition evolution as exogenously given, but return to
the issue of currency choice in Section 7. The price set by firm i in currency j is denoted
by Pt (i). Despite the choice of pricing currency, the firm is always willing to accept any
other parallel currency at the prevailing exchange rate. All firms i  Vj,t pricing in the
same currency form a sector with the same index as the currency.
    Define a sectoral price index for sector j , i.e., for all firms pricing in currency j , per
                                               1
                                              1-
              1
      Pj,t                      Pt (i)1- di                                                   (1)
              j,t        Vj,t


It follows that the general price index, expressed in terms of the dollar and defined per
                                                        1
                J                                      1-

      Pt                      (Ej,t Pt (i))1- di                                              (2)
               j =1    Vj,t


is a composite of the sectoral price indices
                                               1
                J                             1-

      Pt =            j,t (Ej,t Pj,t )1-           .                                          (3)
               j =1


We let

               Pt
      t 
              Pt-1

denote the general price inflation. Although the general price index and the dollar-sector
price index are both expressed in terms of the dollar, their values are not necessarily the
same. Only in the limiting case when all firms price in dollars, 1  1, the general price
index is identical to the sectoral one, Pt = P1,t . We define the relative price between the




                                                            5
price in sector j and the general price level to be

      ^j,t = Ej,t Pj,t ,
      P                                                                                     (4)
               Pt

which is an indicator of the respective currency's purchasing power, with a higher value
corresponding to a weaker purchasing power. From the equation above, a weak purchasing
power of currency j is associated with its depreciation and a higher sectoral price, or an
appreciation and lower sectoral price of a different currency. The relative price P  ^j,t can
also be interpreted as the real effective exchange rate of currency j . Similarly, we define
the bilateral relative price Sjj ,t between two sectors j and j as

                   Ej,t Pj,t
      Sjj ,t =                                                                              (5)
                  Ej ,t Pj ,t

2.2    Households
A representative household's lifetime utility is a discounted flow of the period utility
function of consumption bundle Ct , real money balances or liquidity Lt , and labor supply
Nt , subject to an exogenous preference shock Zt . We use a simple money-in-the-utility
function for our purposes: the precise way win which money matters is not of particular
importance for our analysis. Formally,
           
      E0          t u (Ct , Lt , Nt ) Zt                                                    (6)
           t=0


where Et is the expectation operator and  < 1 is the discount factor. The period utility
function is
                           1-          -
                           Ct -1 + L1t   -1    1+
                                              Nt
                                            - 1+  if  = 1
                             1-       1-         
      u (Ct , Lt , Nt ) =          1-         1+                                     (7)
                          log C + Lt -1 - Nt      if  =  1
                                t   1-       1+


The consumption bundle Ct is an aggregation of the various consumption goods
                                                                                       
                                                    J                                  -1
                                1         -1                                 1
                             1-                                           1- 
      Ct            Ct (i)          di         =                 Ct (i)          di         (8)
                                                   j =1   Vj,t


where Ct (i) is the consumption of variety i. The liquidity Lt is the real value of the
nominal balances Mj,t , j = 1, . . . , J , assumed to provide perfect substitutes in providing




                                                                  6
liquidity services:

                  J
                                                       Ej,t Mj,t
        Lt              Lj,t     where Lj,t                                                                         (9)
                 j =1
                                                          Pt

The representative household maximizes lifetime utility in Eq. (6) over choices (Ct (i))i[0,1] ,
(Mj,t )J
       j =1 , Bt and Nt subject to the sequence of nominal period budget constraints


  J                                             J                                      J
               Ej,t Pt (i)Ct (i)di +Bt +              Ej,t Mj,t = exp(it-1 ) Bt-1 +          Ej,t Mj,t-1 +Pt Wt Nt +Pt t
 j =1   Vj,t                                   j =1                                   j =1
                                                                                                                   (10)

where Bt is the holding of nominal government bonds at the end of period t, taking as
given the dollar-denominated nominal rate of return it on bonds, the real wage Wt and
the real dividends from the firms t .
    The maximization problem of the household gives to the good-specific demand func-
tions
                                     -
                 Ej,t Pt (i)
        Ct (i) =                          Ct     for i  Vj,t                                                       (11)
                     Pt

where we additionally needed to take the conversion into the official currency into account.
With that, the budget constraint Eq. (10) can be written in terms of choices Ct , (Lj,t )J
                                                                                         j =1 ,
Bt and Nt as

                           J                                           J
                 Bt                       exp(it-1 ) Bt-1                  Lj,t-1 Ej,t
        Ct +        +            Lj,t =                   +                            + Wt Nt + t                 (12)
                 Pt       j =1
                                             t       Pt-1          j =1
                                                                            t Ej,t-1


2.3       Firms
Each firm i in the unit interval produces a differentiated good. The production function
of a firm has the form

        Yt (i) = At Nt (i)1-                                                                                       (13)

where At is an exogenous level of technology common to all firms.
     The price-setting process follows Calvo (1983). In each period t, each firm in set Vk,t-1
resets its price with probability 1 - k and otherwise continues to be part of the set Vk,t .
Given an opportunity to reset its price, assume that the firm i is now part of the set
                                       
Vj,t , i.e., sets a new optimal price Pj,t in currency j . This optimal price solves the profit


                                                                   7
maximization problem:
                                               
                                        Ej,t+ Pj,t
      max            j Et Qt,t+                    Yt+ (i) - t+ (Yt+ (i))                                             (14)
       
      Pj,t
              =0
                                          Pt+k

subject to the demand function
                                        -
                          Ej,t+ Pj,t
      Yt+ (i) =                                 Yt+                                                                   (15)
                            Pt+

where Qt,t+ is a stochastic discount factor, and t+ (·) is the real total cost of production.


2.4    Monetary Policy
Monetary policy is governed by a Taylor rule in inflation and the output gap, where
inflation and/or the output gap may refer to the economy as a whole or the dollar sector
only. We state the precise formulation after loglinearizing our model, see subsections 3.4
and 3.5.


2.5    Equilibrium
In equilibrium, both the goods and labor markets clear. All goods produced by firm i
are consumed by households:

      Yt (i) = Ct (i)                                                                                                 (16)
                                                                                      
                                                                            1         -1
                                                                         1- 
Define the aggregate output Yt =                        [0,1]
                                                                Yt (i)          di         . Then the aggregate output and
consumption are equal:

      Yt = C t .                                                                                                      (17)

Aggregating labor demand across all firms leads to
                                                                                             1
                     1                     1
                                                               1                Yt Dt       1-
      Ntd =              Nt (i)di =            (Yt (i)/At )   1-   di =                                               (18)
                 0                     0                                         At

where we define the price dispersion Dt as

                     J                                           1-
                                                   - 1-
                                  Ej,t Pt (i)           
      Dt                                                   di
                 j =1      Vj,t       Pt



                                                                    8
The labor market clearing condition is then

      Nt = Ntd                                                                        (19)




3     Linearization
We log-linearize the model presented in Section 2 around the zero-inflation steady state.
Unless otherwise stated, lower cases are used to denote the deviations from the logarithmic
steady states of the upper-cased variables. Detailed derivations are shown in Section B.
For ease of exposition, we assume from now until Section 7 that the sets of firms Vj,t
pricing in currency j are independent of time, Vj,t  Vt and thus j,t = j . Section B
contains more detailed derivations of the results here.


3.1    exchange rate dynamics
Proposition 1. The exchange rate between any pair of parallel currencies j and j follows
a random-walk process:

      ej,t - ej ,t = Et [ej,t+1 - ej ,t+1 ] .                                         (20)

Proof. See Section A.1.

    Proposition 1 is a version of the fundamental equation presented in Schilling and Uhlig
(2019b) or the exchange rate indeterminacy equations in Kareken and Wallace (1981),
Manuelli and Peck (1990) and Benigno et al. (2019), employing log-linearization and
generalized to our context with any number of currencies. In particular, the exchange
rate between currency j and the dollar is a martingale, up to first order:

      ej,t = Et [ej,t+1 ] .                                                           (21)

Without further restrictions, the martingale difference representing the exchange rate
shock

      ej,t = ej,t - ej,t-1

is an exogenous random variable not usually present in New Keynesian macroeconomic
models. The main focus of our analysis is to examine the macroeconomic and monetary


                                                9
policy consequences of these exchange rate shocks. Additional restrictions may arise from
additional modelling assumptions. One possibility is that currency j is meant to represent
a stablecoin with a consortium credibly maintaining a fixed exchange rate to the dollar,
then ej,t  0. Another possibility is that currency j is the official currency of a foreign
central bank. We wish to keep the analysis general, however, and thus we shall treat
ej,t as an exogenous random variable from here on.


3.2    Sectoral price dynamics and NKPC's
The following derivations are rather standard in the NK literature, but they need to be
done with some care in order to keep track of where and how sectoral differences and
exchange rates enter. It is thus worth stating the key details here and providing all
remaining details in the appndix. In Section B, we show that, when prices are flexible in
sector j , j  0, firms set prices to the desired levels given by

      ~j,t =  mct + pt - ej,t ,
      p                                                                                    (22)

where the log-linearized real marginal cost mct is given in Eq. (B.21) and where  
   1-
1-+
        . Use p                                                              ~t   mct +
               ~t to represent the component independent of currency choice, p
pt . Eq. (22) shows that all desired prices are the same when converted into dollars:

      p
      ~j,t + ej,t = p
                    ~t   for all j = 1, ..., J                                             (23)

Eq. (22) together with Eq. (B.52) yields

                                      +                 +1
      pj,t - p      ^j,t - 
             ~j,t = p             +              yt -      at                              (24)
                                      1-                1-

where the relative price of sector j is defined as p ^j,t  pj,t + ej,t - pt . From Eq. (24), the
price markup can be expressed in terms of the output gap and the relative price. When
prices are flexible in all sectors, all firms price at the same desired level. In this case,
                                                                           n
pj,t = p
       ~j,t , p
              ^j,t = 0, and the aggregate output is at its natural level yt  . Eq. (24) becomes:


                         +         n     +1
      0 = -        +              yt -      at                                             (25)
                         1-              1-

   When prices are sticky, the first-order condition of the firm's profit-maximizing prob-
lem implies that the optimal price set by a firm pricing in currency j is given by a




                                                  10
forward-looking function of future desired prices:
                          
      pj,t   = (1 - j )                 pj,t+ ] = (1 - j )~
                               (j ) Et [~                 pj,t + j Et [pj,t+1 ]           (26)
                          =0


Using the fact that the sectoral price level is the weighted average between its past value
and the optimal price, pj,t = j pj,t-1 + (1 - j ) p j,t , we can express the sectoral inflation
in terms of its expected value one period ahead, and a deviation from the desired price:

      j,t =  Et [j,t+1 ] - j (pj,t - p
                                     ~j,t )                                               (27)

where

              (1 - j ) (1 - j )
      j                                                                                   (28)
                      j

We note that j is decreasing in j .
   Taking the difference between Eqs. (24) and (25) provides an expression for the price
deviation in terms of the sector's relative price and the output gap:

                                      +
      pj,t - p      ^j,t - 
             ~j,t = p            +             y
                                               ~t                                         (29)
                                      1-

Plug this into Eq. (27). The NKPC for sector j is then an equation of its expected value
for the next period, the output gap, and the sectoral relative price.

                             ~t - j p
      j,t =  Et [j,t+1 ] + j y      ^j,t                                                  (30)

where

                          +
      j  j          +                                                                     (31)
                          1-

We note that j is decreaasing in j via j . Two distinctive features are worth empha-
sizing. First, sectoral inflation is influenced by the aggregate output gap, not just the
sectoral one. Second, there is an additional term on the relative price in the sectoral
NKPC. Both features are signs of network effects across currency sectors.




                                                    11
3.3    Output-gap dynamics and the dynamic IS curve
The dynamic IS equation is the same as the one in a standard NK framework, which is
derived from households' Euler equation and the market clearing condition:

                           1 ^                  n
      y        yt+1 ] -
      ~t = Et [~             it - Et [t+1 ] - r
                                              ^t  ,                                        (32)
                           

where ^it is the deviation of the nominal interest rate from its steady state, and r   n
                                                                                      ^t is
the natural rate of interest, which is a linear combination of productivity and preference
shocks

        n
      r
      ^t  = - (1 - a ) ya at + (1 - z ) zt .                                               (33)

The real interest rate is defined as the nominal interest rate adjusted for expected infla-
tion:

      ^t = ^
      r    it - Et [t+1 ].                                                                 (34)

From the demand equations for sectoral consumption goods, the sectoral output is given
                                                               n      n
by yj,t = - p^j,t + yt . With flexible prices in all sectors, yj,t = yt . When prices are rigid,
the sectoral output gap is given by

      ~j,t = - p
      y        ^j,t + y
                      ~t                                                                   (35)


3.4    Key equations
We use bold fonts to symbolize J × 1 vectors of sectoral parameters and variables. In
particular,

           [1 , 2 , ..., J ]
           [1 , 2 , ..., J ]
           [1 , 2 , ..., J ]
        t  [1,t , 2,t , ..., J,t ]
        ^t  [^
        p    p1,t , p
                    ^2,t , ..., p
                                ^J,t ]
        ~t  [~
        y    y1,t , y
                    ~2,t , ..., y
                                ~J,t ]
      et  [e1,t , e2,t , ..., eJ,t ]




                                                  12
From its definition, the general price inflation can be expressed as a vector product
between the sizes of the currency sectors and the exchange rate-adjusted sectoral inflation:



        t =  (t + et ) .                                                                 (36)

The random-walk process of the exchange rates Eq. (21) implies that the vector of ex-
pected value in the next period is Et [et+1 ] = 0, so that the one-period-ahead expected
inflation is

        Et [t+1 ] =  Et [t+1 ] .                                                         (37)

We can then express our NK framework with J parallel currencies using the following
(3J + 2)-equation system, which includes a general Taylor rule

        y        yt+1 ] -  -1 ^
        ~t = Et [~                               n
                              it -  Et [t+1 ] - rt                                       (38)

                          ~t -   p
        t =  Et [t+1 ] +  y      ^t                                                      (39)
        ~t = - p
        y      ^t + y
                    ~t                                                                   (40)
             ^t-1 + (I - 1  ) (t + et )
        ^t = p
        p                                                                                (41)
        ^
        it =  (t + et ) + y y
                            ~t                                                           (42)

where  is an operator for element-wise multiplication and where  and y are the
vectors of Taylor rule cofficients on the various sectoral inflation rates and output gaps.
We note that Eq. (41) implies that  p      ^t = 0, provided this was true in t - 1. We shall
assume so throughout. With that, Eq. (40) implies  y      ~t = y
                                                               ~t .
     The main difference of this NK framework with J parallel currencies from the one in
Gal´ i (2015) lies in the fact in that an exchange rate shock in any sector spills over to the
aggregate economy. An unexpected one-time appreciation of currency j leads to a higher
price in sector j and a higher general price level. The relative price is higher in sector
j , but those in all the other sectors are lower, as seen from Eq. (41). Demand for goods
sold by sector j is now relatively lower, leading to lower inflation in sector j but higher
inflation elsewhere.
     In addition, Eq. (41) shows that a one-time exchange rate shock1 has nonetheless
persistent effects. Due to the infrequent price adjustments, in each period, only a fraction
of the firms can optimize their prices in response to the exchange rate shock. Therefore
deviations in relative prices decline only gradually over time, as firms reset their prices.
  1
      A one-time exchange rate shock leads to a permanent change in the exchange rate.



                                                  13
   These key equations are similar to the NK framework with a production network
presented in Cienfuegos (2019). In particular, the relative prices are state variables of the
economy. Although we do not discuss the production network in this paper, an exchange
rate shock also leads to a network effect on the relative prices of all sectors of the economy.
   From Eqs. (36) and (39), we derive the generalized aggregate inflation:

                         ~t -  (  p
      t =  Et [t+1 ] +   y        ^t ) +  et                                              (43)

Both the sectoral relative prices and the exchange rates influence aggregate inflation. The
extents of such influences are contingent on the sizes of the respective currency sectors.


3.5    Three Taylor Rules: AIAO, DIAO and DIDO.
Equation (42) allows for considerable flexibility in specifying the monetary policy rule.
We shall focus on three variants in particular. The first variant entails a nominal in-
terest rate responding to Aggregate Inflation and the Aggregate Output gap (AIAO)
per  =   and y = y  for some   I                     R, y  I  R. We shall show that this
NK framework differs from the one in the standard literature only in the existence of
an exchange rate disturbance in the NKPC, under the assumption of homogeneous price
rigidity; see Section 5. For that reason, we choose this to be our baseline Taylor rule
and benchmark.
    In the second variant, the nominal interest rate responds to the Dollar-sector Inflation
and Aggregate Output gap (DIAO), where now  =  [1, 0, 0, ..., 0]. This may be a
more appealing choice, as it makes the central bank responsible for the dollar inflation,
as often enshrined by law, but concerned with the whole economy. The last variant
features a nominal interest rate responding to the Dollar-sector Inflation and Dollar-
sector Output (DIDO), where now also y = y [1, 0, 0, ..., 0]. This assumes that the
central bank only responds to economic dynamics in the dollar sector. This can be
justified if the non-Dollar sector is considered to be a shadow economy outside a legal or
regulatory framework, or if law makers and the central bank simply decide to not concern
themselves with macroeconomic developments outside the dollar-denominated sector.


4     Baseline Cases
We present two baseline cases with regard to the impacts of an exchange rate shock.
The first one is when price rigidity is homogeneous across all currency sectors. In such a
case, the model economy deviates from a conventional one only in the presence of parallel
currencies, hence the existence of exchange rates. We are then able to focus exclusively

                                              14
on the role of the exchange rate shock in driving economic dynamics. The second case
is when prices are flexible in one currency sector while being rigid in the others. This
case presents a special scenario in which the exchange rate shock's impacts are muted.
In other words, the exchange rate shock is neutral.


4.1    Homogeneous price rigidity
We summarize the bilateral associations in an economy with homogeneous price rigidity
with the following proposition. Let sjj ,t denote the log-deviation of the relative price
Sjj ,t defined in Eq. (5).

Proposition 2. Between any two sectors j and j with homogeneous price rigidity ,

  1. the optimal prices in both sectors are equivalent, p              
                                                         j,t + ej,t = pj ,t + ej ,t ;


  2. the bilateral relative price is an autoregressive process, sjj ,t =  (sjj ,t-1 + ej,t - ej ,t );

  3. the inflation differential is linear in the bilateral relative price, j,t -j ,t = - 1-
                                                                                          
                                                                                            
                                                                                             sjj ,t ;

                                                                            ~j,t - y
  4. the output-gap differential is linear in the bilateral relative price, y      ~j ,t =
     - sjj ,t .

Proof. See Section A.2.

    The first result is parallel to Proposition 1 of Gopinath et al. (2010), which states that
local currency pricing and producer currency pricing are equivalent. We argue here that
while different choices of pricing currencies end up with an equivalent price in the baseline
case of homogeneous price rigidity, this result may not hold when price rigidities differ
across the currency sectors, except when the expected desired price level is constant.
    The second to the fourth results state that the bilateral relative price is a state vari-
able for inter-sector differentials in inflation and output gaps. These differentials arise
regardless of the choice of monetary policy, as no assumption on the monetary policy is
needed to arrive at these conclusions. Instead, price rigidity is the only characteristic of
the economy that causes the different inflation dynamics between any pair of currency
sectors. The output gap differential is influenced by the elasticity of substitution, in ad-
dition to price rigidity. From the negative signs, the sector that experiences a currency
appreciation always produces less output and has lower inflation, as compared to a sector
with no currency appreciation.
    Two scenarios are relevant to Proposition 2. The first scenario is when currency j
experiences an appreciation, while currency j does not. In the period of an unexpected
appreciation of currency j , the dollar-denominated prices of sector-j products deviate

                                                15
above their desired levels. The price in sector j , relative to that in sector j , becomes
higher. Demand for the sectoral goods changes as it is sensitive to relative prices. The
second scenario is when both currencies j and j do not experience an appreciation.
Suppose that the exchange rate shock does not arise from either of the two currencies,
but a third currency. The inflation and output-gap dynamics are identical between sectors
j and j .
    Extending the assumption of homogeneous price rigidity to the aggregate economy,
we arrive at an NKPC that is similar to the one in Gal´   i (2015). We present this NKPC
in the following proposition.

Proposition 3. The new Keynesian Phillips curve for aggregate inflation is independent
of the relative price dynamics if price rigidity is homogeneous across all currency sectors:



      t =  Et [t+1 ] +  y
                        ~t +  et                                                       (44)




Proof. See Section A.3.

    Proposition 3 posits that when price rigidity is homogeneous, the net effect of sectoral
prices on aggregate inflation is zero.


4.2    Dynamics in a flexible sector
The second baseline case we analyse considers a currency sector with flexible prices among
other currency sectors with the same degree of price rigidity. In this economy, it matters
whether an exchange rate shock arises from the currency sector with flexible prices or a
sector with infrequent price adjustments.

Proposition 4. An exchange rate shock to a non-official currency j does not spill over
to the other currency sectors if prices are flexible in sector j .

Proof. See Section A.4.

    When the shock originates from the sector with flexible prices, the price tends to
deviate from the steady state, which is the desired price. Firms in this sector adjust
their prices so that the effect of the exchange rate shock is offset. As a result, the
dollar-denominated price remains the same as before the exchange rate shock. Hence,
the relative price is unchanged. There is no change in macroeconomic dynamics. The
exchange rate shock is therefore neutral.

                                            16
    On the other hand, an exchange rate shock leads to economy-wide responses as long as
it arises from a sector with sticky prices. The flexible sector does not remain unchanged
when there is an exchange rate shock from another sector with price rigidity. Due to the
infrequent adjustment of prices, there are changes in the aggregate price level and the
output gap as firms adjust their prices toward the desired level. As a result, the desired
price varies. Since firms in this sector always price at the desired level, inflation and the
output gap vary, following the changes in the desired price.


5     Equilibrium Dynamics: Homogeneous Price Rigid-
      ity
With the linear NK framework laid out in the previous section, we can analyze the
economic dynamics. Our analyses involve the responses of output gaps and inflation to
an unexpected exchange rate shock.
    To simplify the exposition, we focus on a two-sector economy J = 2. As in the
previous section, firms in sector 1 price in dollars, and firms in sector 2 price in a non-
dollar currency. This allows us to simplify the notation as follows. Let the size of the
non-dollar sector be 2 =  . Then the size of the dollar sector is 1 = 1 -  . The exchange
rate of the dollar is normalised to e1,t = 0, and we let the exchange rate of the alternative
currency be e2,t = et . It is also convenient to drop the currency indices in the bilateral
relative price of the two sectors so that st  p  ^2,t - p
                                                        ^1,t . From Proposition 2, the law of
motion of the bilateral relative price follows an autoregressive process

      st =  (st-1 + et )                                                                  (45)

                       2
where et  N (0,          e ) is the residual of the random-walk process in Proposition 1. It
follows from the definition of the general price index, (1 -  ) p  ^1,t +  p ^2,t = 0, that the
relative prices in the respective sectors can be expressed in terms of st , so p^1,t = -st and
^2,t = (1 -  ) st . With homogeneous price rigidity across the two sectors, 1 = 2 = ,
p
the subscripts of the parameters 1 , 2 , 1 , and 2 can be dropped. The sectoral NKPCs
are expressed in terms of the output gap and the bilateral relative price as:

      1,t =  Et [1,t+1 ] +  y
                            ~t +   st                                                     (46)
                            ~t -  (1 -  ) st
      2,t =  Et [2,t+1 ] +  y                                                             (47)

The model parameters are summarized in Table 1. Most of the parameters follow Gal´     i
(2015). The size of the non-dollar sector,  , and the standard deviation of the exchange


                                              17
                       Table 1: Parameter values in benchmark model.

       Parameter    Value                           Description
                    0.250    Share of labor input in production function
                    1.000    Coefficient of risk aversion
                    5.000    Inverse Frisch elasticity of labor supply
                    0.990    Discount factor
          1         0.750    Probability of not adjusting prices in dollar sector
          2         0.750    Probability of not adjusting prices in non-dollar sector
                    9.000    Elasticity of substitution among consumption goods
                    1.500    Interest-rate reaction to inflation
          y         0.125    Interest-rate reaction to output gap
                    0.200    Size of non-dollar sector
          e         0.250    Standard deviation of exchange-rate shock
      Note: All parameters, except  and e , are obtained from Gal´
                                                                 i (2015).

rate shock, e , are new. We let the non-dollar sector take 20% of the market. We pick
the size of a one-standard-deviation exchange rate shock to be comparable to a monetary
policy shock in Gal´ i (2015) and set it to 0.25%.


5.1     Aggregate inflation, aggregate output gap
Using Proposition 3, the linearized NK framework describing the dynamics of the aggre-
gate output gap and inflation, including the baseline AIAO Taylor rule, condenses to a
three-equation system as follows

      y        yt+1 ] -  -1 ^
      ~t = Et [~            it - Et [t+1 ] - r
                                             ^tn
                                                                                        (48)

      t =  Et [t+1 ] + y
                       ~t +  et                                                         (49)
      ^
      it =    t +  y y
                     ~t                                                             (AIAO)

The above equations differ from a standard NK framework only in the exchange rate shock
in the NKPC. The additional term in the NKPC here implies that the path of aggregate
inflation is influenced by both the size of the non-dollar sector and the standard deviation
of the exchange rate shock. Since the nominal interest rate responds to aggregate inflation
and the aggregate output gap, the exchange rate shock, therefore, has a direct impact on
the nominal interest rate.
    As all exogenous shocks are assumed to be uncorrelated, the economic dynamics under
a productivity shock and a preference shock are identical to those in Gal´     i (2015). We
therefore focus only on the exchange rate shock. Without productivity and preference
shocks, the natural rate of interest in the dynamic IS curve vanishes . In Fig. 1, the

                                               18
Figure 1: Impulse responses to a 0.25% appreciation of the exchange rate. Under the AIAO
regime, the nominal interest rate responds to the aggregate inflation and the aggregate output
gap. Vertical axes indicate percentage deviations from the steady states. Horizontal axes
indicate quarters after the exchange rate shock.


impulse responses to a 25-basis-point nominal appreciation in the non-dollar currency
are presented. We discuss the impulse responses in detail next.

5.1.1    Aggregate dynamics

The three plots in the first row of Fig. 1 depict that the aggregate output gap, aggregate
inflation, and the nominal interest rate return to their steady states immediately after
the period of the exchange rate shock. To see the analytical solution, substitute the
Taylor rule Eq. (AIAO) into the dynamic IS curve, and use the method of undetermined
coefficients to solve for the paths of aggregate inflation and the aggregate output gap.
The impulse responses as functions to the exchange rate shock are

        ^
        it =     et .                                                                    (50)
        ~t = -   et
        y                                                                                (51)
        t =  ( + y )  et ,                                                               (52)




                                             19
where

                  1
                      >0                                                              (53)
               + y + 

We note that  is increasing in  via . As the equations show, an unexpected one-time
appreciation of the non-dollar currency unambiguously induces a one-time contempo-
raneous negative response in the output gap, and a one-time contemporaneous positive
response in aggregate inflation. This is because the exchange rate shock leads to a higher
consumer price and hence lower aggregate demand. The resulting effect on monetary
policy is a contractionary one, as seen from the positive coefficient in equation (50) for
the nominal interest rate. The random-walk process of the exchange rate means that
Et [t+1 ] = 0, and hence the real interest rate coincides with the nominal interest rate.
    Note that the responses of the aggregate variables are proportional to the size of
the non-linear sector. When few firms opt to price in the non-dollar currency,   0,
an unexpected exchange rate shock has negligible influence on the aggregate economic
dynamics. Besides, the fact that the coefficient  increases in  means that higher
price rigidity implies higher responsiveness of the aggregate variables to an exchange rate
shock.

5.1.2     Sectoral dynamics

We now examine the sectoral dynamics so as to analyze the interactions between the
dollar and the non-dollar sectors. Proposition 2 has shown that the bilateral differentials
in sectoral prices, inflation, and output gaps are results of price rigidity and imperfect
substitution among the goods. The inflation and output-gap differentials are both linear
in the bilateral relative price:

                         1-
        2,t - 1,t = -          st .                                                   (54)
                           
        ~2,t - y
        y      ~1,t   = - st .                                                        (55)

The negative signs in Eqs. (54) and (55) imply that both the output gap and inflation
are higher in the dollar sector compared to those in the non-dollar sector, given an
appreciation of the non-dollar currency. The effect is persistent due to the persistence
of st , see equation (45). Higher price stickiness  implies more persistence as well as a
smaller difference between the sectoral inflation rates.
    Substituting the aggregate output gap into the sectoral output gap functions in




                                            20
Eq. (35) gives the following dynamics of the sectoral output gaps:

      ~1,t =   st -    et
      y                                                                                  (56)
      ~2,t = - (1 -  )  st -    et
      y                                                                                  (57)

These sectoral movements are shown in the second and third rows of Fig. 1. From the
impulse responses, there are distributional effects between the two sectors. Output and
inflation in the dollar sector are positive, while output and inflation in the non-dollar
sector are negative, for the chosen parameters. While this is true generally in all periods
after the initial exchange rate shock, this is not necessarily so in that initial period, as a
closer inspection of the two equations above will now show.
    The first components of the sectoral output gaps are the substitution effects arising
from a change in the relative sectoral price. The second components are the income effects
due to lower aggregate output as seen in Eq. (51). The contemporaneous responses to an
unexpected appreciation in the non-dollar currency are net outcomes of both the income
effect and the substitution effect. The income effect drives the sectoral outputs below
their natural level. The substitution effect, on the other hand, causes households to
consume relatively more goods from the dollar sector and less from the non-dollar sector.
Both effects result in lower output in the non-dollar sector, but in the dollar sector, the
resulting output depends on which effect is dominant. Substitute Eq. (45) into Eq. (56)
and combine the coefficients of the exchange rate shock. The dollar-sector firms produce
above the natural level of output during the period of the exchange rate shock if:

      1     + y
        -<                                                                               (58)
            

in which case the substitution effect dominates the income effect. The right-hand side is
an indicator of the nominal interest rate's responsiveness to aggregate inflation and the
output gap. A greater value on the right-hand side is due to a greater response to the
aggregate output gap and/or a smaller response to aggregate inflation.
     The inequality also implies that an unexpected exchange rate shock may cause the
dollar-sector firms to produce below the natural level in the initial period of the exchange
rate appreciation, when either the elasticity of substitution among consumer goods is
sufficiently low ( is sufficiently small), or the interest rate is sufficiently responsive to
aggregate inflation ( is sufficiently large), and the interest rate is not responsive enough
to the output gap (y is sufficiently small). In the first instance, the small substitution
elasticity limits households' willingness to consume more dollar-sector goods and less non-
dollar-sector goods. In the second instance, the decline in the nominal interest rate is


                                             21
small, limiting the income effect of the exchange rate shock. The degree of price rigidity,
however, has no clear influence on the direction of response.
    In the periods following the exchange rate shock, dollar-sector output is persistently
above the natural level, while non-dollar-sector output is persistently below it. This is
because the exchange rate shock no longer causes a change in aggregate inflation. The
income effect is not present after the period of the shock. The national income is back
at its natural level. Due to price rigidity, the substitution effect, however, remains until
the bilateral relative price returns to its steady state. Because the income effect is only
one-off, kinks are expected in the impulse responses in the second period.
    Using the method of undetermined coefficients, one can solve for sectoral inflation in
terms of the exchange rate shock and the relative price as:

              (1 - )
      1,t =           st -     et                                                        (59)
                 
               (1 -  ) (1 - )
      2,t   =-                st -     et                                                (60)
                     

As in the case of output responses, the exchange rate shock causes aggregate demand
to be lower, and hence puts downward pressure on inflation. The substitution effect
results in a demand-pulled inflation in the dollar sector. Firms adjust their price when
opportunities arise. The rate at which inflation changes is subject to the degree of price
rigidity. Substitute Eq. (45) into Eq. (59) and combine the coefficients of the exchange
rate shock. Inflation in the dollar sector during the period of the exchange rate shock is
higher if

                         +             + y
      (1 -  )   +                 <        .                                             (61)
                         1-            

This inequality also implies that, in the period of an exchange rate shock, the dollar sector
may respond with lower inflation when either the degree of price rigidity is sufficiently
low ( is sufficiently small), or the interest rate is sufficiently responsive to aggregate
inflation ( is sufficiently large), and less responsive to the aggregate output gap (y is
sufficiently small). In the non-dollar sector, inflation is always below the steady state, as
firms need to offset the price hike due to the exchange rate shock. In the periods after
the exchange rate shock, the inflation dynamics are linear in the bilateral relative price.
     It is of policy interest to find from Eqs. (56) and (59) that the dollar-sector variables
are proportional to the size of the non-dollar sector. This is similar to the aggregate
variables. In the case where no firm prices in the non-dollar currency, the dollar-sector
variables do not respond to an exchange rate shock.



                                               22
5.2    Alternative Taylor rules
For the other two variants of the Taylor rule, the nominal interest rate responds to the
dollar-sector inflation instead of the aggregate one. Under such monetary policy rules,
the exchange rate shock does not influence the nominal interest rate directly, but via
the bilateral relative price, which causes changes in the dollar-sector inflation. The NK
framework can be rearranged to a three-equation system with the aggregate output gap,
the dollar-sector inflation, the nominal interest rate, and the bilateral relative price as the
endogenous variables. The non-policy block consists of the following dynamic IS curve
and dollar-sector NKPC, in addition to Eq. (45):

      y        yt+1 ] -  -1 ^
      ~t = Et [~            it - Et [1,t+1 ] +  (1 - ) st - r
                                                            ^tn
                                                                                          (62)

      1,t =  Et [1,t+1 ] +  y
                            ~t +   st .                                                   (63)

We consider the following two variants of the Taylor rule:

      ^
      it =  1,t + y y
                    ~t                                                                (DIAO)
      ^
      it =  1,t + y (~
                     yt +   st )                                                      (DIDO)

Under both regimes, the nominal interest rate responds to the dollar-sector inflation.
The difference lies in the output gaps that enter the policy rule. In DIDO, the nominal
interest rate responds to the dollar-sector output gap.
    In Fig. 2, we show the impulse responses of the macroeconomic variables to a 25-
basis-point nominal appreciation in the non-dollar currency under the DIAO and DIDO
regimes. Both regimes behave similarly when responding to an exchange rate shock, with
the impulse response curves of DIDO below those of DIAO, except for the real interest
rate. To keep the paper concise, we discuss the impulse responses of DIAO in the main
body of the paper and provide the equations of DIDO impulse response functions in
Section C.3.
    The equation system formed from Eqs. (45), (62), (63) and (DIAO) can be interpreted
as one with y~t , 1,t , and ^
                            it being the endogenous variables, and st being an autoregressive
exogenous process. It is then straightforward to express the endogenous variables in terms
of the bilateral relative price:

      ~t = -    st
      y                                                                                   (64)
             (1 - )
      1,t =         (1 -   ) st                                                           (65)
               
      ^
      it = - ( -   ) (1 - )   st                                                          (66)


                                              23
Figure 2: Impulse responses to a 0.25% appreciation of the exchange rate. Under the DIAO
regime, the nominal interest rate responds to the dollar-sector inflation and the aggregate output
gap. Under the DIDO regime, the nominal interest rate responds to the dollar-sector inflation
and the dollar-sector output gap. Vertical axes indicate percentage deviations from the steady
states. Horizontal axes indicate quarters after the exchange rate shock.

                           1
where   (1- )[ (1-)+         y ]+ ( -)
                                       > 0. Contrary to the baseline case, the one-off
exchange rate shock translates into a persistent shock to the bilateral relative price. The
variables now behave differently.
    Aggregate output in Fig. 2 responds with a level below the natural one and returns
to its steady state gradually. The direction of response is the same as in the baseline case
shown in Fig. 1. The impulse response decays gradually because the nominal interest
rate is a function of the sectoral inflation which returns to its steady state only when
the bilateral relative price does. The aggregate output gap, which is sensitive to nominal
interest rate changes, also follows the behavior of the bilateral relative price.
    The directions of responses of the dollar-sector inflation and the nominal interest rate
are no longer unambiguous. They depend on the parameters. In particular, the nominal
interest rate decreases when   -1 > , also elaborated as

              1-1-
       -1 >                                                                                  (67)
                +

which refers to a sufficiently large elasticity of the output gap to the real interest rate

                                               24
(sufficiently small  ). This condition always holds true in the particular case of a constant
return to scale,  = 0. The dollar-sector inflation is lower if

      ( -   ) 
               > y                                                                      (68)
       1-

which holds true when   -1 > , and when either prices are sufficiently rigid (sufficiently
large ), or y is sufficiently small. Note that when   -1 < , both the nominal interest
rate and the dollar-sector inflation increase. From the dynamic IS curve, the real interest
rate is found to increase unambiguously, despite the uncertain response of the nominal
interest rate:

      ^t =    (1 - )   st > 0.
      r                                                                                 (69)

Inflation in the non-dollar sector is derived by adding the inflation differential Eq. (54)
to the dollar-sector inflation

                1-
      2,t = -      (1 -  +    ) st                                                      (70)
                 

which is always below the steady state. The sectoral output gaps are derived from the
demand functions

      ~1,t = - (   -  ) st
      y                                                                                 (71)
      ~2,t = - [    +  (1 -  )] st
      y                                                                                 (72)

As in the dollar-sector inflation, the response of the dollar-sector output depends on the
parameters. For a sufficiently large value of  , firms in the dollar sector produce above
the natural level, as households find it easier to substitute one consumption good for
another. Firms in the non-dollar sector, instead, always produce below the natural level,
as the dollar-denominated price is higher.
    Thus far, under the DIAO regime, all the variables presented are only linear in the
bilateral relative price. This is due to the choice of a monetary policy rule where the
nominal interest rate responds to variables that are associated with the bilateral relative
price. However, an exception is aggregate inflation, which is additionally influenced by
the contemporaneous exchange rate shock:

              1-
      t = -          st +  et                                                           (73)
               

The exchange rate shock offsets some effects of the bilateral relative price. The contem-


                                             25
poraneous response of aggregate inflation is always positive, as shown in the appendix.
From the second period on, aggregate inflation is below its steady state and is linear only
in the bilateral relative price. As a result, a kink is observed in the response of aggregate
inflation.
    In summary, there is one similarity and two differences between economic dynamics
under the AIAO regime and the DIAO (or DIDO) regime. The similarity is that economic
dynamics in the aggregate economy and the dollar sector are proportional to the size of the
non-dollar sector. For DIAO, this is seen from Eqs. (64), (66) and (73) for the aggregate
variables, and from Eqs. (65) and (71) for the dollar-sector variables. In the limiting case
where no firm prices in the non-dollar currency, it is expected that the exchange rate
shock will not affect the economy.
    The two differences between the regimes are as follows. First, the aggregate output gap
and inflation experience one-period volatility under the AIAO regime, but they exhibit
persistent movements in the DIAO regime. Second, the responses of the nominal interest
rate and dollar-sector inflation are unambiguous under the AIAO regime, but they are
dependent on the parameter values under the DIAO regime. Dynamics in the non-dollar
sector, on the other hand, have shown similar patterns between the two sectors.


6    Equilibrium Dynamics: Heterogeneous Price Rigid-
     ity
The implications become richer when price rigidity differs across various pricing curren-
cies. For example, goods listed online may be subjected to more frequent price changes
as it is less costly for merchants to do so online than at physical boutiques. In the future,
perhaps large online merchants will introduce their own cryptocurrency and price their
goods in that currency, just like the airlines price the award tickets in miles, giving rise
to the considerations here. In this section, we thus analyze the economic dynamics when
the dollar and the non-dollar sectors differ in the extent of price rigidity.
    The NK framework with different price rigidities and the baseline AIAO monetary




                                             26
policy are summarized by the following five equations:

      y        yt+1 ] -  -1 ^
      ~t = Et [~            it - Et [(1 -  ) 1,t+1 +  2,t+1 ] - r
                                                                ^tn
                                                                                         (74)

      1,t =  Et [1,t+1 ] + 1 y
                             ~t + 1  st                                                  (75)
                             ~t - 2 (1 -  ) st
      2,t =  Et [2,t+1 ] + 2 y                                                           (76)
      st = st-1 + 2,t - 1,t + et                                                         (77)
     ^
     it =  [(1 -  ) 1,t +  (2,t + et )] + y y
                                            ~t                                           (78)

Notice that the parameters 1 , 2 , 1 , and 2 are now shown with subscripts as the
price rigidities differ. This equation system contains the aggregate output gap, the two
sectoral inflation rates, and the nominal interest rate as the endogenous variables, the
bilateral relative price as the state variable, and the nominal appreciation of the non-dollar
currency as the exogenous variable. Since the price rigidities are different between the
two sectors, Proposition 2 no longer holds, meaning aggregate inflation is not necessarily
independent of the bilateral relative price as in our earlier simulations of the AIAO regime.
    We first consider a scenario in which the non-dollar sector has a lower price rigidity
than the dollar sector. This is done by adjusting the parameter 2 , so that it corresponds
to two price changes per year (2 = 0.5) and four price changes per year (2 = 0), while
holding the frequency of price changes in the dollar sector at once a year (1 = 0.75). The
impulse responses are shown in Fig. 3. The circle-marked lines are the impulse responses
in Fig. 1, when the frequency of price change in the non-dollar sector is the same as that in
the dollar sector. As price rigidity is reduced in the non-dollar sector, more firms respond
to the exchange rate shock by adjusting their non-dollar prices, offsetting the increase
in their dollar-denominated prices. As a result, we see a smaller impact of the exchange
rate shock on the bilateral relative price. This leads to a smaller substitution effect
between the consumption goods, and hence smaller responses in most of the variables.
Also note that aggregate output, aggregate inflation, and the nominal interest rate no
longer experience one-off volatility. They take time to return to the steady states. In the
limiting case where all firms in the non-dollar sector can adjust prices in response to the
exchange rate shock (2 = 0), the change in inflation in the non-dollar sector fully offsets
the impact of the exchange rate shock, leading to no change in their dollar-denominated
prices. Therefore, when prices are fully flexible in the non-dollar sector, the exchange
rate shock is neutral, and does not influence economic dynamics. This result is in line
with Proposition 4.
    We then examine the economic dynamics when the dollar sector becomes more flexible,
as compared to the non-dollar sector. Similar to the above simulation, we vary the price
rigidity in the dollar sector while holding the frequency of price change in the non-dollar

                                              27
Figure 3: Impulse responses to a 0.25% appreciation of the exchange rate. Price rigidity in
the dollar sector is kept at 1 = 0.75, corresponding to a frequency of one price change per year.
Price rigidity in the non-dollar sector varies among 0.75, 0.5, and 0, corresponding to one, two
and four price changes per year, respectively. The monetary policy regime is AIAO. Vertical
axes indicate percentage deviations from the steady states. Horizontal axes indicate quarters
after the exchange rate shock.


sector at once a year. Fig. 4 shows the impulse responses when the price rigidity in the
dollar sector changes from one change a year to two and four changes a year. When the
non-dollar sector is hit by an exchange rate shock, the rigidity in the non-dollar sector
causes the dollar-denominated price of its goods to be higher. The re-distributed demand
from the non-dollar sector to the dollar sector motivates the firms in the dollar sector
to price higher. When price rigidity in the dollar sector is lower, more firms increase
their prices to meet the increased demand. We therefore observe that the response of the
dollar-sector inflation first shows a dip, caused by the one-off exchange rate shock, then
a value in the second period that increases with price flexibility.
    It is important to note that even when prices are fully flexible in the dollar sector,
the exchange rate shock is not neutral as in the case of the flexible non-dollar price.
Again, this is in line with Proposition 4. The non-neutrality arises because the dollar-
denominated price of the non-dollar sector goods resulting from the exchange rate shock
does not coincide with the desired price level. As a result, when the dollar-sector firms
price their goods at the desired levels, there is a price differential between the goods from

                                               28
Figure 4: Impulse responses to a 0.25% appreciation of the exchange rate. Price rigidity in
the non-dollar sector is kept at 2 = 0.75, corresponding to a frequency of one price change per
year. Price rigidity in the dollar sector varies among 0.75, 0.5, and 0, corresponding to one, two
and four price changes per year, respectively. The monetary policy regime is AIAO. Vertical
axes indicate percentage deviations from the steady states. Horizontal axes indicate quarters
after the exchange rate shock.


the two sectors. While firms in the non-dollar sector take time to reset prices to their
desired level, firms in the dollar sector optimize their prices every period. Therefore, we
see the non-negligible impulse responses even when prices are fully flexible in the dollar
sector.
    To obtain a more general picture of economic dynamics at different extents of price
rigidity, in Fig. 5, we compute the cumulative impulse responses for the aggregate output
gap and aggregate inflation over two years (eight quarters). As expected, when prices
are flexible in the non-dollar sector (2 = 0), an exchange rate shock does not cause any
movements in the aggregate output gap and aggregate inflation. However, when prices
are also flexible in the dollar sector (1 = 0), the exchange rate shock is not neutral,
unless prices are flexible in the non-dollar sector. Furthermore, throughout the range of
dollar-sector price rigidity, the cumulative impulse responses are generally greater when
price rigidity in the non-dollar sector is higher.
    In the previous section, we have shown that the impulse responses to an exchange
rate shock for the overall economy and the dollar sector are proportional to the size of

                                               29
Figure 5: Two-year cumulative responses of the aggregate output gap and aggregate inflation
to a 0.25% appreciation of the exchange rate. The vertical axes indicate cumulative percentage
deviations from the steady states.


the non-dollar sector. To see if this result also holds in an environment of heterogeneous
price rigidities, we simulate for different values of  . The impulse responses are shown in
Fig. 6. The price rigidities are set to 1 = 0.75 for the dollar sector, and 2 = 0.5 for the
non-dollar sector. When the size of the non-dollar sector increases from 0.2 to 0.5, the
responses of the economy increase accordingly, whereas when the size of the non-dollar
sector diminishes to 0, there are no responses to the exchange rate shock. Therefore,
we infer that, with heterogeneous price rigidities, the responses of the overall economy
and the dollar sector to an exchange rate shock also vary with the size of the non-dollar
sector.


7     Currency Choice
We now depart from the assumption that a firm sticks to the same pricing currency all
the time. We allow firms to choose a different pricing currency when they are allowed to
reset prices. As a result, a rational firm chooses the currency that provides it with the
best utility outcome.
    We introduce a discrete choice model building on McFadden (1974) to specify the
conditions under which firms choose to price in one currency versus the other. Let Ui,j,t
denote the utility of producer i, who resets its price in period t and uses currency j to
do so. We specify

      log (Ui,j,t ) = log (Vj,t,t ) + i,j,t                                              (79)


                                              30
Figure 6: Impulse responses to a 0.25% appreciation of the exchange rate. Price rigidity
prarameters are set to 1 = 0.75 and 2 = 0.5. The monetary policy regime is AIAO. Vertical
axes indicate percentage deviations from the steady states. Horizontal axes indicate quarters
after the exchange rate shock.


where Vj,s,t is the continuation value to the firm as the sum of expected and discounted
optimized profits when the price has been reset at s  t, using currency j to do so, and
where j,t is an exogenous and random preference parameter for picking currency j at
time t. One may think of this parameter as arising from regulatory concerns, customer
relationships or network effects for using a particular currency, which are outside this
model.     We assume j,t to be independent across i, j and t as well as any other shocks
and to be distributed according to a type I extreme value distribution

      F (i,j,t ) = exp (-j exp(-i,j,t ))                                                (80)

where j > 0 is a constant and common across all producers and dates. A firm chooses
to price in currency j if the utility from the optimized value is at least as high as that
from all the other alternatives:

      Uj,t  Uj ,t j = 0, ..., K.                                                        (81)




                                             31
which holds when

                     Vj,t,t
       j ,t  log                   + j,t j = 1, ..., J.                                              (82)
                     Vj ,t,t

The joint probability from J currencies gives the probability of a firm pricing in currency
j:

                     j    Vj,t,t
       Prj,t =     J
                                                                                                     (83)
                   j =1   j Vj ,t,t

We write the value to the firm in the following recursive form

       Vj,s,t =  ps,j + ej,t | xt + j Et Qt,t+1 Vj,s,t+1                                             (84)

where  (p | xt ) is the profit at the log dollar price p given the state of the economy xt ,
and where p  s,j is the log of the optimal currency-j price set in period s. In the period
following the price adjustment, the firm continues to use the current optimal price with
probability j . Otherwise, a price-setting opportunity arises. For ease of exposition, we
assume that firms are "reborn" with a different owner. Thus, the continuation value for
the old firm owner, in the case of a price-setting opportunity, is zero.2 A proposition from
the baseline case of homogeneous price rigidity can be summarized as follows, echoing a
result in Gopinath et al. (2010):
Proposition 5. Assume homogeneous price rigidity in a two-sector economy. Let 1 = 1,
2 =  . The second-order approximation to the probability of pricing in dollars is
                                              
                  1    K (xt )                                      1 Covt (~
                                                                            pt+ , et+ )
       Pr1,t        +                              () Vart (et+ )     -                              (85)
                1 +  (1 +  )2 V
                              ~t
                                              =0
                                                                    2   Vart (et+ )

where K (xt )  -    ~ pp (~             ~t is the value function of a firm always using the
                          pt | xt ) and V
optimal flexible dollar price, both evaluated at the date-t optimal log flex price p
                                                                                   ~t .
Proof. See Section A.5.

   The endogenous currency choice leads to time-varying sizes of the currency sectors.
With a time subscript to the parameter j , the law of motion for j,t is:

                                     K
       j,t = j j,t-1 + Prj,t               (1 - j ) j ,t-1                                           (86)
                                    j =1

   2
     Alternatively, one could assume that it is the same firm owner, giving rise to an additional additive
term (1 - j ) Et Qt,t+1 Ut , where the continuation value Ut = Et [maxj Ui,j,t ] is the maximized producer
utility, taking expectations over i,j,t .

                                                        32
                   Figure 7: Transition dynamics to more flexible prices.


The first term is the proportion of firms that did not change prices from the previous
period. The second term arises as the sum over all firms that get to reset their price as
well as choose their currency, and choose currency j .
    A more general case pertains to the transition dynamics as a currency sector expe-
riences a permanent change in price rigidity. Extending Proposition 5, we examine the
transition dynamics from the baseline specification to different extents of price rigidi-
ties in a two-sector economy. We use Dynare and the system of non-linear equilibrium
conditions for the numerical calculations. The results are shown in Fig. 7. The non-
dollar sector increases in size when price rigidity in the dollar sector is lower. This is
because, with lower price rigidity, firms in the dollar sector switch to pricing in the non-
dollar currency more easily. For the same reason the non-dollar sector decreases in size
when price rigidity in the non-dollar sector is lower. In general, when transiting from
the baseline specification to one with lower price rigidity, the steady states of the key
macroeconomic variables are unchanged. However, the variables deviate from the steady
states temporarily.
    The evolving size of the currency sector is related to our earlier finding of proportional
macroeconomic responses to the size of the non-dollar sector under an exchange rate
shock. In an environment with endogenous currency choice, the central bank may see


                                             33
changes in the impact of exchange rate shocks when price rigidity in the dollar or the
non-dollar sector changes. In particular, when prices in the dollar sector become less
rigid, exchange rate shocks may pose an increasing risk to economic stability when the
non-dollar sector grows in size.
    When price rigidity stays constant, so will the pricing choice of firms. In that case,
the log-linearized analysis of the previous sections applies even when allowing for the
endogeneity of the currency choice.


8    Conclusion
Extending the basic NK framework in Gal´    i (2015), we examine the macroeconomic dy-
namics when multiple parallel currencies co-exist in an economy. Our baseline case with
homogeneous price rigidity finds an NKPC that is similar to a conventional one, with an
additional disturbance term from the exchange rate. Upon relaxing the assumption of
homogeneous price rigidity, we find that the exchange rate shock is neutral only when
the shock originates from a currency sector with flexible prices. We have also discussed
a scenario in which firms can change the pricing currency. We find that the non-dollar
sector may increase in size when prices in the dollar sector are less rigid, posing a higher
risk to economic stability.
    Our analyses are only forward-looking and not meant to replicate existing situations.
The idea that a considerable proportion of firms price in a non-official currency may
seem futuristic. Existing regulatory frameworks are mostly based on the dollar, resulting
in the majority of firms using the dollar as their pricing unit. However, private monies
such as Diem and stablecoins have made the headlines. At the same time, countries are
contemplating cross-border retail payment facilities. There is a possibility that official
and private currencies can both be pricing units.
    The framework presented in this paper is at most a stereotype model. A benefit of
this simple model is that it is easy to build on it to analyze more complicated issues,
for example, a non-random path of the exchange rate, which we shall leave for future
research.




                                            34
References
Adrian, T. and T. Mancini-Griffoli (2019). The rise of digital money. Fin Tech Notes,
 IMF.

Asimakopoulos, S., M. Lorusso, and F. Ravazzolo (2019). A new economic framework:
  A DSGE model with cryptocurrency. draft, Free University of Bozen-Bolzano.

Barrdear, J. and M. Kumhof (2016). The macroeconomics of central bank issued digital
  currencies. Bank of England working paper no. 605.

Barsky, R. B., C. L. House, and M. S. Kimball (2007, June). Sticky-Price Models and
  Durable Goods. American Economic Review 97(3), 984­998.

Baughman, G. and J. Flemming (2020). Equilibrium bitcoin pricing. Finance and
  Economics Discussion Series 2020-048, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
  System, Washington.

Benigno, P. (2019). Monetary policy in a world of cryptocurrencies. CEPR Discussion
  Paper No. DP13517.

Benigno, P., L. Schilling, and H. Uhlig (2019). Cryptocurrencies, currency competition,
  and the impossible trinity. Becker Friedman Institute for Economics Working Paper
  2019-108.

Berentsen, A. (1998). Monetary implications of digital money. Kyklos 51, 89­117.

Biais, B., C. Bisi`
                  ere, M. Bouvard, C. Casamatta, and A. J. Menkveld (2020). Equilibrium
  bitcoin pricing. EconPol Working Paper (45).

Brunnermeier, M. K., H. James, and J.-P. Landau (2019). The digitalization of money.
  draft, Princeton University.

Brunnermeier, M. K. and D. Niepelt (2019). On the equivalence of private and public
  money. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Calvo, G. A. (1983, September). Staggered prices in a utility-maximizing framework.
  Journal of Monetary Economics 12(3), 383­398.

Chiu, J. and T. V. Koeppl (2019). The economics of cryptocurrencies--bitcoin and
 beyond. Staff Working Paper, Document de travail du personnel 2019-40, Bank of
 Canada, Banque Du Canada.

Cienfuegos, N. C. (2019, January). The Importance of Production Networks and Sectoral
  Heterogeneity for Monetary Policy. Technical report. University of Chicago.

Duffie, D. (2019). Digital currencies and fast payment systems: Disruption is coming.
 draft, Stanford University.

Fern´
    andez-Villaverde, J. and D. Sanches (2019, October). Can currency competition
  work? Journal of Monetary Economics 106, 1­15.

                                          35
Ferrari, M. M., A. Mehl, and L. Stracca (2020, November). Central bank digital currency
  in an open economy. ECB Working Paper no. 2488.

Gal´
   i, J. (2015, June). Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An
 Introduction to the New Keynesian Framework and Its Applications - Second Edition.
 Princeton University Press.

Garratt, R. and N. Wallace (2018). Bitcoin 1, bitcoin 2,....: An experiment in privately
 issued outside monies. Economic Inquiry 56(3), 1887­1897.

George, A., T. Xie, and J. D. Alba (2020). Central bank digital currency with adjustable
 interest rate in small open economies. Available at SSRN 3605918.

Girton, L. and D. Roper (1981). Theory and implications of currency substitution.
  Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 13(1), 12­30.

Gopinath, G., E. Box, C. Casas, F. J. D´
                                       iez, P.-O. Gourinchas, and M. Plagborg-Møller
 (2020). Dominant currency paradigm. American Economic Review 110(3), 677­719.

Gopinath, G., O. Itskhoki, and R. Rigobon (2010, March). Currency Choice and Exchange
 Rate Pass-Through. American Economic Review 100(1), 304­336.

Grossa, J. and J. Schillerb (2020). A model for central bank digital currencies: Do CBDCs
  disrupt the financial sector? Available at SSRN.

Kareken, J. and N. Wallace (1981). On the indeterminacy of equilibrium exchange rates.
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics 96(2), 207­222.

Manuelli, R. E. and J. Peck (1990). Exchange rate volatility in an equilibrium asset
 pricing model. International Economic Review, 559­574.

Matsuyama, K., N. Kiyotaki, and A. Matsui (1993). Toward a theory of international
 currency. The Review of Economic Studies 60(2), 283­307.

McFadden, D. (1974). Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behaviour. In
 P. Zarembka (Ed.), Frontiers in Econometrics, pp. 105­142. New York, NY, USA:
 Academic Press New York.

Pasten, E., R. Schoenle, and M. Weber (2018). The propagation of monetary policy shocks
  in a heterogeneous production economy. Becker Friedman Institute for Economics
  Working Paper (2018-78).

Rubbo, E. (2020). Networks, Phillips curves, and monetary policy. draft, Princeton
 University.

Sch¨
   ar, F. and A. Berentsen (2020). Bitcoin, Blockchain, and Cryptoassets:              A
  Comprehensive Introduction. MIT Press, Boston, MA.

Schilling, L. and H. Uhlig (2019a).    Currency substitution under transaction costs.
  Available at SSRN 3314249.


                                           36
Schilling, L. and H. Uhlig (2019b, October). Some simple bitcoin economics. Journal of
  Monetary Economics 106, 16­26.

Sterk, V. (2010, March). Credit frictions and the comovement between durable and
  non-durable consumption. Journal of Monetary Economics 57(2), 217­225.



Appendix A                   Proofs of propositions
A.1     Proof of Proposition 1
The optimality conditions for real holdings of any currency k is
                       
       lt -  ct =        [ (ct - Et [ct+1 ]) - Et [t+1 ] + Et [ek,t+1 ] - (1 - z ) zt ]    (A.1)
                      1-

Taking the difference between k = j and k = j proves the proposition

      ej,t - ej ,t = Et [ej,t+1 - ej ,t+1 ] .                                              (A.2)

A.2     Proof of Proposition 2
First result With the exchange rate being a random-walk process, the optimal price
for any currency sector k is rewritten as:
                                   
      pk,t   + ek,t = (1 -  k )         (k )h Et [~
                                                  pt+h ]                                   (A.3)
                                  h=0

Let the price rigidity be the same for an arbitrary pair of currencies j and j , j = j = .
                                                               h
Eq. (A.3) can be written as p  k,t + ek,t = (1 -   ) h=0 ( ) Et [~   pt+h ] , in which the right-
hand sides are identical, and independent of the currency choice. Hence, prices set in
currencies j and j are equivalent. Mathematically, p                  
                                                        j,t + ej,t = pj ,t + ej ,t .


Second result Price levels in sectors j and j are weighted sums of optimal prices
and the price levels from the previous period: pj,t = (1 - ) pj,t +  pj,t-1 and pj ,t =
        
(1 - ) pj ,t +  pj ,t-1 . From the definition of sjj ,t :

      sjj ,t = pj,t + ej,t - (pj ,t + ej ,t )
              = (1 - ) p       
                        j,t - pj ,t +  (pj,t-1 - pj ,t-1 ) + ej,t - ej ,t
              = (1 - ) p              
                        j,t + ej,t - pj ,t - ej ,t +  (pj,t-1 + ej,t - pj ,t-1 - ej ,t )
              =  sjj ,t-1 +  (ej,t - ej ,t )

The last equation makes use of the first result.




                                                    37
Third and fourth results The expression for sjj ,t from the second result can be
rearranged as an expression for st-1 : sjj ,t-1 = 1  s
                                                    jj ,t
                                                          - ej,t + ej ,t . The law of motion
of sjj ,t = sjj ,t-1 + j,t + ej,t - j ,t - ej ,t is rearranged as

                                                             1-
      j,t - j ,t = sjj ,t - sjj ,t-1 - ej,t + ej ,t = -         sjj ,t
                                                              
For the output gap differential:

      ~j,t - y
      y      ~j ,t = - p      ~t - (- p
                       ^j,t + y               ~t ) = - sjj ,t
                                      ^j ,t + y

A.3     Proof of Proposition 3
Let j =  for all j . The second and third terms on the right-hand side of Eq. (43)
are simplified as   y      ~t and - p
                     ~t =  y             ^t = 0, where    (1-)(1     
                                                                      -  )
                                                                            +     +
                                                                                 1-
                                                                                      .
Consequently, the NKPC for aggregate inflation is expressed independent of the relative
price.

A.4     Proof of Proposition 4
From Eq. (22) and equilibrium conditions, the relative price in a sector j with flexible
prices is a function of the output gap

                                          +
      ^j,t = pj,t + ej,t - pt = 
      p                             +                y
                                                     ~t                               (A.4)
                                          1-

The contemporaneous sectoral inflation is

                       +
      j,t =   +                 yt + t - ej,t
                                ~                                                     (A.5)
                       1-

The contemporaneous aggregate inflation is
                                                                  k
      t = j j,t +         k (k,t + ek,t ) = j ~
                                              yt +                    (k,t + ek,t )   (A.6)
                    k=j                                   k=j
                                                                1 - j

                j         +
where j  1-       j
                    +     1-
                               . Take expectations on both sides of Eq. (A.5). The expected
sectoral inflation is
                               +
      Et [j,t+1 ] =     +                  yt+1 ] - y
                                      (Et [~        ~t ) + Et [t+1 ]                  (A.7)
                               1-

Take expectations on both sides of Eq. (A.6). The expected aggregate inflation is
                                           k
      Et [t+1 ] = j Et [~
                        yt+1 ] +               Et [k,t+1 ]                            (A.8)
                                   k=j
                                         1 - j




                                                38
Substitute the expected inflation in the IS curve with Eq. (A.8):

                                                                             k
      y        yt+1 ] + j  -1 (Et [~
      ~t = Et [~                            ~t ) -  -1 ^
                                   yt+1 ] - y          it -                      Et [k,t+1 ]      (A.9)
                                                                    k=j
                                                                           1 - j

                                    -1
                                         ^               k
               yt+1 ] -  + j
         = Et [~                         it -                Et [k,t+1 ]                         (A.10)
                                                 k=j
                                                       1 - j

The NK framework with sector j being the flexible one has the following 2K equations,
without the NKPC for sector j . The subscript -j indicate vectors without the j th
element.
                                     -j -j,t+1
                                    -1
      y        yt+1 ] -  + j
      ~t = Et [~                         ^
                                         it -                                                    (A.11)
                                       1 - j
                                ~t - -j  p
      -j,t =  Et [-j,t+1 ] + -j y         ^-j,t                                                  (A.12)
                             1 -j
              ^-j,t-1 + I -
      ^-j,t = p
      p                             (-j,t + e-j,t ) - j ~
                                                        yt 1                                     (A.13)
                            1 - j
      ^
      it =    t +  y y~t                                                                         (A.14)
                                (-j,t +e-j,t )
where t = j ~     yt + -j 1-j        . The exchange rate shock from sector j , ej,t ,
does not enter the equation system, so it does not lead to changes in aggregate inflation
and output gap. However, any shock from another sticky sector leads to changes in the
aggregate output gap. According to Eq. (A.4), the price level in sector j changes only
when there are changes in the aggregate output gap.

A.5      Proof of Proposition 5
The proof and its logic are patterned after Gopinath et al. (2010). For a two-sector
                                                                                   V1,t,t
economy, let 1 = 1, and 2 =  . The probability of pricing in dollars is Prt = V1,t,t + V2,t,t
                                                                                              .
                                                                                ~
A first-order approximation around the flexible-price optimum V1,t,t = V2,t,t = Vt delivers
                   Prt                                   ~t +  Prt                                 ~t
      Prt  Pr +                               V1,t,t - V                                  V2,t,t - (A.15)
                                                                                                   V
                   V1,t,t |V1,t,t =V2,t,t =V
                                           ~t                  V2,t,t |V1,t,t =V2,t,t =V
                                                                                       ~t

                1           
            =     +                   (V      - V2,t,t )                                           (A.16)
              1 +  (1 +  )2 V      ~t 1,t,t

"Telescope out," i.e., iterate on (84) to obtain3
                          
      V2,t,t = max
                
                   Et           l Qt,t+l  ps,2 + e2,t+l | xt+l                                   (A.17)
                pt,2
                          l=0

   3
     There is only one exchange rate, which is the exchange rate of the second currency with respect to
the dollar. For notational consistency, we keep the subindex 2 on that exchange rate.




                                                       39
Consider the second-order approximation of the profit function around the log of the
flex-price optimum, i.e.

      (p | xt+l )  ~ t+l + 1  (p - p
                                   ~t+l )2                                                         (A.18)
                           2 t+l
where  ~ t+l = (~pt+l | xt+l ) is the profit at the optimal flexible price in t + l and where
t+l is the second derivative of (· | xt+l ) at p ~t+l . Note that the first derivative is zero by
virtue of the optimality of p  ~t+l . Replace the profit function in (A.17) with the second-
order approximation in (A.18). Additionally assume that t+l = t + t+1 , where t+l
is (approximately) independent of other sources of randomness. Likewise, assume that
Qt,t+l =  l up to a term (approximately) independent of other sources of randomness.
We obtain
                              
      V2,t,t = max Et             ()l ~ t+l + 1  (p + e2,t+l - p
                                                               ~t+l )2                             (A.19)
                                                t  t,2
                pt,2
                              l=0
                                              2

The first-order condition
                 
      0 = Et           ()l t (pt,2 + e2,t+l - p
                                              ~t+l )                                               (A.20)
                l=0

can be simplified to

      p          pt+l - e2,t+l ]
       t,2 = Et [~                                                                                 (A.21)

when we assume that the right-hand side is (approximately) independent of l: we shall
do so. With that (A.19) becomes

                                        
                             l~                     1                                       1
  V2,t,t = Et          () t+l +t              ()l     Vart [e2,t+l ] - Cov(e2,t+l , p
                                                                                    ~t+l ) + Vart [~
                                                                                                   pt+l ]
                l=0                     l=0
                                                    2                                       2
                                                                                                   (A.22)

For the dollar, the same calculation delivers a simpler expression, since there are no
exchange rate terms,
                                               
                                  l~                 1
      V1,t,t = Et            () t+l + t           ()l Vart [~
                                                            pt+l ]                                 (A.23)
                       l=0                    l=0
                                                     2

Plug (A.22) and (A.23) into (A.16) and rewrite to obtain equation (85).




                                                    40
                         TECHNICAL APPENDIX
                      (FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION)

Appendix B                       Mathematical Derivations for the Lin-
                                 earized NK Model
B.1     Households
The lifetime utility of a representative household is given by:
           
      E0          t u (Ct , Lt , Nt ) Zt                                                       (B.1)
           t=0
                                      -
                          Ct1- - 1 L1
                                    t   - 1 Nt1+
      u (Ct , Lt , Nt ) =         +        -                                                   (B.2)
                            1-      1-       1+
The marginal utility of consumption, liquidity, and labor:

      uC,t = Ct-                                                                               (B.3)
      uL,t = L-
              t
                
                                                                                               (B.4)
      uN,t = -Nt .                                                                             (B.5)

   The household's budget constraint is
                       J                                       J
                                      exp (it-1 ) Bt-1             Lj,t-1 Ej,t
      Ct + Bt +              Lj,t =                    +                       + Wt Nt + t     (B.6)
                      j =1
                                             t             j =1
                                                                    t Ej,t-1

The first-order conditions with respect to Nt , Bt , and Lj,t , are

                           Nt
       Nt : Wt =                                                                               (B.7)
                           Ct-
                                                  1 Zt+1
       Bt : Ct- =  exp (it ) Et Ct-
                                  +1
                                    
                                                                                               (B.8)
                                                  t+1 Zt
                 L-t
                     
                                 Ct- 
                                   +1 1 Ej,t+1 Zt+1
      Lj,t :          = 1 -  E t                                                               (B.9)
                 Ct-             Ct- t+1 Ej,t Zt

Upon log-linearization at the first order around the zero-inflation steady state, the opti-
mality conditions are expressed as:

                 wt =  nt +  ct                                                               (B.10)
                                           1 ^               1
                  ct = Et [ct+1 ] -          it - Et [t+1 ] + (1 - z ) zt                     (B.11)
                                                             
                              
       lt -  ct =               [ (ct - Et [ct+1 ]) - Et [t+1 ] + Et [ej,t+1 ] - (1 - z ) zt ] (B.12)
                             1-



                                                           1
B.2       Firms
The production function of firm i that prices in currency j is

      Yj,t (i) = At Nj,t (i)1-                                                                                                         (B.13)

Recall that Wt denotes the real wage. The real marginal cost of a firm in sector j is then
given by
                               Wt
      MCt (i) =                                                                                                                        (B.14)
                        (1 - ) At Nj,t (i)-
                                                                     
                         Wt                          Yj,t (i)       1-
                   =                                                                                                                   (B.15)
                     (1 - ) At                        At
                                                                                    
                                                                                  -1
                                   Wt                      
                                                          1-
                                                                    Ej,t Pt (i)      -
                   =                            1    Yt                                                                                (B.16)
                        (1 - ) At1-                                     Pt

where we have used (11) as well as Ct = Yt and Ct (i) = Yt (i) in the last step. The average
real marginal cost of the economy
                    J
      MCt =                             MCt (i)di                                                                                      (B.17)
                   j =1        Vj (t)

                                                                J                              
                                                                                             -1
                               Wt                     
                                                     1-
                                                                             Ej,t Pt (i)        -
             =                              1   Yt                                                     di                              (B.18)
                   (1 - ) At1-                             j =1       Vj,t       Pt

In order to log-linearize this equation when Vj,t  Vj is independent of time, examine
first the term
               J                                         
                                                       -1
                                  Ej,t Pt (i)             -
      Qt =                                                      di
             j =1         Vj          Pt

Log-linearization delivers
                                                                                                                         
                                        J                              -1 -                 J                          -1 -
          1- ¯                                         Ej P (i)                                             Ej P (i)
      -     Qqt +                                         ¯
                                                                               pt =
                                                                                                               ¯              (ej,t + pt (i))di
                   j =1                         Vj        P                                j =1   Vj           P
                                                                                                                                       (B.19)

Likewise, log-linearizing the definition of the price index (2) delivers
              J                                      1-
                                 Ej P (i)
      pt =                          ¯                     (ej,t + pt (i))di                                                            (B.20)
             j =1       Vj          P




                                                                              2
Note now that

        Ej P (i)
           ¯     =1
           P
as all firms will choose the same price expressed in dollars at the steady state, and that
price therefore equals the general price index. Use this and (B.20) in (B.19) to find that
qt = 0. The log-linearized real marginal cost is therefore
                               1
      mct = wt +         yt -    at                                                    (B.21)
                      1-      1-
It follows that an individual firm's real marginal cost and the average real marginal cost,
after log-linearization, are associated with the following equation:
                            
      mct (i) = mct -         [pt (i) + ej,t - pt ]                                    (B.22)
                           1-
    The firm seeks to maximize real profits per its choice of the price Pt (i). With flexible
prices, the desired price Pt (i) = P ~j,t is chosen so as to equalize real marginal revenue
to real marginal cost, taking into account the demand function (11) with Ct = Yt and
Ct (i) = Yt (i). This leads to the markup equation
                  ~j,t
         - 1 Ej,t P
                       = MCt (i)                                                       (B.23)
               Pt
                                                 ~j,t . The log-linearized desired price is
where MCt (i) is evaluated at the price Pt (i) = P

      ~j,t = mcj,t|t + pt - ej,t
      p                                                                                (B.24)

where (from Eq. (B.22))
                            
      mcj,t|t = mct -          pj,t + ej,t - pt ]
                              [~                                                       (B.25)
                           1-
The desired price can be solved as

      ~j,t =  mct + pt - ej,t
      p                                                                                (B.26)

where
              1 -  + 
      =                                                                                (B.27)
                 1-
Note that the dollar-denominated desired price, p   ~j,t + ej,t , is independent of currency
choice. When prices are sticky, the log-linearized optimal price is
                            
      pj,t   = (1 -  j )         ( j ) Et mct+ |t + pt+ - ej,t+                        (B.28)
                            =0

To simplify the equation, use Eq. (B.22) to establish the relationship between the opti-

                                                    3
mizing firm's real marginal cost with the economy's average marginal cost:
                             
      mct+ |t = mct+ -           p   + ej,t+ - pt+                                             (B.29)
                            1 -  j,t
Substitute into Eq. (B.28) and simplify:
                         
                                                         
      pj,t = (1 -  j )        ( j ) Et mct+ -                p + ej,t+ - pt+ + pt+ - ej,t+
                         =0
                                                        1 -  j,t
                                                                                               (B.30)
                               
         = -1 (1 -  j )             ( j ) Et  mct+ + pt+ - ej,t+ - (1 - ) pj,t                 (B.31)
                               =0
                                                        
                  -1
         =-            -1   pj,t   +   -1
                                            (1 -  j )        ( j ) Et [ mct+ + pt+ - ej,t+ ]
                                                        =0
                                                                                               (B.32)
                         
         = (1 -  j )          ( j ) Et [~
                                        pj,t+ ]                                                (B.33)
                         =0

which can be written in a recursive form

      p             
       j,t =  j Et pj,t+1 + (1 -  j ) p
                                      ~j,t                                                     (B.34)

The law of motion for inflation is derived using the sectoral price index

      p                      
       j,t - pj,t-1 =  j Et pj,t+1 - pj,t + (1 -  j ) p
                                                      ~j,t - pj,t-1 +  j pj,t                  (B.35)
                  =  j Et pj,t+1 - pj,t - (1 -  j ) (pj,t - p
                                                            ~j,t ) + j,t                       (B.36)

From the identity pj,t =  pj,t-1 + (1 - ) p                             
                                           j,t , we have j,t = (1 -  ) pj,t - pj,t-1 . The
above equation becomes

      (1 - )-1 j,t = (1 - )-1  j Et [j,t+1 ] - (1 -  j ) (pj,t - p
                                                                 ~j,t ) + j,t                  (B.37)

Rearrange terms to obtain the law of motion for sectoral inflation

      j,t =  Et [j,t+1 ] - j (pj,t - p
                                     ~j,t )                                                    (B.38)

where pj,t - p
             ~j,t is interpreted as the price markup.

B.3     Equilbrium
The market clearing conditions for the goods and labor markets are

      Yt = C t                                                                                 (B.39)




                                                    4
where the aggregate output is defined as
                                                           
                  J                                        -1
                                             1
                                          1- 
     Yt                        Yj,t (i)           di                                                                    (B.40)
               j =1       Vj


The labor market clears when
              J
     Nt =                     Nj,t (i)di                                                                                (B.41)
             j =1        Vj
                           1
               Yt         1-
         =                           Dt                                                                                 (B.42)
               At
                                                          
                                                       - 1-
                      J               Ej,t Pt (i)           
where Dt              j =1                Pt
                                                                di is a version of price dispersion for a multi-sector
economy. The price dispersion is elaborated as
              J                                                                  
                                          - 1-                                - 1-
                         Ej,t Pj,t                              Pt (i)             
     Dt =                                                                             di                                (B.43)
             j =1
                           Pt                          Vj,t     Pj,t
              J                                                  
                                                              - 1-
                      ^ - 1-
                            
                                                 Pt (i)            
         =            P j,t                                           di                                                (B.44)
             j =1                     Vj,t       Pj,t
              J                
         =            ^ - 1- Dj,t
                      P                                                                                                 (B.45)
                        j,t
             j =1


where Dj,t is the sectoral price dispersion
                                             
                                          - 1-
                              Pt (i)           
     Dj,t =                                         di                                                                  (B.46)
                  Vj,t        Pj,t
                                                                                                      
                                                    - 1-                                           - 1-
                                          Pj,t                                        Pj,t-1 (i)        
          = j (1 - j )                                        +                                            di           (B.47)
                                          Pj,t                    Vj,t S (i)            Pj,t
                                                                                                              
                                                    - 1-                                                   - 1-
                                          Pj,t                                        Pj,t-1 Pj,t-1 (i)         
          = j (1 - j )                                        +                                                    di   (B.48)
                                          Pj,t                    Vj,t S (i)           Pj,t Pj,t-1
                                                                                                              
                                                    - 1-                                                   - 1-
                                          Pj,t                         
                                                                      1-
                                                                                            Pj,t-1 (i)          
          = j (1 - j )                                        + j,t                                                di   (B.49)
                                          Pj,t                                 Vj,t S (i)    Pj,t-1
                                                       
                                                    - 1-
                                          Pj,t           
                                                                  1-
                                                                           
          = j (1 - j )                                        + j j,t Dj,t-1                                            (B.50)
                                          Pj,t

The labor market condition is linearized as
             yt - at
     nt =                                                                                                               (B.51)
             1-
Note that the price dispersion vanishes at the first order.

                                                                              5
B.4     Deriving the Sectoral NKPC
Combining (B.10), (B.21), (B.51) and ct = yt yields

                    +                  +1
      mct =    +                yt -      at                                       (B.52)
                    1-                 1-

With that, (B.26) delivers
                                           +                +1
      pj,t - p      ^j,t - 
             ~j,t = p                  +             yt -      at                  (B.53)
                                           1-               1-
The last equation eliminates the real wage using the household's optimality condition for
the labor supply. Under flexible prices, pj,t = p
                                                ~j,t , p
                                                       ^j,t = 0, and we have

                          +          n     +1
      0 = -        +                yt -      at                                   (B.54)
                          1-               1-

Solve Eq. (B.54) for the natural level of output
       n
      yt = ya at                                                                   (B.55)

Take the difference between Section B.4 and Eq. (B.54). The price markup is expressed
                                                n
                                      ~t  yt - yt
in terms of the output gap defined as y           :

                                       +
      pj,t - p      ^j,t - 
             ~j,t = p            +              y
                                                ~t                                 (B.56)
                                       1-

Substitute the price markup back into the law of motion for sectoral inflation. The
sectoral NKPC is derived as:

                             ~t - j p
      j,t =  Et [j,t+1 ] + j y      ^j,t                                           (B.57)

B.5     Dynamic IS Curve
Using the market clearing condition yt = ct , one can rewrite the optimality condition for
government bonds as
                          1                   1
      yt = Et [yt+1 ] -     (it - Et [t+1 ]) + (1 - z ) zt                         (B.58)
                                              
Subtracting the flexible counterpart from B.58 gives
                          1                    n
      y        yt+1 ] -
      ~t = Et [~            (it - Et [t+1 ] - rt )                                 (B.59)
                          
where the natural rate of interest is a linear combination of exogenous shocks
       n
      rt  - (1 - a ) ya at + (1 - z ) zt                                           (B.60)




                                                     6
B.6        NKPC in Non-Linear Form
The firm's profit maximisation problem is expressed as
                                               
                                        Ej,t+ Pj,t
       max            j Et Qt,t+                   Yj,t+ |t - t+ Yj,t+ |t                                 (B.61)
        
       Pj,t
                =0
                                           Pt+

subject to the demand function
                                        -
                           Ej,t+ Pj,t
       Yj,t+ |t =                           Yt+                                                           (B.62)
                              Pt+

where t+ (·) is the real total cost of production. The first-order condition for price
setting is
        
                                                                          Yj,t+ |t Pt+ MCj,t+ |t Yj,t+ |t
              j Et Qt,t+ Ej,t+ (1/Pt+ ) Yj,t+ |t + Pj,t                       
                                                                                  -                  
                                                                                                              =0
        =0
                                                                          Pj,t         Ej,t+     Pj,t
                                                                                                          (B.63)

which can be simplified to the following condition

                                                            -
                                ^
                                        -   Ej,t+ Pt                   Pj,t         ^           Pj,t+
      j Et      Ct-
                  +
                    
                            j,t Pj,t
                                                                Yt+             j,t Pj,t+ -             MCj,t+ |t   =0
 =0
                                             Ej,t Pt+                 Pj,t+                    - 1 Pj,t
                                                                                                          (B.64)
                       ^
Multiply both sides by P j,t

                                                  -
                      -              Ej,t+ Pt                Pj,t          ^              Pj,t+
      j Et      Ct-
                  + j,t                               Yt+              j,t Pj,t+ -
                                                                                                  MCj,t+ |t   =0
 =0
                                      Ej,t Pt+              Pj,t+                        - 1 Pj,t
                                                                                                          (B.65)
                         
                     Et Pj,t
where j,t             Pj,t
                             .   Rearrange terms,

                                                                -
                            1-                Ej,t+ Pt                     Pj,t ^
                j Et  Ct-
                        + j,t                                       Yt+         Pj,t+                     (B.66)
           =0
                                               Ej,t Pt+                   Pj,t+
                                                             -
                            -                Ej,t+ Pt                     
       =        j Et  Ct-
                        + j,t                                    Yt+         MCj,t+ |t                    (B.67)
           =0
                                              Ej,t Pt+                    -1




                                                            7
Substitute the expression for idiosyncratic marginal cost:
                                                              -
            1+ 1-                               Ej,t+ Pt            Pj,t ^
        j,t
                              j Et      Ct-
                                          +
                                            
                                                                         Pj,t+ Yt+                     (B.68)
                       =0
                                                 Ej,t Pt+          Pj,t+
                                                          -                      - 1
                                             Ej,t+ Pt          Pj,t ^               -
      =                j Et        Ct-
                                     +
                                       
                                                                    Pj,t+               Yt+ MCt+       (B.69)
        -1        =0
                                              Ej,t Pt+        Pj,t+

which can be rewritten as
          1+ 1-               
      j,t       x2,t =           x1,t                                                                  (B.70)
                              -1
where
                                                              -
                                              -1
                                                     ^j,t+1
                                                     P
      x2,t =          ^j,t
               Ct- Yt P        + j Et                              x2,t+1                              (B.71)
                                             j,t+1     ^j,t
                                                      P

and
                                                                          -
                                                              ^j,t+1
                                                              P
      x1,t =          ^ - 1- MCt
               Ct- Yt P                   + j Et j,t+1   1-
                                                                              x1,t+1                   (B.72)
                        j,t                                     ^j,t
                                                               P

The relative price follows
                          e
             ^j,t-1 t j,t
      ^j,t = P
      P                                                                                                (B.73)
                    t
In the case of flexible prices, the desired price is given by
                                          
      ~j,t = Pt
      P
                       
                          MCt                                                                          (B.74)
             Ej,t      -1

B.7     Value Function in Non-Linear Form
Iterate the value function:
                       
      Vj,t|t = Et             j Qt,t+ j,t+ |t                                                          (B.75)
                       =0
                                                                     
                                        Ej,t+ Pj,t
           = Et               j Qt,t+              Yj,t+ |t - Et          j Qt,t+ MCj,t+ |t Yj,t+ |t
                       =0
                                          Pt+                        =0

The value function of the firm is therefore

      Vj,t = Rj,t - Cj,t                                                                               (B.76)




                                                          8
The revenue is given by
                                     
                              Ej,t+ Pj,t
     Rj,t =         j Qt,t+              Yj,t+ |t                                                           (B.77)
               =0
                                Pt+
                                         -          
                              Ct+            Ej,t+ Pj,t
          =         (j )                                Yj,t+ |t                                            (B.78)
               =0
                               Ct              Pt+
                                         -                                  -
                              Ct+            Ej,t+ Pj,t       Ej,t+ Pj,t
          =         (j )                                                        Yt+                         (B.79)
               =0
                               Ct              Pt+              Pt+
                                         -                     1-
                              Ct+              Ej,t+ Pj,t
          =         (j )                                            Yt+                                     (B.80)
               =0
                               Ct                Pt+
                                         -                            1-
                              Ct+                 ^          Pj,t
          =         (j )                      j,t Pj,t+                     Yt+                             (B.81)
               =0
                               Ct                           Pj,t+
                                                                           1-
            1     1-                                 ^j,t+ Pj,t
          = - j,t                   (j )     Ct-
                                               +
                                                 
                                                     P                          Yt+                         (B.82)
           Ct                  =0
                                                           Pj,t+

    ~ j,t  Rj,t  -1 Ct- , then
Let R           j,t

                                                               1-
     ~ j,t =
     R              (j ) Et Ct-            ^j,t+ Pj,t
                                           P                        Yt+                                     (B.83)
                              +
               =0
                                                 Pj,t+
                                                                                  1-
          =        ^ 1- Yt
               Ct- P          +          (j ) Et Ct-             ^j,t+ Pj,t
                                                                 P                     Yt+                  (B.84)
                     j,t                           +
                                    =1
                                                                       Pj,t+
                                                    1-                                           1-
                ^ 1- Yt + Et               Pj,t                                   ^j,t+ Pj,t+1
          = Ct- P j,t                                            (j ) Ct-
                                                                        +
                                                                          
                                                                                  P                   Yt+
                                          Pj,t+1            =1
                                                                                        Pj,t+
                                                                                                            (B.85)
                                                          1-
                ^ 1- Yt + j Et                  Pj,t             ~ j,t+1
          = Ct- P j,t                                            R                                          (B.86)
                                               Pj,t+1
                ^ 1- Yt + j Et -1 R
          = Ct- P                   ~                                                                       (B.87)
                  j,t          j,t+1 j,t+1




                                                          9
The discounted cost is
              
     Cj,t =        j Qt,t+ Yj,t+ |t MCj,t+ |t                                                                  (B.88)
              =0
                                     -                              -                               - 1
                           Ct+                  ^          Pj,t                     ^        Pj,t      -
         =         j                        j,t Pj,t+                   Yt+     j,t Pj,t+
                                                                                                           MCj,t+
              =0
                            Ct                            Pj,t+                             Pj,t+
                                                                                                               (B.89)
                                                                       
                                     -                              - 1-
                           Ct+                  ^          Pj,t          
         =         j                        j,t Pj,t+                       Yt+ MCj,t+                         (B.90)
              =0
                            Ct                            Pj,t+
                                                                                 
                                                                              - 1-
           1        
                 - 1-                                       ^j,t+    Pj,t          
         = - j,t
                                          (j )     Ct-
                                                     +
                                                       
                                                            P                         Yt+ MCt+                 (B.91)
          Ct                         =0
                                                                    Pj,t+
                       
    ~j,t  Cj,t Ct-  1-
Let C                    , then
                   j,t

                                                              
                                                           - 1-
     ~j,t =                               ^j,t+    Pj,t         
     C             (j )       Ct-
                                +
                                  
                                          P                         Yt+ MCt+                                   (B.92)
              =0
                                                  Pj,t+
                                                                       
                                                                    - 1-
                        
                  ^ - 1- Yt MCt                            Pj,t          
                                                                            ~j,t+1
         =    Ct- P j,t                    + j Et                           C                                  (B.93)
                                                          Pj,t+1
                                                            
                       -
               ^ 1- Yt MCt + j Et  1- C
         = Ct- P                       ~                                                                       (B.94)
                 j,t              j,t+1 j,t+1


The steady states are

                   Y (1 - MC)
     Vj = V =                                                                                                  (B.95)
                     1 - 




                                                               10
Appendix C                   Solutions to a Two-Sector Economy
C.1     AIAO
Since the exchange rate shock is the only exogenous variable in the equation system, all
endogenous variables can be expressed in terms of it:

      y    aiao
      ~t = ye   et ;         aiao
                         t = e    et ;      ^    aiao
                                            it = ie   et .                           (C.1)
         aiao   aiao       aiao
where ye      , e    , and ie   are unknown coefficients to be determined. Because Et et+1 =
0, the forecasts of the endogenous variables one period ahead are:

      Et [~
          yt+1 ] = 0;   Et [t+1 ] = 0.                                               (C.2)

Substitute Et [~
               yt+1 ] and Et [t+1 ] into the three-equation system, and use the Taylor rule
to substitute out the nominal interest rate in the dynamic IS curve. The equation system
reduces to:

      ~t = - -1 ( t + y y
      y                 ~t )                                                         (C.3)
      t = y ~t +  et                                                                 (C.4)

from which t and y
                 ~t can be solved in terms of et :
              
      ~t = -
      y            et                                                                (C.5)
            + y + 
           ( + y )
      t =          et                                                                (C.6)
           + y + 

From the Taylor rule, the nominal interest rate is

      ^         
      it =           et .                                                            (C.7)
              + y + 

Define    + y +  . The coefficients are
      aiao
      ye   = - ,                                                                     (C.8)
      aiao
      e      =  ( + y ) ,                                                            (C.9)
      aiao
      ie     =  .                                                                   (C.10)

The sectoral dynamics involve the bilateral relative price as a state variable.
            aiao        aiao                   aiao        aiao
      1,t =  1s
                 st-1 +  1e
                             et ;        2,t =  2s
                                                    st-1 +  2e
                                                                et .                (C.11)

The forecasts for the sectoral inflation are
                 aiao                    aiao
      Et 1,t+1 =  1s
                      st ;    Et 2,t+1 =  2s
                                              st                                    (C.12)




                                                11
From the dollar sector's NKPC:
            aiao      aiao
      1,t =  1s
                 st + ye   et + st                                               (C.13)
            aiao         aiao
          =  1s
                 +  st + ye   et                                                 (C.14)
              aiao                    aiao                 aiao
          =    1s
                     +  st-1 +         1s
                                             +   +         ye     et             (C.15)

The last equation comes from the autoregressive representation of the bilateral relative
price. From comparison with the unknown coefficients:
      aiao   aiao
       1s
           =  1s
                  +                                                              (C.16)
      aiao   aiao       aiao
       1e
           =  1s
                  +   + ye                                                       (C.17)
                 aiao     aiao
The coefficients  1s
                      and  1e
                               can be solved as:
      aiao
       1s
           =  (1 - )                                                             (C.18)
      aiao
       1e
             =  (1 - ) -                                                         (C.19)

By combining the terms with common coefficients, the dollar-sector inflation can be
rewritten as a function of the contemporary bilateral price and the exchange rate shock:

             (1 - )
      1,t =         st -  et                                                     (C.20)
               
          =  (1 - ) st-1 +  (1 -  -  ) et                                        (C.21)

The dollar-sector inflation is above its steady state if

                        1 -  >                                                   (C.22)
                                
                   + y +  >                                                      (C.23)
                               1-
                                                           +
                          + y >  (1 - )   +                                      (C.24)
                                                           1-
                        +            + y
      (1 - )   +                <                                                (C.25)
                        1-           

From Proposition 2, inflation in the non-dollar sector is
                 1-
      2,t = 1,t -      st                                                        (C.26)
                   
             (1 -  ) (1 - )
          =-                st -  et                                             (C.27)
                   




                                             12
The sectoral output gaps are derived from the demand functions:

      y
      ~1,t = y
             ~t + st                                                                      (C.28)
           = st -  et                                                                     (C.29)
           = st-1 +  ( -  ) et                                                            (C.30)
      y      ~t - (1 -  ) st
      ~2,t = y                                                                            (C.31)
           = - (1 -  ) st -  et                                                           (C.32)

The contemporaneous response of the dollar-sector output gap depends on the parame-
ters. The sector produces above the natural level if

               >                                                                          (C.33)
                 
       + y +  >                                                                           (C.34)
                 
       1
         -    <  + y                                                                      (C.35)
       
           1      + y
             -<                                                                           (C.36)
                  

C.2     DIAO
The expected aggregate inflation in the dynamic IS curve is rewritten as:

      Et [t+1 ] = Et [(1 -  ) 1,t+1 + 2,t+1 ]                                             (C.37)
                = Et [1,t+1 +  (st+1 - st )]                                              (C.38)
                = Et [1,t+1 ] -  (1 - ) st                                                (C.39)

where the last equation follows from Eq. (45). The bilateral relative price st can be viewed
as an exogenous autoregressive variable in a three-equation system; so all endogenous
                                                          diao                diao
variables can be written as functions of st . Let y~t = ys     st , and 1,t =  1s
                                                                                   st . Again, it
                                        diao                           diao
follows from Eq. (45) that Et [~
                               yt+1 ] = ys st , and Et [1,t+1 ] = 1 s st . Substitute these,
together with the Taylor rule, into the dynamic IS curve and the dollar-sector NKPC
                                             diao      diao
yields the following equation system for ys       and   1s
                                                            :
             diao   diao
      (1 - )  1s
                  = ys   +                                                                (C.40)
            diao                    diao
      ( - )  1s
                 = - [ (1 - ) + y ] ys   -  (1 - )                                        (C.41)
                       1
Define       (1-)[ (1-)+y ]+( -)
                                 .     The solutions to the equation system are:

      diao
      ys   = -                                                                            (C.42)
      diao    (1 - )
       1s
           =         (1 -  )                                                              (C.43)
                
The response of dollar-sector inflation depends on the parameters. It is negative if
 diao
  1s
      < 0, and positive otherwise. Taking into account the expression of , this con-


                                                13
dition becomes:

      (1 - ) [ (1 - ) + y ] +  ( - ) <                                          (C.44)
                 (1 - ) [ (1 - ) + y ] <                                        (C.45)
                             (1 - ) y
                        +              <                                        (C.46)
                                  
                                         ( -  ) 
                                    y <                                         (C.47)
                                          1 - 
The dynamics of the nominal interest rate are obtained by substituting the solutions to
the output gap and dollar-sector inflation into the Taylor rule:
     ^
     it =  diao        diao
                st + y ys   st                                                  (C.48)
            1s

        = - ( -  ) (1 - )  st                                                   (C.49)

Its response is negative if:

                   -1 >                                                         (C.50)
            -1 ( + )
       1 +             >                                                        (C.51)
             1-
                         1-1-
                    -1 >                                                        (C.52)
                           +
Inflation in the non-dollar sector is obtained using Proposition 2:
               1-
      2,t = 1,t -   st                                                          (C.53)
                 
             1-
          =-    (1 -  +  ) st                                                   (C.54)
              
The aggregate inflation is the weighted sum of the sectoral inflation:

      t = (1 -  ) 1,t + 2,t                                                     (C.55)
            1-
        =-         st +  et                                                     (C.56)
              
        = - (1 - )  st-1 +  [1 - (1 - )  ] et                                   (C.57)
                                                                                (C.58)

The coefficient of the exchange rate shock is

       { ( - 1) + (1 - ) [ (1 - ) + y ]}  > 0                                   (C.59)




                                            14
The real interest rate is:

      ^t = ^
      r    it - Et [t+1 ]                                                      (C.60)
                                         1-
        = - ( -  ) (1 - )  st +              st                                (C.61)
                                          
        =  (1 - )  st                                                          (C.62)

The sectoral output gap dynamics can be derived from the demand functions:

      y      ~t + st = - (  -  ) st
      ~1,t = y                                                                 (C.63)
      y      ~t - (1 -  ) st = - [  +  (1 -  )] st
      ~2,t = y                                                                 (C.64)

For the dollar sector to produce above the natural level,  >  . Otherwise, it produces
below the natural level.

C.3     DIDO
Follow the same method as in the case of DIAO. Solutions to the three-equation system
are:
                             
      ~t = - 
      y             +          y  s t                                          (C.65)
                            1-
               (1 - )          
      1,t =           1-         y  s t
                                  +                                            (C.66)
                             1-
      ^                         
      it = - ( -   ) (1 - )  +    y  s t                                       (C.67)
                               1-

From the IS curve, the real interest rate is positive:

                                  
      ^t =    (1 - )  +
      r                              y  st                                     (C.68)
                                 1-

Inflation in the non-dollar sector is negative:

                1-                         
      2,t = -      1-+                +      y  s t < 0                        (C.69)
                                          1-

Sectoral output gaps are given by:

                           
      ~1,t = -   +
      y                      y  -  s t                                         (C.70)
                          1-
                           
      ~2,t = -  
      y                 +    y  +  (1 -  ) st                                  (C.71)
                          1-

Aggregate inflation is:

              1-                  
      t = -                  +      y      st +  et                            (C.72)
                                 1-

                                             15
The coefficient of the exchange rate shock is

      { ( - 1 - y ) + (1 - ) [ (1 - ) + y ]}                                     (C.73)

whose sign depends on the parameters. In the case of a large elasticity of substitution,
the aggregate inflation response is negative.




                                           16
