                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       EXPOSURE TO A SCHOOL SHOOTING AND SUBSEQUENT WELL-BEING

                                       Phillip B. Levine
                                       Robin McKnight

                                      Working Paper 28307
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28307


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




We are grateful to seminar participants at Wellesley College and at the National Bureau of
Economic Research Summer Institute Children's Program Meeting for helpful comments. Tom
Downes also provided useful advice regarding the use of the NCES Common Core of Data. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Phillip B. Levine and Robin McKnight. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Exposure to a School Shooting and Subsequent Well-Being
Phillip B. Levine and Robin McKnight
NBER Working Paper No. 28307
December 2020
JEL No. I18,I21

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper examines the impact of school shootings on the educational performance and long-
term health consequences of students who survive them, highlighting the impact of
indiscriminate, high-fatality incidents. Initially, we focus on test scores in the years following a
shooting. We also examine whether exposure to a shooting affects chronic absenteeism, which
may play a role in explaining any such effect, and school expenditures, which may counteract it.
We analyze national, school-district level data and additional school-level data from Connecticut
in this part of the analysis. In terms of effects on health status, we focus on its most extreme
measure, mortality in the years following a shooting. In this part of the analysis, we analyze
county-level data on mortality by cause. In all analyses, we treat the timing of these events as
random, enabling us to identify causal effects. Our results indicate that indiscriminate, high-
fatality school shootings, such as those that occurred at Sandy Hook and Columbine, have
considerable adverse effects on students exposed to them. We cannot rule out substantive effects
of other types of shootings with fewer or no fatalities.


Phillip B. Levine
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
plevine@wellesley.edu

Robin McKnight
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
rmcknigh@wellesley.edu
                                                                                    Levine and McKnight, p. 1



        Between 1995 and 2019, 302 people have died in 176 shooting incidents that occurred in

public schools during school hours and caused at least one death. The tragedy and horror

associated with these shootings is difficult to express. The media coverage of these events

naturally focuses on those whose lives have been taken and the intense pain felt by their families

and communities.

        Of course, the impact may not end there. Every student enrolled in a school experiencing

a shooting suffers trauma that has the potential to affect their lives subsequently. In the 20 years

following the 1999 shooting at Columbine High School, we estimate that 180,000 students were

exposed to a school shooting that occurred during school hours and caused at least one fatality

(Levine and McKnight, 2020). The psychological distress that those students suffer may have a

disruptive effect on many aspects of their lives following the event.

        The purpose of this paper is to examine the longer-term well-being of the students who

are exposed to a school shooting, focusing specifically on educational and health-related

outcomes. We treat each shooting as an event whose timing is random. Our main empirical

approach is a triple-difference estimation strategy; students in affected birth cohorts in relevant

years in the locations of the shootings would experience differential outcomes if the shootings

had a causal impact. As we document below, boys are more likely to be the victims of these

shootings, so we consider the impact on boys and girls separately in much of our analysis.

Because our overall empirical results are driven by indiscriminate, high-victimization incidents,

we devote additional attention to the impact of two of the most egregious examples of such

tragedies: the shootings at Sandy Hook Elementary, in Newtown, CT in 2012 and at Columbine

High School, in Littleton, CO in 1999.1


1
 The 2018 shooting at Marjorie Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, FL occurred too recently to examine
given limitations on available data.
                                                                               Levine and McKnight, p. 2



          We initially examine how survivors fare in school, focusing on standardized test scores in

the years following the shooting. In this part of the analysis, we focus on shootings that took

place at an elementary or middle school, which are less common. We do so because these tests

are required annually in grades 3 through 8 and our national source of test score data restricts its

attention to standardized tests given in these grades. National data are reported at the district

level. We find that test scores fell considerably among affected students in the district where the

Sandy Hook school shooting occurred, particularly for boys. We do not find a statistically

significant impact across all shootings, which may reflect low statistical power, arising from

relatively fewer shootings at elementary and middle schools and our use of data that are

aggregated to the district level.

          To provide additional context for the estimated impact at Sandy Hook, we examine test

results from the state of Connecticut. These data are publicly reported at the school level. We

find reductions in a measure of proficiency rates across the entire district following the shooting.

These Connecticut data also enable us to examine a plausible mechanism for some of the test

score results: chronic absenteeism (absence for more than 10 percent of school days). We find

that the rate of chronic absenteeism at Sandy Hook Elementary more than doubled in the year

after the shooting. It also increased at other elementary schools in the district, although to a lesser

extent.

          School shootings have financial implications for districts, which may try to lessen the

impact on the surviving students by providing them with greater resources. To examine this

issue, we use national, district-level financial data. We find that all types of school shootings lead

districts to spend more money on "support services" (which includes counseling and security, but

may also represent other services). In shootings classified as indiscriminate with multiple
                                                                               Levine and McKnight, p. 3



fatalities (like Sandy Hook), all forms of spending increase after the shooting, including

instructional spending and a large increase in spending on support services. Based on our

findings on test score results, though, this additional spending appears to be insufficient to offset

the impacts on the exposed students.

         We also explore the impact of shootings on longer-term health status, focusing on its

most extreme ­ but objective ­ measure, mortality in the years following the shooting. We use

county-level, Vital Statistics Mortality data with detailed causes of death between 1995 and 2017

to determine whether exposure to a school shooting affects life expectancy for some affected

students in the years following a shooting. We use a similar triple-difference estimation strategy,

also making use of the specific causes of death available in these data. If there is any causal

effect of school shootings among young adults, it would arise in the form of additional deaths

from "external" causes, including suicide and other accidents (which include "accidental

poisonings," like drug overdoses), but not "internal" causes (cancer, heart disease, etc.). This

analysis focuses on shootings that affected high-school aged children (14 to 18) at the time of the

event.

         We find that exposure to a school shooting may affect even this very extreme measure of

health status. Again, though, we track a major contributing factor of the impact to indiscriminate

shootings with numerous fatalities; Columbine is the most salient example in these data.

External, but not internal, deaths increased as a result, particularly for boys. The fact that our

data are aggregated to the county level, which may include multiple schools, makes it more

difficult to identify the impact of shootings that were less extreme.

         Taken together, our findings indicate long-term consequences ­ including lower test

scores, increased absenteeism, and increased subsequent mortality ­ for those students, and
                                                                                        Levine and McKnight, p. 4



particularly boys, who are exposed to the highest-victimization school shootings. We show that

these negative outcomes occur despite substantially increased spending in affected school

districts.

        Our findings imply that the social costs of school shootings persist long after the shooting

itself, affecting outcomes for exposed students through young adulthood and possibly beyond.

As costly as the loss of life associated with such an event is, even that cost is an understatement

of the amount of harm that is done.

I. Prior Research

        Our analysis contributes to the literature on the impact of traumatic events on subsequent

outcomes for those who were exposed. Past research has shown that exposure to such events has

a harmful effect on mental health, as reviewed by Wilson (2017). The Oklahoma City bombing

in 1995 is an example of such an event; North et al. (2001) find that 34 percent of survivors

experienced post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Lowe and Galea (2017) draw similar

conclusions regarding exposure to mass shootings based on their review of the evidence. 2 North,

et al. (1994) provide an example of this research. They find that 28 percent of the survivors of a

1991 mass shooting in a cafeteria in Killeen, Texas, where 23 people were killed, met the criteria

for PTSD following this event. In a recent contribution to this literature, Bharadwaj, et al. (2020)

report that children who survived a 2011 mass shooting at a summer camp in Utøya, Norway,

where 69 people were killed, experienced a 400 percent increase in mental health diagnoses

following the shooting relative to a matched sample.




2
  Mass shootings are generally defined as shootings with four or more fatalities. While some school shootings meet
this definition of a mass shooting, there are many school shootings that do not because they have three or fewer
fatalities. Likewise, many mass shootings are not considered school shootings, because they do not occur on school
grounds.
                                                                                          Levine and McKnight, p. 5



         Prior research has also documented that stressful and traumatic experiences hinder

educational performance. This includes exposure to police violence (Ang, forthcoming), local

homicides (Sharkey, 2010), and the short-run effects of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita (Sacerdote,

2012). 3 The previously described summer camp shooting in Norway led to half a standard

deviation decline in test scores among survivors (Bharadwaj, et al., 2020).

         Our understanding of the long-term health consequences of such traumatic events is more

limited. For instance, in their review of the evidence on the impact of mass shootings, Lowe and

Galea (2017) conclude that "further reviews could also apply broader inclusion criteria, for

example, to provide insight into the influence of direct and indirect exposure to mass shootings

on other domains of functioning (e.g., physical health and social functioning)." Some research

does find an impact, though. Dursun (2019) demonstrates that pregnant women exposed to mass

shootings are more likely to give birth prematurely and to very low birth weight babies.

         A school shooting represents another form of traumatic event that has the potential to

affect survivors in its immediate aftermath and beyond. Following the school shooting at

Columbine, for instance, an increased share of students reported, in a national survey, that they

felt "too unsafe to go to school" (Brener, et al. 2002). Rossin-Slater, et al. (2019) find that

exposure to a fatal school shooting increases anti-depressant prescriptions filled at retail

pharmacies by 21 percent among youths under the age of 20. Elevated sales persist throughout

the two-year post-shooting sample period, suggesting prolonged mental health consequences for

survivors.

    Recent research has explored the impact of exposure to a school shooting on other outcomes.

Beland and Kim (2016) address educational outcomes. They find that math proficiency at


3
 In the long-run, test scores of students who moved to higher-performing school districts after the hurricanes
actually improved.
                                                                               Levine and McKnight, p. 6



schools that experienced a fatal shooting is reduced by about 5 percentage points relative to

unaffected schools in the same town, while English proficiency is reduced by about 4 percentage

points, with larger effects in schools that experienced multiple fatalities.

   Contemporaneous work by Cabral, et al. (2020) examines the longer-term impact on students

who were exposed to shootings at 33 schools in the state of Texas. They find that survivors

suffered lower levels of educational attainment, higher levels of absenteeism, and lower

subsequent early career earnings. Their analysis is complementary to our own. While our

strongest evidence comes from indiscriminate shootings with multiple fatalities, their data set

does not include such events. But, while we lack statistical power to definitively identify the

impacts of lower-victimization events, they have more power and conclude that these events are

consequential for educational and economic outcomes.

II. Documenting School Shootings

       Our key independent variable of interest is a measure of exposure to a school shooting.

This measure is constructed from the comprehensive K-12 School Shooting Database created by

the Center for Homeland Defense and Security (CHDS) at the Naval Postgraduate School. These

data are intended to catalog "each and every instance a gun is brandished on school property for

any reason, regardless of the number of victims (including zero), time, day of week, or category

(e.g. planned attack, accidental, domestic violence, gang-related)" (Riedman and O'Neill, 2018).

The database provides extensive information regarding each shooting, but we primarily rely on

information about the school location, the number of fatalities, the time and day that the shooting

occurred, and the category of shooting. CHDS separates the shootings into 19 categories, such as

indiscriminate, accidental discharge of a firearm, bullying, gang-related shootings, self-defense,

and others. We describe these data in greater detail in Levine and McKnight (2020).
                                                                                Levine and McKnight, p. 7



       We limit our analysis to shootings that occur at a public school, on a school day and

during school hours, when students are likely to be exposed to them. We also limit our analysis

to shootings that resulted in a fatality. As documented in Levine and McKnight (2020), shootings

with no fatalities appear to be subject to differential rates of reporting in the news media ­ and

therefore differential likelihood of inclusion in the database ­ based on the timing and location of

the shootings. Specifically, we show that shootings with no fatalities are more likely to be

reported in the aftermath of a high-victimization shooting, when school shootings are a focus of

public discussion. And shootings with no fatalities are more likely to be reported in urban than in

rural areas, a pattern that may be attributable to greater presence of local media. Regardless of

the reason for the bias in reporting, we conclude that it is important to focus on shootings that

result in a fatality, because they are more likely to be uniformly reported across communities and

over time. During the time period between 1995 and 2019, the focus of our analysis, there were

176 school shootings that meet our criteria; they resulted in 302 fatalities.

       The distribution of the number of fatalities per shooting is quite skewed. Eighty percent

of the shootings resulted in one fatality, 11 percent resulted in 2 fatalities, and 5 percent resulted

in 3 fatalities. A smaller percentage of school shootings generated a disproportionate share of the

deaths, with the largest number of fatalities at Columbine High School in 1999 (15 fatalities),

Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in 2018 (17 fatalities), and Sandy Hook Elementary

School in 2012 (28 fatalities). All of the these most extreme incidents were categorized by

CHDS as "indiscriminate" shootings, indicating that they were not targeted at specific

individuals.

       Figure 1 shows patterns in these data over time. It documents that the number of

shootings has not changed very much over time. In most years, the number of fatalities is close
                                                                              Levine and McKnight, p. 8



to the number of shootings, reflecting the fact that the majority of school shootings generate a

single fatality. However, the number of fatalities spikes in years with high-victimization events.

       The variation in school shootings raises the possibility that there may be heterogeneity in

the impacts. It is plausible, for instance, that impacts increase with the number of fatalities or

vary with the category of shooting. In addition, it is possible that schools and communities

respond differently to some types of shootings and that this variation in responses can mediate

the impact. In our analysis, we therefore allow for some heterogeneity by indiscriminate status

and number of fatalities.

       We also note that the CHDS data document the gender of shooters for 89 percent of

shootings in its database and the gender of victims for 86 percent of shootings. Among shootings

with fatalities that occurred on school days and during school hours since 1995, these data

indicate that 90 percent of shooters ­ and 100 percent of indiscriminate shooters ­ were male.

The data also indicate that 86 percent of the shootings had at least one male victim, whereas 33

percent had at least one female victim. These differences by gender are relevant for our

subsequent discussion regarding differential effects of school shootings by gender.

       We append several sources of data to the school shooting data to examine the impact of

these events on educational outcomes, school finances, and subsequent mortality. In Table 1, we

provide a summary of these additional data sources, including the outcome measures, the sample

periods, and the number of shootings that we analyze along with a brief description of the

empirical methods that we use. We discuss each of these data sources and our methods in greater

detail below.
                                                                               Levine and McKnight, p. 9



III. Impact on Test Scores

A. Data

       The first source of data we use to examine the impact of school shootings on test scores is

the Stanford Education Data Archive (SEDA). As noted in the first row of Table 1, these data

include English Language Arts and Math test scores for grades 3 through 8 for school years from

2008-09 to 2015-16. Mean test scores are provided at the school district level. Because each state

can administer a different test, the researchers linked the state-specific test scores to National

Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) test scores to convert the state scores to a common,

normalized scale. Thus, the average SEDA-reported test score measure is zero and the unit of

measure is interpreted as standard deviations in test scores relative to the national cohort.

       Given the sample period, our analysis of the impact of school shootings on test scores is

limited to shootings that occurred during the school years ending between 2009 and 2016. In

addition, because these data only include test scores administered in grades 3 through 8, we

focus our analysis on 14 school shootings that affected elementary and middle schools during

this time period. Each of these shootings resulted in a single fatality, except for the

indiscriminate shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School, which resulted in 28 deaths.

       These data possess some limitations for our analysis. First, limiting our analysis to these

14 shootings reduces our statistical power. Second, data are reported as means for entire school

districts. Even if test scores for students in a single school are affected by their exposure to a

school shooting, the impact on the overall mean for the district may be small, especially in

larger, urban school districts. As we show in Levine and McKnight (2020), shootings classified

as personally-targeted or crime-related are more likely to occur in these areas. Thus, our ability
                                                                                         Levine and McKnight, p. 10



to identify an impact on test scores, particularly for these other types of shootings, may be

limited even if such an effect exists.

         We complement our analysis of SEDA test score data with additional, publicly-reported

information from the state of Connecticut, as described in the second row of Table 1. 4 This part

of the analysis focuses specifically on educational outcomes of students in Newtown, CT

following the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting. The advantage of this additional data

source is that it allows us to examine test scores at the school level and to explore the pattern of

effects across schools that are directly-affected and other schools in the district. The data include

indicators of proficiency at the school and grade level (3rd through 8th grades) between 2007-08

and 2017-18.

         We focus on 3rd and 4th grade test results in these data. Since Sandy Hook enrolls students

through 4th grade, once students move beyond that level, they mix with students from other

schools. This prevents us from consistently tracking differentially exposed students. For this

analysis, we construct a balanced panel of data from 267 elementary schools in 87 districts

between 2008 and 2018. The state did not report test score data in 2014 due to a transition to a

new test format. Because proficiency rates are not directly comparable before and after the

transition, our analysis focuses on each school's percentile within the distribution of proficiency

rates across all the schools in the state for a given grade level, subject, and year. 5




4
  Data beginning in 2014-15 is publicly available at http://data.ctdata.org/data_by_topic#education. Data from
earlier years was publicly available at the website, www.ctreports.com. We accessed these data in 2019, but that
website was shut down in January of 2020.
5
  After the transition to the new test, we observe the share of students who "met or exceeded" standards, instead of
the share who were "proficient." Note that the rate is suppressed from the data, and the school is therefore excluded
from our panel, when the count of students in a particular category falls below six. In order to maintain a full panel
of schools in the Newtown district, however, we impute missing values (using the assumption that the suppressed
value is 5) in the few cases where data are missing. Our results are similar if we exclude these imputed observations.
                                                                              Levine and McKnight, p. 11



B. Descriptive Analysis

        Before conducting a formal statistical analysis, we report the results of a descriptive

analysis of the effects of the Sandy Hook school shooting using school-level data from

Connecticut. These data include percentile scores based on a school's performance in math and

English and language arts (ELA). We restrict the sample to scores from the 3rd and 4th grades, as

described previously. To simplify the descriptive exercise, we average percentile scores across

the two grades within the school and across subject areas (i.e. the average of four scores per

school). For this analysis, we compare patterns in these averaged percentile scores between

Sandy Hook Elementary, other Newtown elementary schools, and other elementary schools in

the state. Because of the circumstances of the shooting, no test results are available for any

school in the Newtown district in 2012-13 or, as we described earlier, for the entire state in 2013-

14 due to a transition in the state standardized test.

        Given these data issues, any impact of the shooting on test results would be observed

between 2011-12 and 2014-15. Our available "post" data from 2014-15 and 2015-16 test results

for 3rd and 4th graders includes students who were exposed to the shooting, observed two or three

years afterwards.

        The results of this analysis are presented in Figure 2. Newtown, CT is a high-income

town with strong public schools. Its scores are typically much higher than state averages, which

is verified by the very high proficiency rates prior to the shooting, in the 80th to 90th percentile

range. At other elementary schools in the state, the average percentile is consistently around 50,

by design.

        At Sandy Hook, test results fell dramatically after the shooting. Two years later in 2014-

15, our measure is still 20 percentile points lower than it was beforehand. Results rebounded
                                                                              Levine and McKnight, p. 12



somewhat over time as the affected cohorts aged out of the school. At other Newtown

elementary schools, these data suggest that test scores fell as well, suggesting a broad impact

within the district.

C. Econometric Analysis

        The descriptive analysis highlights the impact of the Sandy Hook school shooting, but we

conduct an econometric analysis to formalize our findings and examine the impact of the full set

of relevant shootings. We use district-level data for the nation from SEDA, which enables us to

incorporate test scores from additional grade levels, additional districts that were affected by

other school shootings, as well as unaffected school districts across the country. In addition, we

can separately analyze scores for boys and girls.

        Our empirical strategy tests for differences in outcomes in geographic locations that were

affected by school shootings, among cohorts of students who were exposed to school shootings,

in the years after the school shootings occurred. It is therefore a triple-difference strategy that is

characterized by the following regression equation:

              TestScoregdt =  + Exposedgdt + t + g + d + t g + t d + gd + gdt                       (1)

        Where g represents grades, d represents school districts, and t represents time. Our key

independent variable of interest is Exposedgdt, which is an indicator for children who were

exposed to a school shooting. The impact of a school shooting is therefore identified by variation

at the grade/district/year level.

        Our regressions include a full set of second-order interactions between grade, district, and

year. These interactions control flexibly for any trends in outcomes that may vary by age group

or geographic area, and for any local differences in outcomes for different age groups.

Regressions are weighted by enrollment in grade level g in school district d in year t. Standard
                                                                             Levine and McKnight, p. 13



errors are clustered at the district level. To reduce computational complexity, we collapse data

for all districts where no school shooting occurred within a state into a single composite state-

level control group.

        Table 2 presents the results of this analysis. The top panel shows results for all shootings,

and we see that, collectively, school shootings do not have a statistically significant impact on

standardized test scores overall or for boys or girls.

       In the middle panel, we distinguish types of shootings. As indicated earlier, data

limitations require us to focus on shootings that occurred in elementary and middle schools,

limiting our sample to 14 of these events. Only one (Sandy Hook) led to more than one fatality.

In this part of the analysis, we distinguish those with more than one death (Sandy Hook) from all

the other shootings.

       We find no statistically significant effect on test scores for those shootings with one

death, but Sandy Hook led to a significant reduction in test scores in both subject areas. The

impact for boys is larger than the impact for girls. The exact impact depends on the test but, on

average, boys' scores fell by 0.1 of a standard deviation of and girls' scores fell by 0.06. The

effects on boys and girls are statistically significantly different from each other. The impacts are

substantial, particularly for an analysis conducted at the level of district means. The larger impact

on boys is consistent with other evidence suggesting that boys suffer greater educational

consequences from other environmental disadvantages (See, for example, Bertrand and Pan,

2013; Autor et al., 2015; Chetty et al., 2016; and Kearney and Levine, 2016).

       We note that the lack of a significant effect of the other shootings (those with one

fatality) on test scores does not mean one does not exist. Even if there are substantial effects in

the affected schools, when the test scores are averaged with the rest of the unaffected schools in
                                                                             Levine and McKnight, p. 14



the district, they may not be statistically apparent, especially relative to the typical random

variability in test scores.

        At Newtown, though, the shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary could have had an impact

on learning not only for the students in the school, but also at other schools in the district where

siblings, friends, and acquaintances attended school. We provided limited evidence of this earlier

in our descriptive analysis and pursue it further in an econometric framework by examining test

score data from the state of Connecticut. As described above, we focus on 3rd and 4th grade test

scores only, when students are enrolled in elementary school.

        More formally, we estimate a difference-in-differences model that is characterized by the

following regression equation:

                TestScoregst =  + 1SandyHooks*Postt + 2OtherNewtowns*Postt +                       (2)

                                     t + g + s + s*trendt + gst

where test scores are measured for grade level g in school s and year t. Our identification,

though, comes only at the level of schools over time (s and t). Our analysis includes school fixed

effects, year fixed effects, grade-level fixed effects, and school-specific linear time trends.

Regressions are weighted by the enrollment in grade level g in school s and year t. Standard

errors are clustered at the school district level.

        We also note that the outcome in this analysis is the school's percentile in the state

proficiency rate distribution for the specific test and grade. As we described earlier, the specific

test administered changed in 2013-14, so direct comparisons of proficiency rates before and after

the transition would be inappropriate. Instead, we convert these data to percentiles, which should

be comparable over time. We also note that these data are not available by gender, so we cannot

compare the estimated effects between boys and girls.
                                                                              Levine and McKnight, p. 15



        Our results, displayed in Table 3, show that there were effects on test results throughout

the school district. In the years following the shooting at Sandy Hook, average 3rd and 4th grade

test scores fell by 26 and 6 percentile points in math and ELA, respectively. Students at other

Newtown elementary schools experienced diminished performances as well. Their average test

scores fell by 35 and 18 percentile points in math and ELA, respectively. The small size of the

Newtown district (only 4 elementary schools) may contribute to the considerable impact at other

Newtown schools. The results are consistent with the earlier results using SEDA data, reported in

Table 2, indicating larger effects on math scores than ELA.

D. Interpreting the Results: The Impact of Mobility

        One limitation of this analysis is the issue of mobility. Students living near the site of a

school shooting may move away or enroll in a private school in subsequent years. Prior research

suggests that these incidents can affect enrollment patterns (e.g. Abouk and Adams, 2013,

Beland and Kim, 2016). If that mobility were random in terms of the students/families who

chose to move, it would not bias our results. It is plausible, though, that students who move are

not randomly selected. If higher-scoring students are more likely to move away (or enroll in a

local private school), for instance, this could introduce bias, overstating the impact of a shooting

on test scores.

        We use the NCES Common Core of Data (Common Core) and publicly-reported data

from Newtown Public Schools on enrollment in elementary schools to see whether such mobility

occurs. If enrollments drop in the immediate aftermath of a shooting, it would indicate that some

students moved away from the school where the shooting occurred and raises the possibility of

bias.
                                                                             Levine and McKnight, p. 16



       The Common Core include information on enrollment in each school district. Using these

data, we estimate difference-in-difference models (district and year) of the impact of a school

shooting on enrollments. The results indicate a negative, but insignificant effect of enrollments in

response to all types of school shootings, but a 7.2 percent decline in enrollments in response to

an indiscriminate shooting with greater than 1 fatality (significant at the 10 percent level). This

impact is at the district level, which likely understates the impact at the specific school that has

experienced a shooting.

       We also track enrollments for the 2010 through 2014 kindergarten entry cohorts in Sandy

Hook Elementary using data presented in Prowda (2019). These data include the number of

students born in each cohort residing in the Sandy Hook school attendance zone. In these data,

we see similar evidence of mobility in the year after the shooting. The magnitude of the decline

is comparable to the 7 percent decline we estimated using Common Core data. The evidence is

strongly suggestive that some families left the school because of the shooting.

       Although outmigration potentially biases our results, the bias is unlikely to be large.

Suppose, for instance, that a class at Sandy Hook had a mean percentile score of 90 before the

shooting, consistent with the data shown in Figure 2. Of that class, suppose that 10 percent

moved away as a result. If those students were all in the 99th percentile, this mobility would

reduce the average percentile score from 90 to 89, in the absence of any causal effect of the

shooting on test scores. We observe an impact that is far greater than that. Although mobility is

an issue that should be kept in mind, it is unlikely to be substantively driving our findings.

E. Spillovers to Other Communities

       One potential limitation of this analysis is that the impact of a shooting may be

understated because the "control group" may be indirectly affected. Events such as the Sandy
                                                                             Levine and McKnight, p. 17



Hook school shooting, for example, were so highly publicized and broadly traumatic that

children elsewhere could have been affected by it. We have already shown that it had an impact

on test results at other schools within the district. To the extent that "unaffected" students

outside of the school district where the shooting occurs are adversely affected, our analysis will

understate effects on those who were directly exposed.

       Indeed, past research shows that traumatic events can have widespread impacts. For

instance, the psychological effects of the September 11th terrorist attacks were not limited to

those who directly experienced them. Silver et al. (2002) report that 17 percent of the U.S.

population outside of New York City reported symptoms of post-traumatic stress two months

after the attacks, with 6 percent continuing to report such symptoms after 6 months. In the

aftermath of a 2008 school shooting in Finland, matriculation test scores fell throughout the

country, with the effects concentrated among males (Poutvaara and Ropponen 2018).

       To assess the degree of spillovers in our setting, we extend our analysis of the Sandy

Hook shooting to examine its impact on test results of students from other nearby school districts

in the state with comparable socioeconomic status. We estimate that the shooting had no

significant impact on test results at these other schools. Although we see no evidence suggesting

broader impacts outside of the district, we note that if such an impact occurred, it would cause us

to understate the impact inside the district.

IV. Impact on Chronic Absenteeism

       In this section, we explore the impact of the shooting on chronic absenteeism, which is

defined as being absent for 10 percent or more of the school days in an academic year. If

students missed substantially more school as a result of exposure to the shooting, it could

contribute to the drop-off in their average performance.
                                                                                          Levine and McKnight, p. 18



A. Data and Descriptive Analysis

         We are aware of no national data on chronic absenteeism that we could use to estimate

the impact of a school shooting on this outcome. Instead, we rely exclusively on publicly-

available data from the state of Connecticut, available at edsight.ct.gov. As noted in the third row

of Table 1, these data are available at the school, but not grade, level. We focus our attention on

Sandy Hook Elementary and other Newtown elementary schools, comparing their patterns of

chronic absenteeism to other elementary schools in the state. 6 Restricting these data to

elementary schools makes this analysis consistent with our examination of test scores. We

examine a balanced panel of these schools, spanning the school years, 2011-12 through 2018-

19. 7

         We initially use these data to conduct a descriptive analysis of the impact of the Sandy

Hook school shooting on chronic absenteeism. We report chronic absenteeism in the years

following the shooting relative to the level that existed in 2011-12, before the event occurred.

Note that the exact date of the shooting was December 14, 2012, so the data point for 2012-13

represents half of a year in its aftermath.

         The results of a descriptive analysis of these data are reported in Figure 3. Each data

point in the figure represents the percentage point change in chronic absenteeism rates between

each year and the baseline. The rate of chronic absenteeism at Sandy Hook Elementary in 2011-

12 was 2.2 percent. In 2013-14, the first full year following the shooting, this rate had nearly

tripled, increasing over 4 percentage points. This effect appears to dissipate in subsequent years,



6
  These data do not directly indicate whether the school is an elementary school. We merge Connecticut test score
data to the enrollment data and focus on the same set of schools used in the test score analysis.
7
  Note that the chronic absenteeism percentages are bottom-coded; if it falls below a certain number of students, a
school's absence rate is coded as missing in the data. In cases of missing data, we use the lowest percentage of
chronic absences that is observed in other years to maintain a balanced panel of schools. Our analysis of these data is
not affected when we omit these observations.
                                                                                           Levine and McKnight, p. 19



as one might expect as cohorts age out. We also observe a smaller increase in chronic

absenteeism at other Newtown elementary schools, which dissipated more quickly.

B. Econometric Analysis

         We estimate a difference-in-differences specification, comparable to the one represented

in Equation 2, replacing test scores with chronic absenteeism rates as the dependent variable.

Because absenteeism is not reported for each grade level, we exclude the grade fixed effects.

More formally, the model we estimate takes the form:

           ChronicAbsenteeismst =  + 1SandyHooks*Postt + 2OtherNewtowns*Postt +                                         (3)

                                              t + s + s*trendt + st

         The results of this analysis are reported in the final column of Table 3. They suggest that,

in the aftermath of the shooting, there was a 3.4 percentage point increase in chronic absenteeism

at Sandy Hook Elementary School, with a 1.2 percentage point increase at other schools in the

district. These declines are large relative to the 2.2 and 3.0 percent baseline rates of chronic

absenteeism from 2011-12 at Sandy Hook and other Newtown elementary schools, respectively.

         While we cannot observe the distribution of absence rates in each school, it is reasonable

to suppose that absences increased throughout the distribution, not only in the tail that is

considered "chronic." We note that Cabral, et al. (2020) find a 0.4 percentage point increase in

absences as well as an increase in chronic absenteeism, following school shootings that have

zero or one fatality in their analysis of data from Texas. 8 The increase in school absences offers

a plausible mechanism for some of the decline in test scores as Sandy Hook Elementary School

and in the other elementary schools in the Newtown district.




8
  Our analysis of high fatality shootings finds that chronic absenteeism rose by 155 percent. Cabral, et al. (2021)
finds a 28 percent increase in chronic absenteeism in response to shootings that lead to either zero or one fatality.
                                                                             Levine and McKnight, p. 20



V. Impact on School Expenditures

       One would also anticipate that schools that have experienced a school shooting work hard

to improve the school environment in an effort to help reduce the impact on affected students.

This section examines the financial implications on the schools that have had the misfortune of

such an event.

A. Data and Descriptive Analysis

       To examine the impact of school shootings on school spending patterns, we use district-

level data from the Common Core School District Finance Survey data for the years 1995 to

2016. These data are described in rows 4 and 5 of Table 1. We focus on data for school districts

for which we observe the full 22 years of data, generating a panel data set. The categories of

spending that we examine are total expenditures, non-capital expenditures (including all

expenses except for capital outlays for construction, land, and equipment), expenditures for

instruction, support services, and other expenditures. Instructional spending includes payments

for salaries for teachers, teacher aides and assistants, benefits, supplies and materials for

instruction. Support services includes a wide range of expenditures, including the costs of

administration and record-keeping, student transportation, libraries, building services such as

heating and security, and nursing, psychological, and speech services for students. Examples of

other expenses include adult education, payments to other school systems, and interest on debt.

       The long availability of these data enables us to examine the impact of many more of the

incidents that our shootings database contains. We focus on those that occurred between 1998

and 2013, allowing us to observe each school district for at least three years before and after each

school shooting. Because the data are at the district level, we can examine shootings at all levels

of public schools, including elementary schools, middle schools/junior high schools, and high
                                                                              Levine and McKnight, p. 21



schools. For this analysis, we examine the impact of 105 of the 176 school shootings in our data

that occurred within the 1998-2013 period (allowing for a three-year window before and after the

shooting). We also separately examine the impact of the Sandy Hook school shooting on district

spending relative to other districts in the state of Connecticut.

       We conduct a descriptive analysis of district-level spending on support services, focusing

on the six indiscriminate shootings in our sample period that resulted in more than one fatality.

School spending is a district-wide decision, making this the appropriate level of analysis for such

an exercise. The districts that experienced such a shooting are those that include the following

schools: Sandy Hook Elementary (2012), Heath High School (1998), Westside Middle School

(1998), Columbine High School (1999), Red Lake High School (2005), and Chardon High

School (2012). We detrend all spending data (1995 is the baseline) and then compare levels of

district-level spending in the few years before and after each shooting occurred.

       The results of this analysis are reported in Figure 4. The data show that spending on

support services increased from around $2,200 per student per year to around $2,800 per student

per year in the year following a shooting, representing a 27 percent increase. It remained

elevated for at least three years afterward.

B. Econometric Analysis

       We extend this analysis by estimating econometric models of school spending by

category and by type of shooting. Our specification is analogous to that indicated in Equations 2

and 3, but focusing on an interaction between the type of school shooting and an indicator for

post, while controlling for year and district fixed effects and district-specific time trends.

           ln(Expendituresst) =  + 1ShootingTyped*Postt + t + ds + d*trendt + ast                   (4)
                                                                                            Levine and McKnight, p. 22



         Based on preliminary analyses, we specifically focus on the impact of indiscriminate

shootings, distinguished by the number of fatalities that result, relative to other types. Similar to

our analysis of test scores, we collapse the data for school districts within a state that experienced

no shooting into a single, composite state-level control group for computational simplicity.

         Table 4 presents our regression results, with a different measure of spending reported in

each column. We measure the expenditures as the natural log of expenditures per student, so

coefficients can be interpreted as percentage changes in per-pupil spending. The top panel

aggregates all types of shootings. We find no statistically significant impact on overall spending,

but we do find a small, significant, positive effect on spending on support services.

         The middle panel distinguishes types of shootings. All types increase support services

spending by at least a small amount, but indiscriminate shootings that result in more than one

death are clearly different. In those districts, spending on support services jumps by one-third.

Other forms of spending increase as well, leading to a 10 percent increase in overall spending.

The capital expenditure component of total expenditures generates very large year-to-year

variation in district spending when new building projects are undertaken. Thus, in the second

column, we exclude capital expenditures and find that per-pupil, non-capital expenditures

increase by 17 percent in the aftermath of indiscriminate school shootings with more than one

fatality.9 The fourth column shows a small, statistically significant increase in instructional

spending, while the final column shows a statistically significant 24 percent increase in "other"

spending. This category contains a range of expenditures that could be impacted by a school

shooting. For instance, it includes interest payments on debt ­ which would increase with debt-


9
  In an analysis of school district revenues, we see an offsetting, statistically significant increase in revenues in
districts that experience an indiscriminate shooting with more than one fatality. This increase is driven by a
statistically significant 15 percent increase in local tax revenue. Thus, the increased costs of operating schools in the
aftermath of such a shooting appear to be borne primarily by the local community.
                                                                           Levine and McKnight, p. 23



financed school construction projects ­ and payments to private school systems, charter schools,

and private schools ­ which could increase with changing enrollment patterns.

       The bottom panel of Table 4 repeats the analysis focusing specifically on the state of

Connecticut and the Sandy Hook school shooting. We estimate a model analogous to Equation 4,

but replace the shooting type indicator with a Newtown, CT indicator (since it is a district-level

analysis). The results indicate that the impact of Sandy Hook on school finances in Newtown

was similar to the broader effect of indiscriminate shootings where more than one person was

killed. The impact on spending on support services was smaller, but it still increased by 13

percent following the shooting.

       The evidence reported here indicates that school districts respond differentially to an

event as extreme as an indiscriminate school shooting with multiple fatalities. Using national

data (which drive the analysis in the middle panel of Table 4), the median school district in 2016

had $11 million in annual expenditures (or $10 million if capital expenditures are excluded). A

10 percent increase in spending would cost such a district $1.1 million per year. Of course, the

human tragedy in such an event is paramount, but it is noteworthy that school shootings generate

meaningful financial consequences for affected school districts. It is also noteworthy that this

additional spending appears insufficient to prevent a reduction in educational performance.

VI. Impact on Subsequent Mortality

       We next examine subsequent mortality for survivors of school shootings using county-

level Vital Statistics data between 1995 and 2017. Mortality is unquestionably an extreme health

outcome. Even if there are long-term health consequences of exposure to a school shooting, it is

plausible that there would be no mortality effect or that the mortality effect would be too small to

separate from the random variation in mortality across cohorts and years. If there are mortality
                                                                              Levine and McKnight, p. 24



effects, on the other hand, there are likely effects on other health outcomes that are less easily

measured.

A. Data

           As described in the sixth row of Table 1, we use county-level Vital Statistics mortality

data between 1995 and 2017 for our analysis of the impact of shootings on subsequent mortality

for cohorts who were exposed to school shootings. These data represent every death that

occurred in the United States along with the information contained on death certificates,

including month of death, detailed cause of death, and demographic details of the deceased (age,

sex, and race/ethnicity). The deceased's state and county of residence is restricted, but it can be

obtained by researchers under an agreement with the National Center for Health Statistics.

Because deaths are reported based on current residence, not residence during high school,

mobility is a potential problem in this analysis as well. A similar simulation as we described

regarding test scores is appropriate here, however, suggesting it is extremely unlikely to

substantively bias our results.

           For our analysis, we measure deaths per 1,000 population, using data from the

Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) program to measure the population. We

separately examine external and non-external causes of deaths. 10 Among external deaths, we

focus specifically on those caused by suicides, homicides, and other accidents (which include

accidental poisonings/drug overdoses).

           We examine subsequent mortality through age 29 for the cohorts who were exposed to

school shootings. For this analysis, we focus on shootings that affected children of high school

age (14 to 18) between 1995 and 2012, allowing us to observe mortality outcomes at least for



10
     These categories are not inclusive of all causes of death.
                                                                                         Levine and McKnight, p. 25



several years following the shooting event.11 During our sample period, there were 103 that

affected high school-age students; seven of these were indiscriminate shootings. Eighty-nine of

the shootings resulted in a single fatality. Eleven shootings resulted in two or three fatalities. The

shooting at Columbine High School in 1999 had the greatest number of fatalities, with 15

(including the two shooters).

           One weakness of these data is that they are available at the county level, not narrower

geographic areas that would better reflect school district boundaries. Many students in a county

where a school shooting took place did not attend the affected school. The focus on a somewhat

broader geographic area makes it more difficult to identify an effect, a limitation that needs to be

taken into consideration in interpreting the results of this analysis.

B. Descriptive Analysis

           Before conducting a formal statistical analysis, we conduct a quasi-experimental analysis

of the Columbine High School shooting, which took place in Jefferson County, Colorado, on

April 20, 1999 (during the 1998-99 school year). Using the Vital Statistics Mortality data, we

construct age-specific death rates for those between the ages of 14 and 29 for residents of

Jefferson County and all other counties in the state separately for each year between 1995 and

2017. We identify the cohort of "exposed" students who were potentially present at the school

shooting by identifying death rates among individuals who were residents of Jefferson County

and between the ages of 14 and 18 in 1999. We track death rates for that cohort as they age (15

to 19 in 2000, 16 to 20 in 2001, ...), assuming no mobility.

           We also construct similar death rates for the same age-ranges from other years ("non-

exposed" Jefferson County residents, aged 14 to 18 in years other than 1999, etc.) to set a



11
     This may include shootings that occurred at a middle school, which would have 14-year old students enrolled.
                                                                                        Levine and McKnight, p. 26



baseline death rate by age category in that county. Differencing those sets of statistics from

Jefferson County provides one estimate of cohort differences between students exposed to

Columbine and other cohorts within Jefferson County.

         To abstract from potential idiosyncrasies across cohorts, we conduct the same exercise

using age/year specific mortality rates for the rest of the state outside of Jefferson County.

Differencing these two sets of differences provides a baseline test of the impact of exposure to

the Columbine shooting on subsequent mortality. To summarize, we calculate the following

statistic:

                    (MRExposed Cohort/Jefferson County ­ MRUnexposed Cohort/Jefferson County) -

                        (MRExposed Cohort/Other County ­ MRUnexposed Cohort/Other County)

at ages 14-18, 15-19, 16-20, ..., using the 1995 through 2017 mortality data. Tracking this

statistic as individuals age provides a way to gauge the impact of the Columbine shooting on the

mortality patterns of shooting survivors.

         Figure 5 reports the results of this analysis. The first bar in this figure, which is visually

separated from the others, shows the impact on mortality in the year of the shooting on the

exposed cohort. It captures the direct impact of the shooting itself. It is not surprising that the

mortality rate for the 14-18-year-olds in Jefferson county was differentially higher in this year.

         The remainder of the figure explores the impact on mortality at subsequent ages. The

figure shows that, while mortality rates dipped downward in the initial years following the

shooting (perhaps reflecting increased support services), mortality rates eventually increased, and

the increase persisted through the exposed cohort's twenties. Of course, this figure provides no

standard errors and does not tell us anything about the causes of death. But it does provide
                                                                              Levine and McKnight, p. 27



suggestive evidence that the shooting at Columbine High School may have had long-term

impacts on mortality for the exposed cohort.

C. Econometric Approach

         As in our past analyses, we conduct a more formal econometric analysis to examine the

impact of exposure to a school shooting on subsequent mortality. We continue with our focused

analysis on the impact of the Columbine shooting and then broaden the discussion below to the

larger pool of all shootings we consider. The approach we use here is a triple difference

estimation strategy similar to that described earlier in Equation 1 regarding test scores. One main

difference here is that the data are organized by age (a), year (t), and county of residence (c). We

track cohorts over time, distinguishing between the contemporaneous effect in 1999 from the

subsequent effects in the years after that. Equation 5 provides a formal specification of this

model.

                  MortalityRateact =  + 1ExposedCurrentact + 2ExposedPostact                        (5)

                               + t + a + c + t a + t c + ac + act

The mortality rate represents deaths per 1,000 population. In this context, Exposed reflects the

fact that a student was in an age group and residing in a county (in this case, Jefferson County,

CO) at the time that a school shooting took place (again, assuming no mobility). The

ExposedCurrent coefficient (1) is capturing the same concept as the first bar in Figure 5 and the

ExposedPost coefficient (2) is capturing the same concept as the average of the remaining bars

in that figure. We estimate this model separately for boys and girls based on our earlier analysis

indicating that the impact of a shooting may differ by gender.

         The results of this analysis are reported in Table 5, with results for boys in the top panel

and for girls in the bottom panel. For boys, we see increases in contemporaneous deaths driven
                                                                                        Levine and McKnight, p. 28



by external deaths and, specifically, homicides and suicides, as one would expect based on the

nature of the shooting.12

         Note that since the coefficients are measured as mortality rates per 1,000 population, we

can multiply them by the cohort size in 1,000s (exposed cohorts are those between ages 14 and

18, distinguished by sex ­ values are shown in the notes to Table 5) to calculate an estimated

number of additional deaths. The implied, estimated numbers of excess deaths are generally

consistent with the actual impact of the shooting, providing some support that our econometric

approach is appropriately describing the effects.

         In terms of subsequent deaths, we find that both suicides and accidental deaths increased

for boys, leading to an overall increase in external deaths. We augment our earlier approach to

calculate the estimated number of deaths by noting that Columbine survivors remained in our

data through age 29, or an average of 13 additional years for those between 14 and 18 in 1999.

Our point estimates would imply that 9.8 additional suicides (0.038×19.9×13) and 8.8 additional

accidental deaths (.034×19.9×13) occurred among survivors through age 29. We see no

statistically significant effects on suicides or accidental deaths for girls. Some spurious changes

in mortality patterns are also evident in these data, but nothing that would suggest a broader

movement towards higher mortality among this cohort.

         We also estimate the impact of all 103 shootings that affected high school-age (14 to 18)

students identified in our sample period that led to a fatality in our analysis, distinguished by

category. The results of this analysis are reported in Tables 6A (boys) and 6B (girls). Overall,

our methods largely are able to identify the impact of the different types of shootings on

contemporaneously measured homicides and suicides, particularly for boys.


12
 At this incident, there were 15 deaths, including 13 homicides and 2 suicides. Ten of the student fatalities were
male.
                                                                             Levine and McKnight, p. 29



       Consistent with what we observed in Columbine, this evidence suggests that there is

some excess subsequent mortality among boys following an indiscriminate shooting. Following

an indiscriminate shooting with one fatality, these results indicate that accidental deaths rise.

Suicides increase following a larger fatality, indiscriminate shooting (identified from five such

events, including Columbine). For girls, the pattern appears to be different and does not tell a

consistent story.

       Taken as a whole, these results strongly suggest that high fatality, indiscriminate school

shootings affect subsequent mortality patterns of boys. An analysis of less aggregated data would

allow an identification strategy that is better able to pinpoint this impact. We view this as an

important topic for future research.

V. Discussion

       The trauma associated with exposure to a school shooting is hard to comprehend. It

would be difficult to discount its potential to have long-lasting impacts on the lives of those who

survive one. Identifying those effects, however, is a challenging task. Even though these

shootings are all too common and affect too many people, the proportion of children affected is

relatively small and the ways in which the effects may manifest themselves are not easily

measured in publicly available, aggregated data.

       Nonetheless, we find evidence of impacts on exposed children in the years following a

shooting. Our strongest evidence comes in the form of lower test scores among students affected

by the Sandy Hook school shooting and an increased risk of suicide or accidental deaths among

students affected by the Columbine High School shooting. In both cases, boys were more

susceptible to longer-lasting impacts. It is perhaps not surprising that our evidence is strongest in

the most egregious examples of school shootings. The fact that boys are most affected may be
                                                                             Levine and McKnight, p. 30



partly attributable to the fact that boys are more likely to be victimized and that boys are often

more responsive to negative shocks in their social settings.

       We do not believe it would be appropriate to interpret the remainder of our results as

indicating that students are not affected by other shooting incidents. Statistical inference does not

allow us to draw that conclusion. In a setting with more statistical power to examine lower-

victimization incidents, Cabral, et al (2020) find statistically significant, adverse impacts on

educational and labor market outcomes. Similarly, Rossin-Slater, et al. (2019) conclude that the

sales of anti-depressant drugs increases in the aftermath of school shootings.

       In the end, we believe the combined weight of the evidence from our analyses, and the

findings of other studies that complement our own, is consistent with a negative impact

associated with exposure to any school shooting, with especially strong consequences from

indiscriminate, high-victimization incidents. We conclude that the consequences of a school

shooting go beyond the victims who are killed at the event itself. This is a topic that deserves

more attention.
                                                                       Levine and McKnight, p. 31




                                         References

Abouk, Rahi and Scott Adams (2013), "School Shootings and Private School Enrollment,"
Economics Letters 118(2): 297-299.

Ang, Desmond (forthcoming), "The Effects of Police Violence on Inner-City Students."
Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Autor, David, David Figlio, Krzysztof Karbownik, Jeffrey Roth, and Melanie Wasserman (2015).
"Family Disadvantage and the Gender Gap in Behavioral and Educational Outcomes," IPR
Northwestern working paper 15-16, October.

Bharadwaj, Prashant, Manudeep Bhuller, Katrine V. Løken, and Mirjam Wentzel (2020).
"Surviving a Mass Shooting." Unpublished manuscript.

Beland, Louis-Philippe and Dongwoo Kim (2016). "The Effect of High School Shootings on
Schools and Student Performance," Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 38(1): 113-126.

Bertrand, Marianne and Jessica Pan, "The Trouble with Boys: Social Influences and the Gender
Gap in Disruptive Behavior," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, January 2013,
5(1), 32-64.

Brener, Nancy D., Thomas R. Simon, Mark Anderson, Lisa C. Barrios, and Meg L. Small (2002).
"Effect of the Incident at Columbine on Students' Violence- and Suicide-Related Behaviors."
American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 22(3):146­150.

Cabral, Marika Bokyung Kim, Maya Rossin-Slater, Molly Schnell, and Hannes Schwandt (2020).
""Trauma at School: The Impacts of Shootings on Students' Human Capital and Economic
Outcomes." National Bureau of Economic Research working paper 28311.

Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Frina Lin, Jeremy Majerovitz, Benjamin Scuderi (2016).
"Childhood Environment and Gender Gaps in Adulthood." NBER Working Paper 21936.

Connecticut State Department of Education (various years). "School Profile and Performance
Report." Hartford, CT: Connecticut State Department of Education.

Dursun, Bahadir (2019). "The Intergenerational Effects of Mass Shootings," unpublished
manuscript.

Helliwell, John F. (2004). "Well-Being and Social Capital: Does Suicide Pose a Puzzle?" Social
Indicators Research 81(3): 455-496

Kearney, Melissa S. and Phillip B. Levine (2016). "Income Inequality and the Decision to Drop
Out of High School." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. pp. 333-380.
                                                                       Levine and McKnight, p. 32



Lowe, Sarah R. and Sandro Galea (2017). "The Mental Health Consequences of Mass
Shootings," Trauma, Violence and Abuse 18(1): pp. 62-82.

North, Carol S., Sara Jo Nixon, Sheryll Shariat, Sue Mallonee, J. Curtis McMillen, Edard L.
Spitznagel, and Elizabeth M. Smith (2001). "Psychiatric Disorders among Survivors of the
Oklahoma City Bombing," Journal of the American Medical Association 282(8) pp. 755-762.

North, Carol S., Elizabeth M. Smith, and Edward L. Spitznagel (1994). "Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder in Survivors of a Mass Shooting," The American Journal of Psychiatry 151(1): pp. 82-
88.

Poutvaara, Panu and Olli Ropponen (2018), "Shocking News and Cognitive Performance,"
European Journal of Political Economy 51: pp. 93-106.

Prowda, Peter M. (2019). Newtown Public Schools Enrollment Projected To 2029 (available at:
https://newtown.campuscontact.com/_theme/files/District%20Information/2019-
2020%20Enrollment/Prowda%20Enrollment%20Report%209-24-19.pdf, accessed 12/8/2020).

Reardon, Sean F., Ho, Andrew D., Shear, Benjamin R., Fahle, Erin M., Kalogrides, Demetra,
Jang, H., Chavez, Belen, Buontempo, J., and R. DiSalvo (2018). Stanford Education Data
Archive (version 3.0). Retrieved from http://purl.stanford.edu/db586ns4974.

Riedman, David and Desmond O'Neill (2018). K-12 School Shooting Database: Research
Methodology. Naval Postgraduate School, Center for Homeland Defense and Security,
Homeland Security Advanced Thinking Program (HSx). https://www.chds.us/ssdb/methods/

Rossin-Slater, Maya, Molly Schnell, Hannes Schwandt, Sam Trejo, and Lindsey Uniat (2019).
"Exposure to School Shootings Raises Youth Antidepressant Use." Unpublished manuscript,
Stanford University.

Sacerdote, Bruce (2012), "When the Saints Go Marching Out: Long-Term Outcomes for Student
Evacuees from Hurricanes Katrina and Rita," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
4(1): 109-135.

Sharkey, Patrick (2010), "The Acute Effect of Local Homicides on Children's Cognitive
Performance," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107(26): 11733-11738.

Silver, Rachel Cohen, E. Alison Holman, Daniel N. McIntosh, Michael Poulin, and Virginia Gil-
Rivas (2002). "Nationwide Longitudinal Study of Psychological Responses to September 11,"
Journal of the American Medical Association 288(10): pp. 1235-1244.

Smith, Nathan Daniel Lucia, and Ichiro Kawachi (2014). "State-Level Social Capital and Suicide
Mortality in the 50 U.S. States." Social Science and Medicine. 120 (November): 269-277.

Wilson, Laura C. (2017). "Mental Health Outcomes Following Direct Exposure", in The Wiley
Handbook of the Psychology of Mass Shootings, edited by Laura C Wilson. Wiley Blackwell.
                                     Table 1: Summary of Data, Outcomes, and Methods

Outcome               Source                      Data                Outcome Measure             Shootings              Method
Test Scores 1   Stanford Education            Grades 3-8,             z-scores from math        14 Elementary/      Triple Difference
                   Data Archive          national, district-level,       and ELA tests          Middle School        (grade, district,
                     (SEDA)              2009-2016, by gender                                     shootings               year)

Test Scores 2      CT publicly             Grades 3 and 4,              Percentiles of           Sandy Hook             Diff-in-Diff
                  reported data          CT only, School-level,      proficiency on math          (2012/13)         (school, year) with
                                              2008-2018                 and ELA tests                                 school-specific
                                                                                                                          trends

Chronic            CT publicly            No grade level data,       Percent of students         Sandy Hook             Diff-in-Diff
Absenteeism       reported data          CT Only, School-level,      missing more than            (2012/13)         (school, year) with
                                           2011/12-2018/19           10% of school days                               school-specific
                                                                                                                          trends

Educational     Common Core of            No grade level data,         Expenditures in         105 shootings that      Diff-in-Diff
Expenditures        Data                 National, District-level,    multiple categories      occurred between       (district, year)
                                               1995-2016                                        1998 and 2013          with district-
                                                                                                                      specific trends

Educational     Common Core of             No grade level data,        Expenditures in           Sandy Hook            Diff-in-Diff
Expenditures        Data                  Restricted to CT only,      multiple categories         (2012/13)           (district, year)
                                              District-level,                                                          with district-
                                                1995-2016                                                             specific trends

Mortality         Vital Statistics         Track birth cohorts       Death rates by cause      Columbine (1999)     Triple Difference
                    Mortality                through age 29,         (internal vs. external:                        (county, cohort,
                                           County-level data,          homicide, suicide,                                 year)
                                          1995-2017, by gender              accident)
Mortality         Vital Statistics         Track birth cohorts       Death rates by cause       103 shootings in    Triple Difference
                    Mortality                through age 29,         (internal vs. external:      high schools      (county, cohort,
                                           County-level data,          homicide, suicide,      between 1995 and           year)
                                          1995-2017, by gender              accident)                2012.
                              Table 2: The Impact of a School Shooting on Standardized Test Scores

                                      All Students                             Boys                                Girls

                                 Math              ELA               Math               ELA               Math              ELA
 All shootings                   0.035             0.031             0.019              0.016             0.044             0.042
                                (0.028)           (0.027)           (0.027)            (0.035)           (0.030)           (0.026)
 More than 1 Death              -0.086            -0.046            -0.124             -0.086            -0.073            -0.039
 (Sandy Hook)                   (0.021)           (0.013)           (0.022)            (0.014)           (0.019)           (0.014)
 1 death                         0.038             0.033             0.023              0.018             0.047             0.043
                                (0.029)           (0.027)           (0.027)            (0.036)           (0.032)           (0.027)
 Mean of dep var                 0.003             -0.006            -0.002            -0.118             0.013             0.112

  N                              2,732              2,855              2,700            2,835               2,701            2,837
Note: authors' calculations based on district-level standardized test scores between the 2008/09 and 2015/16 school years. Test
scores are measured in standard deviations relative to a national cohort. Shootings are restricted to those occurring in elementary
and middle schools during this time period. Differences in sample sizes arise because SEDA does not report test score average if
less than 95 percent of the students take the exam.
                       Table 3: The Impact of the Sandy Hook School Shooting on School-Level Outcomes

                                        Math Proficiency Percentile     ELA Proficiency Percentile         Chronic Absenteeism
  Sandy Hook*Post                                 -26.38                          -6.33                            3.39
                                                  (2.29)                         (1.87)                           (0.41)
  Other Newtown Elementary*Post                    -34.60                          -17.73                           1.20
                                                   (2.21)                          (1.79)                          (0.42)
  Mean of Dependent Variable                       50.03                           50.11                            6.18
  Sample Size                                      4,132                           4,132                           1,876
Note: authors' calculations based on data from the state of Connecticut on school-level proficiency rates between the 2007/08 and
2017/18 school years and chronic absenteeism between the 2011/12 and 2017/18 school years. Proficiency percentiles are
measured as the percentile of the school's proficiency rate on standardized tests within the state, grade, and year; chronic
absenteeism is measured as a percentage of all students. Regressions include school fixed effects, year fixed effect, and school-
specific linear trends. Test score results include grade-level fixed effects. Regressions are weighted by the number of test-takers at
each school (test score results) or enrollment (chronic absenteeism results). Standard errors are clustered at the district level.
                                 Table 4: The Impact of School Shootings on School Expenditures

                                      Total             Non-capital            Support           Instructional           Other
                                   expenditures         expenditures           Services            Spending             Spending

                                                                             National Data
 All shootings                         0.030                0.004              0.035                 -0.008               0.006
                                      (0.025)              (0.015)            (0.016)               (0.018)              (0.047)
 Indiscriminate: 1 death               -0.024               -0.029              0.042                -0.077               -0.043
 *post                                (0.054)              (0.022)             (0.011)              (0.020)              (0.120)

 Indiscriminate: >1 death              0.104                0.166               0.333                0.033                0.243
 *post                                (0.018)              (0.020)             (0.050)              (0.016)              (0.059)

 Other shootings                       0.028                -0.002              0.024                -0.009               -0.002
 *post                                (0.026)              (0.014)             (0.012)              (0.018)              (0.048)

 Mean spending per student            $10,519              $9,475              $3,050               $5,398                $1,027
 N                                     3,212               3,212               3,212                3,212                 3,212

                                                                        Connecticut Data Only
 Newtown, CT*post                      0.129                0.080             0.139                  0.023                0.264
                                      (0.019)              (0.011)           (0.019)                (0.010)              (0.032)

 Mean spending per student              $14,361           $13,466              $4,294               $7,910                $1,261
 N                                       3,652              3,652               3,652                3,652                 3,652
Note: authors' calculations based on district-level data on expenditures per student (in 2017 dollars) by category from the
Common Core of Data for the 1994/95 and 2015/16 school years. Regressions include district fixed effects, year fixed effect, and
district-specific linear trends. are weighted by enrollment. All dependent variables are in logs, so coefficients can be interpreted as
percentage changes. Standard errors are clustered at the district level.
                                 Table 5: Impact of Columbine Shooting on Mortality Rates by Gender

                                                                                                           Types of External Deaths
                                                                          Non-External                                                Accidental
                                     All Deaths      External Deaths        Deaths              Homicide           Suicide             Deaths

                                                                                       Male
   Contemporaneous Impact               0.960              0.962             -0.177               0.487             0.194               0.022
                                       (0.117)            (0.100)            (0.022)             (0.046)           (0.036)             (0.034)

   Subsequent Impact                    0.036              0.044             -0.012              -0.039             0.038               0.034
                                       (0.032)            (0.023)            (0.012)             (0.007)           (0.010)             (0.011)

                                                                                       Female
   Contemporaneous Impact              -0.234              0.027             -0.119               0.250            -0.066               0.029
                                       (0.072)            (0.071)            (0.044)             (0.012)           (0.030)             (0.021)

   Subsequent Impact                    0.082              0.030             -0.015               0.016            -0.020              -0.012
                                       (0.033)            (0.025)            (0.011)             (0.004)           (0.009)             (0.011)

Note: authors' calculations based on county-level Vital Statistics mortality data from Colorado between 1995 and 2017. Columbine High
School is part of the Jefferson County School District. To convert these results into the impact on number of deaths, the coefficients need to be
multiplied by cohort size in 1,000s. These values for boys and girls in Jefferson County is 19.9 and 18.4, respectively.
                                     Table 6A: Impact of School Shootings on Mortality Rates for Boys

                                                                                                        Types of External Deaths
                                                         External        Non-External                                              Accidental
                                      All Deaths         Deaths            Deaths            Homicide           Suicide             Deaths
 Mean Death Rate                         1.17             0.87              0.18               0.20              0.19                0.21

                                                                            Contemporaneous Impact
 Indiscriminate Shooting
   One death                            0.934              0.988             0.163             0.065             0.267               0.160
                                       (0.140)            (0.264)           (0.020)           (0.041)           (0.089)             (0.093)
   More than One Death                  0.462              0.600            -0.214             0.465             0.138              -0.065
                                       (0.325)            (0.276)           (0.031)           (0.018)           (0.056)             (0.088)
 Other Types of Shootings              -0.029              0.003            -0.016             0.037            -0.001              -0.030
                                       (0.036)            (0.027)           (0.016)           (0.018)           (0.009)             (0.014)

                                                                               Subsequent Impact
 Indiscriminate Shooting
   One death                            0.203              0.156             0.067             0.035             0.086               0.182
                                       (0.205)            (0.173)           (0.102)           (0.057)           (0.066)             (0.064)
   More than One Death                  0.007              0.000             0.005            -0.016             0.056              -0.027
                                       (0.045)            (0.047)           (0.012)           (0.004)           (0.013)             (0.038)
 Other Types of Shootings              -0.049             -0.032            -0.007            -0.004            -0.008              -0.017
                                       (0.014)            (0.012)           (0.004)           (0.009)           (0.003)             (0.006)
Note: authors' calculations based on county-level Vital Statistics mortality data between 1995 and 2017. Shootings are restricted to those
occurring in high schools and between 1995 and 2012. To convert these results into the impact on number of deaths, the coefficients need to
be multiplied by cohort size in 1,000s. These values are 1.9 for those exposed to an indiscriminate shooting with one death, 7.1 for those
exposed to an indiscriminate shooting with more than one death, and 41.9 for all other shootings.
                                      Table 6B: Impact of School Shootings on Mortality Rates for Girls

                                                                                                          Types of External Deaths
                                                          External         Non-External                                              Accidental
                                       All Deaths         Deaths             Deaths            Homicide            Suicide            Deaths
 Mean Rate                                0.46             0.25               0.13               0.04               0.04               0.06

                                                                              Contemporaneous Impact
 Indiscriminate Shooting
   One death                              -0.241            0.017              -0.146            -0.004             0.012              0.060
                                         (0.114)           (0.027)            (0.037)           (0.013)            (0.025)            (0.011)

   More than One Death                    0.172             0.384              -0.115            0.401              0.040              0.040
                                         (0.228)           (0.252)            (0.087)           (0.195)            (0.082)            (0.009)

 Other Types of Shootings                 -0.047            -0.024             -0.010            0.006              -0.004             -0.009
                                         (0.024)           (0.018)            (0.008)           (0.006)            (0.005)            (0.008)

                                                                                 Subsequent Impact
 Indiscriminate Shooting
   One death                              0.092             0.125              0.026             0.008              0.063              0.073
                                         (0.107)           (0.073)            (0.026)           (0.002)            (0.068)            (0.030)
   More than One Death                    0.038             0.022              -0.018            0.011              -0.001             -0.003
                                         (0.060)           (0.030)            (0.013)           (0.009)            (0.003)            (0.010)

 Other Types of Shootings                 -0.024             -0.013             -0.007           -0.002             -0.002              -0.005
                                         (0.006)            (0.005)            (0.003)          (0.002)            (0.001)             (0.003)
Note: authors' calculations based on county-level Vital Statistics mortality data between 1995 and 2017. Shootings are restricted to those
occurring in high schools and between 1995 and 2012. To convert these results into the impact on number of deaths, the coefficients need to
be multiplied by cohort size in 1,000s. These values are 1.8 for those exposed to an indiscriminate shooting with one death, 6.5 for those
exposed to an indiscriminate shooting with more than one death, and 40.4 for all other shootings.
