                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          CITIES, PRODUCTIVITY, AND TRADE

                                     Alvaro Garcia Marin
                                     Andrei V. Potlogea
                                      Nico Voigtländer
                                         Yang Yang

                                      Working Paper 28309
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28309


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




We would like to thank Dominick Bartelme, Tim Kehoe, Fernando Parro as well as seminar
audiences at the Meeting of the Urban Economic Association in 2017 (Vancouver), the Chilean
Productivity Commission Workshop, the Pontificia Universidad Católica seminar, the 2019
RIDGE Workshop in Firms and Trade Dynamics, the 2020 Econometric Society World
Congress, and the Virtual Urban Economic Association Meetings in 2020 for helpful comments
and suggestions. We gratefully acknowledge research support from the UCLA Ziman Center's
Rosalinde, Arthur Gilbert Program in Real Estate, Finance and Urban Economics, and
CONICYT-Chile through project Fondecyt Regular 1191536. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Alvaro Garcia Marin, Andrei V. Potlogea, Nico Voigtländer, and Yang Yang. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Cities, Productivity, and Trade
Alvaro Garcia Marin, Andrei V. Potlogea, Nico Voigtländer, and Yang Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 28309
December 2020
JEL No. F23,F6,R13,R31

                                           ABSTRACT

We document a novel stylized fact: Using data for several countries, we show that export activity
is disproportionately concentrated in larger cities ­ even more so than overall economic activity.
We account for this fact by marrying elements of international trade and economic geography.
We build a model with agglomeration economies where firms with heterogeneous productivity
sort across city sizes and select into exporting. The model allows us to study the geographic
implications of trade policy, as well as the international trade effects of urban policies. We show
that (i) lifting restrictions on housing supply raises not only the aggregate productivity of the
economy but also its aggregate export intensity, by allowing more firms to locate in larger cities
and profit from agglomeration effects; (ii) conversely, while opening up to trade has complex
overall economic geography implications, within sectors it tends to shift employment towards
larger cities. We structurally estimate the model using data for the universe of Chinese
manufacturing firms and study the general equilibrium effects of trade liberalization and of urban
policies. We find that the effects of these policies are quantitatively different from those predicted
by trade models that ignore economic geography, and by economic geography models that omit
international trade (both of which are nested in our framework).

Alvaro Garcia Marin                               Nico Voigtländer
Universidad de los Andes                          Anderson School of Management
Monseñor Álvaro del Portillo 12455                University of California, Los Angeles
Las Condes, Santiago                              110 Westwood Plaza
Chile                                             C513 Entrepreneurs Hall
alvarof.garciam@gmail.com                         Los Angeles, CA 90095
                                                  and NBER
Andrei V. Potlogea                                nico.v@anderson.ucla.edu
School of Economics
University of Edinburgh                           Yang Yang
Room 2.08, 31 Buccleuch Place                     700 19th St NW
Edinburgh, EH8 9JT                                Washington, DC 20431
Scotland                                          yyang5@imf.org
Andrei.Potlogea@ed.ac.uk




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28309
1       Introduction
Over the last decades, two mega-trends have shaped economies across the globe: rapid urbaniza-
tion and a surge in international trade.1 The simultaneous unfolding of these trends naturally raises
the question if they are connected. While the underlying drivers of these trends have traditionally
been examined by two separate strands of literature ­ international trade and economic geography
­ more recently a literature at the intersection of these fields has emerged.2 However, important
gaps remain in this nascent strand of research. First, while the effects of international trade shocks
on domestic economic geography have been studied extensively, the converse effects of urban poli-
cies and shocks on trade flows have received relatively little attention. Second, the work analyzing
the impact of international trade on economic geography has typically focused on heterogeneity
in sectoral specialization across cities and regions, abstracting from the underlying more granular
level, in particular, firms.3
    In this paper we study the role played by firm-level heterogeneity in shaping the interactions
between economic geography and international trade. We first show ­ using data for China, the
United States, and Brazil ­ that larger cities systematically export a higher fraction of their output
than smaller cities, even after controlling for differences in geographic characteristics. Over three-
fourths of the association between export intensity and city size can be attributed to variation
within industries. We show that the higher within-industry export intensity of larger cities is driven
by a higher export participation of firms. This suggests that the sorting and agglomeration of
heterogeneous firms has important implications for the spatial configuration of exporting activity
within countries.
    To explain the stylized facts described above we extend the systems of cities framework of
Gaubert (2018) to a multi-country setting and augment it with a mechanism of selection into ex-
porting in the spirit of Melitz (2003). We study a setup with an arbitrary number of symmetric
countries, each subject to an identical distribution of potential entrants in each sector. Within coun-
tries, cities form endogenously on sites that are ex-ante identical and grow in population as firms
choose to locate there, raising local labor demand. For firms, the main benefit of locating in cities
is given by agglomeration externalities, such as thick labor markets or knowledge spillovers (Du-
ranton and Puga, 2004). Firms are heterogeneous, drawing their productivity from sector-specific
    1
      The average urbanization rate in the world grew from 43 to 55 percent between 1990 and 2010. During the same
period, exports as a share of GDP have grown from 30 to 46 percent (https://data.worldbank.org/indicator).
    2
      Recent empirical or quantitative contributions to this literature include Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013), Dauth,
Findeisen, and Suedekum (2014), Redding (2016), Dhingra, Machin, and Overman (2017), Cheng and Potlogea
(2020), Lyon and Waugh (2019), and Ducruet, Juhasz, Nagy, and Steinwender (2020). Earlier contributions typi-
cally used stylized models to qualitatively explore the effects of trade liberalization on economic geography. These
include, for example, Krugman and Livas Elizondo (1996), Monfort and Nicolini (2000),Behrens, Gaigne, Ottaviano,
and Thisse (2006b), Behrens, Gaigne, Ottaviano, and Thisse (2006a), Behrens, Gaigne, Ottaviano, and Thisse (2007),
and Behrens, Gaigne, Ottaviano, and Thisse (2009).
    3
      Notable exceptions include Cosar and Fajgenbaum (2016) and Redding (2016).

                                                          1
distributions.4 They sort across cities of different sizes within their country.5 When choosing their
location, firms trade off the gains in productivity generated by local externalities in large cities
against the higher labor costs prevailing in these cities. Moreover, in line with Gaubert (2018) and
Combes, Duranton, Gobillon, Puga, and Roux (2012) we assume that more efficient firms benefit
relatively more from these local externalities. This generates positive assortative matching: More
efficient firms locate in larger cities, reinforcing their initial productivity advantage. Finally, as in
Gaubert (2018), city developers operate within each country and compete to attract firms to their
city. They act as a coordinating device in the economy, leading to a unique spatial equilibrium.
    The model explains the disproportionate concentration of exporting in larger cities: More pro-
ductive firms sort into larger cities and further augment their productivity advantage due to local
agglomeration economies. As a result, they are more likely to overcome the fixed costs of ex-
porting and sell their products internationally. Consequently, within sectors, a higher fraction of
firms in larger cities become exporters, which accounts for the positive association between export
intensity and city size across city × industry cells.6 For any two cities with similar sectoral compo-
sitions, the model predicts that the larger one will have a larger aggregate export intensity, as it will
have a higher export intensity in every sector. Similar to Melitz (2003), the model also predicts
that ­ conditional on exporting ­ export intensity at the firm level is unrelated to productivity. This
is consistent with our findings.
    The model further allows us to study the interaction between international trade and economic
geography. We show that increases in housing supply elasticity (associated for instance with loos-
ening planning restrictions) bring about increases in aggregate export intensity as well as increases
in aggregate productivity. Weaker congestion forces encourage all firms to locate in larger cities
where they benefit from stronger agglomeration economies. As a result, all firms become more
productive and more likely to become exporters. Conversely, we show that trade liberalization,
while overall having complex implications for the location of economic activity, tends to shift
employment within each sector towards larger cities.
    Finally, we structurally estimate the model using Chinese firm-level data. The model can ac-
count for the bulk of the correlation between export intensity and city size observed in the data.
Furthermore, to explore the quantitative implications of the model, we perform two policy experi-
ments. First, we study the welfare implications of moving to autarky. We benchmark our findings
against a similar experiment undertaken in the context of an alternative model that omits internal

   4
      While differentiating between sectors is not necessary to illustrate the main mechanism in our model, it allows
us to match the differential export participation across sectors in the data. We keep the structure simple by using
Cobb-Douglas utility across sectors, implying constant sectoral shares.
    5
      Firms cannot choose the country they enter; they choose a city within a pre-determined country.
    6
      An important strand of the trade literature predicts the opposite: A direct implication of the gravity model ­ and
the underlying Armington assumption ­ is that larger cities (or countries) are less open (Anderson and van Wincoop,
2004).

                                                           2
geography.7 We find that the welfare losses associated with shutting down international trade are
about 20% smaller in our model relative to the simplified "Melitz" benchmark. Intuitively, in our
model with geography, exporters locate in bigger cities where they face higher input costs than the
less productive, domestic firms. This diminishes the effective productivity advantage of exporters
and their weight in the economy, leading to relatively smaller welfare gains from trade. Second,
we study the welfare gains associated with increasing housing supply elasticities. We find that the
effects on productivity are about 50% larger than in an alternative model that shuts down interna-
tional trade. Increased housing supply benefits the most productive firms that locate in the largest
cities. Trade amplifies the corresponding welfare gains because the most productive firms can also
export and grow even larger, increasing their weight in the economy.
    Our paper is related to several strands of the literature. First, we document a series of novel styl-
ized facts regarding the economic geography of exporting activity ("exporter facts," as in Bernard,
Jensen, Redding, and Schott, 2007). To the traditional stylized facts about exporters (being larger
and more productive) we add a new one: Exporters tend to locate disproportionately in large, suc-
cessful and expensive cities. This, in turn, leads to an economic geography of exporting within
countries that is even more uneven than that of overall economic activity. In a paper that follows
ours, Bakker (2020) confirms our main stylized fact in data from France.8
    Second, by combining a tractable model of spatial equilibrium featuring heterogeneous firms
with a mechanism of selection into exporting à la Melitz (2003), we contribute both to the systems
of cities literature (pioneered by Henderson, 1974), and to the international trade literature. From
the perspective of the former, our contribution is most closely related to Gaubert (2018), who first
proposed the modelling strategy of urban systems that we employ.9 However, Gaubert's study
focuses on the sorting and agglomeration of heterogeneous firms in a single country setting, and it
does not feature international trade or selection into exporting. In a related contribution, Behrens,
Duranton, and Robert-Nicoud (2014) study the spatial sorting of entrepreneurs who produce non-
tradable intermediates.10 We study the case of producers of goods that are perfectly tradable within
countries but subject to transportation frictions across countries.11
    From the perspective of the trade literature, our contribution is most closely related to the the-
   7
      We recalibrate this last model to fit the data, such that both models ­ our baseline and the model without geography
­ imply similar trade participation and measured productivity distributions.
    8
      Bakker (2020) also employs a similar theoretical framework and uses firm-level data. But his focus is on regional
inequality, which he shows tends to increase after trade liberalization, favoring larger cities.
    9
      Some of our modeling assumptions are motivated by the empirical findings of Combes et al. (2012), who show that
the productivity advantage of firms in large cities is driven by agglomeration effects, as opposed to tougher competition
(and hence stronger selection). They also find that the most efficient firms are disproportionately more productive in
large cities, indicating potential complementarities between firm productivity and city size.
   10
      Another closely related strand of the literature uses similar conceptual tools, borrowed from the assignment litera-
ture, to study how workers rather than firms sort across space (c.f. Eeckhout, Pinheiro, and Schmidheiny, 2014; Davis
and Dingel, 2014, 2019).
   11
      Our setup is, however, sufficiently tractable to be extended to feature trade costs also within countries.

                                                            3
oretical body of work that analyzes firms' decisions to enter into exporting (Melitz, 2003; Bernard
et al., 2007). We show that the same firm-level fundamentals that lead firms to select into ex-
porting may also cause them to locate in large, productive, but expensive cities. This interplay of
location choices and exporting decisions allows us to account for the uneven economic geogra-
phy of exporting. Our paper is also related to an older theoretical literature that analyzes the joint
determination of international trade flows and within-country economic geography (Krugman and
Livas Elizondo, 1996; Monfort and Nicolini, 2000; Paluzie, 2001; Behrens et al., 2006a,b, 2007).
As in some of these models, in our framework trade policy affects the configuration of economic
geography, while spatial policy can affect trade flows. Moreover, as in these models, our frame-
work also captures the fact that domestic policy decisions can have spillovers on other countries
via trade channels.12 However, unlike these earlier stylized models, our quantitative model can be
taken to the data.
    Finally, as in Gaubert (2018), Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg (2013) and Behrens et al. (2014),
we also use structural estimation of a model of a system of cities to assess the welfare implications
of the spatial equilibrium. In doing so, we contribute to the literature that measures agglomeration
externalities, as reviewed in Rosenthal and Strange (2004).13 Moreover, we also employ the model
to run policy experiments in order to study the general equilibrium effects of place-based policies.
We thus contribute to the strand of literature that quantifies productivity and output losses from
policies that distort location decisions, such as restrictive housing policies (Hsieh and Moretti,
2019; Gaubert, 2018; Parkhomenko, 2018). Relative to this literature the main innovation of our
paper is an assessment of the indirect effect of (policy-induced) spatial distortions on productivity,
output, and welfare via their effect on the gains from international trade.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the data and our stylized facts.
Section 3 introduces the model and its equilibrium properties. Section 4 presents the structural
estimation of our model, discusses model fit, and provides a counterfactual analysis. Section 5
concludes.

2        Data and Stylized Facts
2.1      Data
Our main empirical analysis uses firm-level data from the 2004 Chinese Economic Census of
Manufacturing. One important advantage of the Chinese data is that it details the geographical
    12
      For example, spatial policies that limit agglomeration in a country reduce productivity and entry into exporting,
thus hurting foreigners consumers.
   13
      This literature provides some evidence that sorting across space matters for the understanding of the wage distri-
bution. Some papers in this literature use detailed data on worker characteristics or a fixed effect approach to control
for worker heterogeneity and sorting in a reduced-form analysis (c.f. Combes, Duranton, and Gobillon, 2008; Mion
and Naticchioni, 2009; Matano and Naticchioni, 2012). By contrast, we follow Gaubert (2018) in using a structural
approach to explicitly account for the sorting of firms when measuring agglomeration economies.

                                                           4
location of the firms at the at the county-level. This allows us to study the sorting of firms and
exporters across cities. In addition, we use more aggregate information at the city-level from the
United States (at the MSA level) and Brazil for 2012 to confirm the main patterns we derive for
China. To derive industry, and firm-level patterns, we use information for China, which is our main
dataset. We begin discussing the Chinese data in detail, and then we turn to describing the main
features of the US and Brazilian data.
2.1.1    China
Data for the Chinese Economic Census of Manufacturing is collected by the National Bureau of
Statistics, and covers the universe of firms in China, irrespective of their size. It contains detailed
information on plant characteristics, such as sales, spending on inputs and raw materials, employ-
ment, investment, and export value. In the data, the location of firms is defined in terms of the
county where the firms' headquarters is based. We argue that this feature most likely plays a minor
role in our results, because as Brandt, Van Biesebroeck, and Zhang (2014) shows, over 90 percent
of firms in China are single-plant firms.
     We use the information from the Census to compute measures of city, industry and firm-level
export activity. Although we also have access to official exports information from the Chinese
Customs Agency, we avoid using it for three reasons. First, customs exports only consider direct
exports, while Census exports consider both direct and indirect exports through intermediaries.
Second, data from customs provides no information for the location of the exporters, and the
data cannot be matched in a straightforward way to the Census of manufacturing, leading to poor
matching rates.14 Finally, when computing export intensity with Customs information, many firms
have unreliable export intensities ­ about 10% of the firms identified as exporters using customs
data have export intensities above 100%. Nevertheless, as we show in the online appendix, both
export measures are highly correlated across firms. Computing export intensities with customs
exports lead to confirmation of the main patterns we derive using the information from the Census.
     In our main analysis, we define cities in terms of metropolitan areas defined as contiguous areas
of lights in nighttime satellite images. We use the correspondence constructed by Dingel, Miscio,
and Davis (2019) to map counties into metropolitan areas with a threshold for light intensity equal
to 30. This value is in the middle of the set of threshold provided by these authors. Importantly, our
results are not dependent on the particular value chosen for threshold of light intensity.15 We define
city size in terms of urban population obtained from the Chinese Population Census of 2010.
  14
      Firms in the Census and Customs datasets does not share a common identifier. The only way to match both dataset
is through fuzzy matching algorithm using firm names. These procedure yields poor matching rates: Only two-thirds
of the export value in Customs can be matched to firms in the Census of manufacturing.
   15
      A large body of research using information for China defines cities in terms of prefecture-level cities. A
prefecture-level city is an integrated political and economic unit, but it often includes rural areas. We avoid defin-
ing cities in terms of prefectures, because administrative boundaries may fragment economically integrated areas into
distinct cities or circumscribe places, including rural areas.

                                                          5
    The Census of Manufacturing contains information for approximately 1,272,000 firms with
positive output in 2004. However, our main sample only considers firms located in cities with
more than 100,000 inhabitants (1,178 metropolitan areas). We drop firms with zero or missing
sales (66,887 observations, corresponding to 5.3% of the sample) or industry codes (20,882 obser-
vations, 1.7% of the sample), or with export intensity above 100% (6,261 observation, 0.5% of the
sample). Our final sample consists of 1,169,258 firms, accounting for 95.7% of sales in cities with
more than 100,000 inhabitants.
2.1.2   United States
We now turn to the description of the city-level data for the United States. In the case of the United
States, we define cities in terms of Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSA). MSAs are defined as one
or more adjacent counties with at least one urban core area with a population of at least 50,000
inhabitants, with a high degree of social and economic integration with the core, as measured by
commuting flows to work and school. As Dingel et al. (2019) show, MSAs are well approximated
by cities defined in terms of contiguous areas of lights in nighttime satellite images, as we do in the
case of China. Our analysis considers 312 U.S. metropolitan areas with a population over 100,000
inhabitants in 2012.
    To develop our main analysis, we combine data from several sources. Data for exports at
the MSA level are provided by the International Trade Administration of the U.S. Department of
Commerce and include overall exports. We combine this with establishment-level information
of sales and employment aggregated at the MSA level from the 2012 Economic Census. In our
baseline analysis we use information for the manufacturing sector (NAICS 31-33), which is closer
to our theoretical framework. Consequently, city-level export intensity is constructed as overall
exports over manufacturing sales. Finally, we use MSA population from the population projections
of the U.S. Census Bureau.
2.1.3   Brazil
Finally, for the case of Brazil we consider microregions as the main unit of analysis. Microre-
gions are defined by the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) as urban agglom-
erations of economically integrated contiguous municipalities with similar geographic and pro-
ductive characteristics.16 Although microregions do not directly capture of commuting flows as
U.S. Metropolitan Areas, they are constructed according to information on integration of local
economies, which is closely related to the notion of local labor markets. Our sample includes 420
microregions with more than 100,000 inhabitants in 2012.
    To construct export intensity, we use overall exports ­ available at the level of municipalities ­

  16
    A number of researchers have used microregions as their main unit of analysis (see Kovak, 2013; Dix-Carneiro
and Kovak, 2015, 2017, 2019; Costa, Garred, and Pessoa, 2016; Chauvin, Glaeser, Ma, and Tobio, 2017).

                                                       6
from the COMEX Stat database (which is compiled by the Brazilian Ministry of Industry, External
Commerce and Services), and complement it with municipal-level GDP from IBGE. We aggregate
both exports and GDP at the level of microregions using the correspondence provided by the IBGE,
and compute city-level export intensity as the ratio of overall exports over GDP (across all sectors).
Finally, we use population projections from the 2010 population Census.
2.1.4    Summary Statistics
Before turning to our empirical results, we show descriptive statistics for the sample of cities
considered in the analysis for China, the United States and Brazil. Table 1 shows statistics for
the distribution of population and export intensity for the three samples. Average city size varies
importantly across the three datasets. U.S. cities are larger on average (about 800 thousands in-
habitants), followed by China (522 thousands) and Brazil (439 thousands). These reflect the fact
that population in the U.S. is more concentrated in larger cities. Indeed, as Figure B.2 shows, both
China and Brazil have a relatively higher density of small cities than the United States.17 While
for the U.S. two-thirds of the cities in our sample have populations over 500 thousands people, in
China and Brazil only 16 percent of the cities surpass the 500 thousand people threshold.
    In terms of export intensity, the most noticeable difference between the three countries is the
prevalence of zeros. In the U.S., all cities have exporting firms; in contrast, in China and Brazil
about 10 percent of the cities record no export activity. We argue that the existence of cities with
zero exports does not affect the quantitative implications of our results, because these cities repre-
sent a small fraction of output (2.5% and 1.5% of the production in China and Brazil, respectively).
As with population, the distribution of export-intensity is positively skewed for the three countries
in our sample, with the distribution of the U.S. dominating the distributions of China and Brazil.
2.2     Stylized Facts
In this section we present our empirical results. We first present results about the distribution of
export activity across cities. Next, we show to what extent the city-level results reflect differences
in sectoral composition. Finally, we provide evidence on firm-level sorting into exporting and into
cities.
2.2.1    Export activity and City Size
Figure 1 presents our main result ­ the relationship between export intensity and city size. For all
three countries, we begin plotting the logarithm of export intensity against the logarithm of city
size, measured in terms of cities' population, for cities with more than 100,000 people. The figure
shows a remarkable positive relation between export intensity and the size of the cities. The rela-

  17
     This is consistent with evidence in Au and Henderson (2006), who shows that about half of prefecture-level cities
in China are smaller than their optimal size. They argue that this is most likely due to the existence of strong migration
restrictions.

                                                            7
tionship is more precisely estimated for China and the United States than for Brazil. Nevertheless,
even for Brazil we estimate a significant positive relationship between export intensity and cities'
population. Table 1 shows the point estimates for the elasticity between export intensity and city
size. For all countries, the elasticity is highly significant, ranging from 0.32 for the United States
and Brazil (column 2 and 3) to 0.45 for China (column 1). Importantly, it remains positive and
highly significant when we include geographical controls for distance to the nearest port and a
categorical variable for cities located in the coastline (columns 2, 4 and 6).18 In all these cases, the
elasticity varies between 0.30 and 0.41.
     We implement several tests to check the robustness of our findings, focused on our baseline
dataset, China. First, the Census of Manufacturing defines firms' locations in terms of the com-
panies' headquarter offices. This may introduce an upward bias to our results if export-intensive
companies with production based in small cities locate their headquarters in large cities. As Brandt
et al. (2014) show, less than 10 percent of firms in the Census of Manufacturing are multi-plant
firms, and these tend to be relatively large. We use this last feature to indirectly control for the
possibility that multi-plant firms drive our results. Table B.1 shows that the baseline elasticity be-
tween export intensity and city size is very similar when dropping relatively large firms. Second,
an important body of literature uses prefecture-level Chinese cities as their main unit of analysis
(e.g. Au and Henderson, 2006). We show in Table B.2 in the appendix that our main findings are
qualitatively unchanged; the elasticity we estimate is larger in this case (0.73 for the unconditional
correlation and 0.38 once geographical controls are included). Third, a distinctive element of China
is the existence of Special Economic Zones (SEZ) and Coastal Development Areas (CDA), which
are intended to promote exports and overall economic activity in particular areas. We show in Ta-
ble B.2 that our main results are not affected by the inclusion of categorical variables for SEC and
CDA cities. Fourth, we show that our results are unchanged when we control by the average preva-
lence of processing trade. Finally, we show that defining export intensity using information from
the Chinese Customs Service barely affects the baseline correlation. In sum, the strong correlation
between cities export intensity and city size establishes our first stylized fact:


Stylized Fact 1. Export intensity increases with city size


2.2.2    Within- and between-industries variation
To what extent does the positive correlation between export intensity and city size reflect within-
industry variation? To address this question, we replicate the analysis of the previous section at
the industry-city level. Importantly, we can only perform this analysis for our main dataset, China,
  18
     The distance to the nearest port variable is computed as the shortest straight distance from the center of the city
to the nearest port.

                                                           8
because for Brazil and the United States we only have access to aggregate city-level information.
For each industry j (at the 4-digit ISIC level), we run versions of the equation:

                          yjc = j + j log(P opulation)c + Xc + jc                                     (1)

where y denote different outcomes for export activity defined at the city-industry level, and Xj
corresponds to the set of geographical controls we use in Table 2. We run this equation industry-
by-industry, and also pooling industries while allowing for industry fixed-effects. Note that in this
last case, the coefficient j is restricted to be homogeneous across industries. In all regressions,
we only include information for industries located in cities with positive exports and population
above 100,000 people (but allow industries to have zero exports in any given city).
    Table 3 shows the results when we pool industries and cities. In columns 1-3 we explore the
overall variation in export intensity, within and across industries. We avoid applying logarithms to
the ratio of exports to output as in the previous sub-section, because the issue of zeros in exports at
the industry-city level becomes endemic. For comparability with Table 2, we show the estimated
export intensity semi-elasticity using aggregate city-level information (column 1). The estimated
coefficient is positive and significant at the 1% level, as in Table 2. Then, in columns 2-3 we
show results defining export intensity at the city-industry level. As it can be seen, the estimated
coefficient for city size is largely unaffected by the inclusion of industry fixed effects: It varies
from .0139 (no industry FE) to .133 (with industry FE). These values are also in the ballpark of
the coefficient we estimate with city-level information in column 1. The stability of the coefficient
on log city size in columns 1-3 suggests that the positive correlation between export intensity and
city size reflect to an important extent, variation occurring within industries.
    In columns 4-6 we explore whether is more likely to observe positive industry-level exports in
larger cities. For this, we define a categorical variable that takes the value one for industries with
strictly positive exports, and use it as the dependent variable in (1). Columns 4-6 of Table 3 show
the results. In column 4 we show results for aggregate city-level export intensity. The estimated
coefficient suggest that doubling the city size increases the likelihood of positive export in 5.5
percentage points. Then, in columns 5-6 we show results using data aggregated at the city-industry
level, with and without fixed effects, respectively. In both cases, the coefficients are positive and
statistically significant at the 1% level. As in the case of overall export intensity, the coefficients on
the log city size is remarkably stable when we include industry fixed-effects. The point estimates
suggest that doubling city size increases the probability of positive export in 11.2-11.8 percentage
points.
    To check the robustness of the pooled results, we run specification (1) industry-by-industry.




                                                    9
Table 4 summarizes the results for the 118 four-digit ISIC industries.19 Column 1 shows results
using export intensity, and column 2 when using a categorical variable for the probability of posi-
tive exports. As it can be seen in the first row of Table 4, in both cases the average semi-elasticity
is close to the average effect estimated in Table 3. More importantly, the bottom part of Table 4
shows a positive coefficient for practically all industries at different confidence levels. In the case
of export intensity, in two-third of the industries export intensity increases with city size at least
at the 10% level (column 1). For the case the case of the probability of positive industry-level
exports, in over 97% of industries the probability of positive export increases with city size at the
10% level. All this evidence is reassuring for our results in Table 3, and suggests that the patterns
we found before are also observed within industries. This leads us to our second stylized fact:

Stylized Fact 2. Within industries, export intensity increases with city size

    Stylized fact 2 can be interpreted as a refinement to Stylized fact 1. It suggests that the positive
elasticity between export intensity and city size we document in section 2.2.1 for China, the United
States and Brazil, actually reflect industries becoming more export-oriented in larger cities.
    Next, we turn into determining whether the correlation between export intensity and city size
can also be accounted for by differences in sectoral composition ­ i.e., larger cities being more
intensive in more export-oriented industries. To answer this question we construct an imputed
measure of city-level export intensity. This measure is constructed in the following way. First,
we compute for each sector its national-level export intensity. We then impute city-level export
intensity by interacting (national-level) industry export intensities with each city's industrial com-
position. Thus, this counterfactual measure of city-level export intensity solely reflects variation
in the sectoral composition of each industry across cities.
    Table 5 compares the elasticity between city size and actual export intensity at the city-level
(column 1) with the imputed measure where only sectoral composition varies across cities (column
2). As it can be seen in column 2, the counterfactual export intensity is significantly related to city
size, suggesting that more export-intensive industries represent a higher share of economic activity
in larger cities. However, the coefficient turns non-significant once we add the set of geographical
controls, most likely reflecting the fact that more export oriented industries does not only benefit
from larger city size, but also from locating in cites with good access to ports.
    Note that the imputed export-intensity measure can also be used to assess the robustness of the
correlation between city-level export intensity and city size (stylized facts 1 and 2). For this, we
run a horse-race between our agglomeration variable and the imputed city level export intensity
measure presented above. The result of this exercise is shown in columns 3 (no controls) and 6
(geographical controls) of Table 5. As it can be seen, the conditional correlation between city-level
  19
       We exclude 5 industries with activity in less than 100 cities out of the total of 1,178 cities in our sample.

                                                              10
export intensity and city size goes down by one-fourth (no controls) and one-tenth (with geograph-
ical controls) once the imputed city-size measure is considered. Nevertheless, the agglomeration
elasticity remains highly significant suggesting that variation at the city-industry level is important
for accounting for the relationship between agglomeration and export intensity at the overall city
level.


2.2.3    Firm Sorting
To improve our understanding of the drivers of the association between aggregate export intensity
and city size, we study exporting behavior at the firm-level. In exploring this relationship, we face
an important challenge related to the composition of our data. Small firms (less than 25 employees)
dominate the Chinese Census of Manufacturing: They account for over 50 percent of firms in all
city sizes, and within small firms about half of them have less than 10 employees. At the same
time, small firms account only for 6 percent of the aggregate production value, and less than 2%
of them are exporters. This is in stark contrast with export activity among medium- and large
-sized firms, where over 20 percent of the firms are exporters.20 The dominance of small firms in
our sample will most likely tend to dilute the coefficient between export activity and city size in
a simple unweigthed regression, because they are distributed more or less homogeneously across
all city sizes and have a low unconditional export probability. In the following, we address this
issue reporting results with firms weighted by their share of city-level sales.21 In this way, we aim
to identify the coefficient on city size by the set of firms where the forces of agglomeration could
most likely induce selection into exporting. Nevertheless, in light of the limitations imposed by
our data, our results should be interpreted as an exploratory analysis.22
    Table 6 shows the main firm-level results. Columns 1­2 use firm-level export intensity as
dependent variable, while columns 3­4 use a categorical export variable as dependent variable. In
all regressions, we include geographical controls and industry fixed-effects (at the 2-digit level),
and cluster standard errors at the city-level.
    We begin discussing results for overall export intensity. Column 1 shows a positive correlation
for the coefficient on city size. This suggests that export intensity tend to be higher for firms that
locate in larger cities: Doubling the city size leads to an export intensity 0.8 percentage points

  20
      This is consistent with a large literature shows that larger, more productive firms, sort into exporting (e.g. Melitz,
2003). See Bernard et al. (2007) for evidence for the United States. As a reference, almost 5 percent of plants with
less than 25 employees in Chile are exporters.
   21
      We could also weight observations by firms' sales. This alternative, however, would implicitly give a higher
weight to larger cities.
   22
      A second limitation of our analysis is related to the endogeneity of firm's location. To alleviate this concern, we
control for the logarithm of total factor productivity: We expect more productive firms to have a higher probability of
locating in larger cities In order to accurately pinning-down the relationship between export activity and city size, we
would need a source of exogenous variations.

                                                            11
higher. Then, column 2 includes firm-level productivity as a control.23 This allows us to assess the
role played by firm level productivity in mediating the relationship between city size and export
intensity. Our results indicate that firm productivity indeed plays a role, as the TFP control is pos-
itive and highly significant, and reduce in about one-third the magnitude of the city scale measure.
Indeed, once we control for TFP, the coefficient on city size is only significant at the 10 percent
level.
    Results in columns 1­2 of Table 6 suggests that the intensive export margin is relatively weak
in explaining the positive correlation between city-level export activity and city size. Next, we
explore if the extensive margin of exporting could account for the higher export intensity of large
cities. In particular, we replicate the regressions in columns 1­2 using as the dependent variable
an export dummy for firms with positive exports. Columns 3­4 of Table 6 show the results. In
both columns, city size is positive and statistically significant at the 1 percent level. This suggests
that exporting is more likely for firms located in larger cities. We stress that this results can only
be interpreted as a correlation, because as our model in next section suggests, firm location is
endogenous.24 Next, in column 4 we include log productivity as a control. As in the case of
export intensity (column 2), the coefficient on firm-level productivity is positive and significant,
suggesting that more productive firms are more likely to be exporters. At the same time, the
coefficient on city size stays positive and significant, experiencing a modest drop (less than 20
percent) in its magnitude once we control for firm productivity. Taken together, these results
suggest that the higher within-industry export intensity of large cities is driven by a higher export
participation of firms in large cities. We summarize this in the following stylized fact:


Stylized Fact 3. Within-industries, there is a positive ­ although statistically small­ relationship
between export intensity and city size. On the other hand, the extensive margin of firms export
participation is relatively strong: Export participation is more likely to occur in larger cities.


    These suggestive findings provide partial justification for our theoretical framework, that em-
phasizes the role of firm level productivity, which is typically high in large cities due to sorting and
agglomeration mechanisms, in explaining the correlation between city size and aggregate (city-
level) export intensity. We turn to the presentation of our model in the next section.


  23
      For computing firm-level total factor productivity, we estimate a value added production function for each 2-
digit industry using the proxy-function method proposed by Ackerberg, Caves, and Frazer (2015). Given that this
methodology is dynamic, we only use information for the subset of firms in the Census of Manufacturing available in
the Annual Survey of Manufacturing from 2004 to 2007. We proxy for unobserved using materials' expenditure, and
correct for non-random exit.
   24
      Conversely, the coefficient could also be reflecting the fact that exporting leads to efficiency gains (see Garcia-
Marin and Voigtländer, 2019, for establishment-level evidence for Chile, Colombia and Mexico).

                                                          12
3     Model
In this section we present a model of sorting and agglomeration of firms across cities, together with
selection into exporting, that can account for the stylized facts documented in the previous section.
The model combines a multi-country version of the firm location model of Gaubert (2018) with a
standard mechanism of selection into exporting as in Melitz (2003).
3.1   Setup
We consider a world economy featuring C symmetric countries. Each country has an endowment
N of workers and contains a continuum of potential city sites that are ex-ante identical. Each site
has a given stock of land normalized to one. Cities with different population levels L may emerge
endogenously on these sites. Crucially, workers are assumed to be perfectly mobile across cities
within countries, but immobile internationally.
     Within these countries production takes place in cities in an arbitrary number of sectors, de-
noted by S . In each country and sector, production is undertaken by heterogeneous firms which
produce differentiated varieties in cities making use of local labor. Land scarcity in cities gives rise
to congestion but cities are also the locus of non-market interactions that generate positive agglom-
eration economies. Moreover, these agglomeration effects are assumed to be heterogeneous across
firms, with more efficient firms benefiting disproportionately from local agglomeration forces.
Like workers, firms are also assumed to be mobile within countries but immobile internationally.
     Economic geography is primarily driven by the location choices of firms. When choosing
which city to locate in, firms trade off the strength of local productivity externalities, the local
level of input prices, and the generosity of any local subsidies. Firms can ship their goods costlessly
within their home country but need to pay trade costs when shipping internationally. Moreover,
all locations within each country have symmetric access to foreign markets. Heterogeneous firms
face different incentives which leads them to make different choices regarding location and export
status.
     Following Gaubert (2018), we posit that, within countries, each potential city site is admin-
istered by a city developer who represents local landowners and competes against other sites to
attract firms. These developers play a coordination role in the creation of cities, leading to a unique
equilibrium. In what follows we fix a country and describe the rest of the model's setup from the
perspective of one "home" country. Given that all other countries are symmetric, the setup would
look identical from other countries' perspectives.
     With the setup described above, city size is sufficient to characterize all the key economic
forces at play at the local level. In particular, the distance between two cities plays no role in the
model because goods produced in the economy are freely traded within the country, all cities have
by assumption equal access to foreign markets, and housing (the only other good in the economy)


                                                  13
is non-tradable. Consequently, in what follows we index all relevant city-level parameters by city
size L. We now proceed to describe in greater detail the optimization problems faced by the key
agents in the model, namely by workers, housebuilders, firms, and city developers.

Preferences Workers live in a city of their choice within their home country, and consume a
bundle of goods and housing while being paid the applicable local wage w(L). Crucially, as
described in detail below, the wage earned by workers depends on the size of the city chosen as a
residence. Workers' preferences are characterized by the utility function:
                                                                         1-
                                               c             h
                                     U=                                                          (2)
                                                            1-

where h denotes housing and c is a Cobb-Douglas composite of tradable goods across the S sectors
of the economy
                                        j =S                  j =S
                                                
                                   c=          cjj with              j = 1                       (3)
                                        j =1                  j =1

Moreover, within each sector j  {1, . . . , S } consumers choose varieties according to the CES
aggregator:
                                                                         j
                                                            j -1         j -1
                                                            j
                                    cj =           cj (i)          di                            (4)


Housebuilding In each city, housing is built by atomistic local landowners by combining land
with local labor according to the technology:

                                                                        1-b
                                                         l
                                       hS =  b                                                   (5)
                                                        1-b

where hS denotes housing supply,  denotes land, and b denotes share of the cost of producing
housing attributable to land. Both land and housing markets are assumed to be perfectly competi-
tive at the local level, and landlords take the local wage level w(L) as given.

Production Within each country and sector, firms produce differentiated tradable varieties using
labor. Firms differ exogenously in their "raw"efficiency z . For a firm of efficiency z in sector j
and city of size L the production technology is given by

                                      yj (z, L) =  (z, L, sj )l                                  (6)

where l denotes labor inputs and  (z, L, sj ) is a firm-specific productivity shifter.The productiv-
ity of a firm  (z, L, sj ) increases with its own `raw'efficiency z and with local agglomeration

                                                     14
externalities that depend on city size L. The productivity function is also indexed by a sector-
specific parameter sj , with sectors that benefit from stronger agglomeration economies for each
city size being assigned higher values of this parameter. Moreover, the key assumption of the
Gaubert (2018) model, which we also adopt, is that the productivity of a firm  (z, L, sj ) exhibits
a strong complementarity between local externalities and the `raw'efficiency of the firm. More
precisely, we assume that  (z, L, s) is twice differentiable, log-supermodular in city size L, firm
raw efficiency z and sectoral characteristic s and strictly log-supermodular in (z, L)25 . That is,

           2 log  (z, L, s)                      2 log  (z, L, s)                      2 log  (z, L, s)
                            >0          ;                         0           ;                         0
               Lz                                    Ls                                     zs

Following Gaubert (2018), we also assume that agglomeration externalities have decreasing elas-
ticity to city size. Given that the congestion forces increase with city size with a constant elasticity,
this guarantees that the firm's problem is well defined and concave for all firms, absent any local
subsidies. Intuitively, we require that the positive effects of agglomeration externalities are not
too strong compared to the congestion forces to preclude a degenerate outcome with complete ag-
glomeration of all firms in the largest city of each country.
     Firms engage in monopolistic competition and aim to maximize profits by their choice of lo-
cation and pricing. In doing so, they take the sectoral price index (which by symmetry is the same
across countries) as given. Moreover, there is an infinite supply of potential entrants in each coun-
try and sector. Firms pay a sunk cost fj in terms of the final good in order to enter. They then
draw a raw productivity level z from a distribution given by Fj (.). Once firms discover their raw
efficiency they choose the size of the city where they want to produce and whether they want to
export to other countries.

City developers Within countries, each potential city site is administered by a city developer.
Each city developer i announces a city size L and competes with other city developers to attract
firms to their city by subsidizing firms'operational profits (understood to mean total revenues minus
variable costs of production or profits gross of any fixed production costs). Thus city developers
also announce the level of subsidies to local firms'operational profits in sector j , that may vary
with firm type z , Tji (L, z ). Developers are funded by fully taxing the profits made by landlords
on the housing market. City developers are therefore the residual claimants on local land value
and their objective is to maximize land rents net of the cost the of policies they put in place to
maximize local land value26 . There is perfect competition and free entry among city developers,
  25
     This set of assumptions is denoted as Assumption A in Gaubert (2018).
  26
     As is standard in the literature (e.g. Henderson 1974), the role of these developers is to solve a coordination
failure: atomistic agents such as firms, workers or landowners alone cannot create new cities. This results in multiple
equilibria in which cities of suboptimal size persist due to the failure of atomistic to coordinate on creating new cities.
City developers are, in contrast, large players at the city level and act as a coordinating device that allows a unique

                                                           15
which drives their profits to zero in equilibrium.


3.2   International Trade Costs and Selection Into Exporting
To complete the link between the multi-country version of the Gaubert (2018) model presented
in the previous section and the analysis of the economic geography of exporting that we aim to
undertake, we now specify the international trade frictions faced by firms that aim to ship their
goods internationally. To export to other countries firms need to pay a sector-specific fixed export
cost fje in terms of the final good for each foreign country it wants to export to, and their exports
are also subject to iceberg transportation costs  . Importantly, these costs are symmetric for all
locations within the source country (i.e. a firm locating in any city in the source country will face
the same international trade costs) and across all destination countries (the same trade costs apply
to all country pairs). This setup yields a standard mechanism of selection into exporting, with
firms above a certain sector specific threshold of "realized"productivity j selecting to export,
while firms below that threshold remain domestic. Moreover, given the symmetry of the problem,
firms will either find it optimal to be purely domestic or to export to all countries (if it is profitable
for a firm to export to one country, it is profitable to export to all countries).
    With the above setup in place we now proceed to describe the key spatial equilibrium condi-
tions, those characterizing workers and firms.

Spatial Equilibrium: Workers and Firms We begin our discussion of the key spatial equilib-
rium conditions with an analysis of workers. Denoting by P the aggregate price index for the
composite tradable good in the home country, and by c(L) and h(L) the consumption of the trad-
able composite good and housing, respectively, for a worker residing in a city of size L, we can
write the budget constraint for such a worker as:

                                         P c(L) + pH (L)h(L) = w(L).

Since goods are freely tradable within countries, all cities have symmetric access to foreign mar-
kets, and countries are symmetric, the price indices denoted by P are the same across all cities in
all countries. Moreover, given the housebuilding technology given in equation (5) and the housing
market clearing condition, the quantity of housing consumed in equilibrium by each worker in a
city of size L is given by:
                                      h(L) = (1 -  )1-b L-b                                     (7)

Intuitively, housing consumption is lower in more populous cities because cities are land con-
strained. This yields a congestion force that counterbalances the positive production externalities
equilibrium to emerge in terms of city-size distribution.

                                                            16
that occur in cities and thus precludes the complete agglomeration of each country's economy into
only one city.
    The free mobility of workers and the symmetry of countries guarantees that in equilibrium
worker utility must be equalized across all inhabited locations in all countries. We denote this
common level of utility U  ¯ . As a result, wages must increase with city size to compensate workers
for the higher cost of housing in these locations:
                                                                 1-
                                            ¯ ((1 -  ) L)b
                                     w(L) = w                                                     (8)

                                           1
where following Gaubert (2018) w    ¯=U  ¯   P denotes a country-wide constant that is determined in
general equilibrium. However, this constant will be the same in all countries due to symmetry.
    We can now proceed to characterize the spatial equilibrium condition for firms, whose location
choices are the main driver of economic geography in the model. Firms choose city size based on
three factors. First, the price of the labor varies by city size. Second, firm productivity increases
with city size, as a result of stronger agglomeration externalities. Third, the firms stand to benefit
from subsidies to operational profits (profits gross of any fixed exporting costs paid) offered by
local city developers. The firm's problem can thus be solved recursively. For a given city size, the
problem of the firm is to hire labor and set prices to maximize profits, taking as given the size of
the city (and hence the size of the externality term), input prices, and subsidies. Then, firms choose
location to maximize this optimized profit. When maximizing profits, firms treat local productivity
as exogenous, so that the agglomeration economies take the form of external economies of scale.
    Consider a firm of efficiency z producing in sector j and in a city of size L. Denoting by Pj
the price index in sector j (which again by symmetry will be the same in all countries) and given
CES preferences, firms face demand curves of the type:
                                                           -j
                                                  pj (i)
                                       cj (i) =                 cj                                (9)
                                                   Pj

which can be rewritten:
                                                            -1
                                     cj (i) = pj (i)-j Pj j      Ej                              (10)

Where Ej represents total expenditure in sector j in the (home) country (by symmetry this will
be the same in all countries). Given monopolistic competition, firms set constant mark-ups over
marginal costs yielding profits before subsidies on the domestic market:
                                                                      j -1
                     D            1        j -1  (z, L, sj )                       -1
                     j (z, L) =   j (j - 1)                                  Ej P j j            (11)
                                  j               w(L)

Moreover, for each foreign country c , a firm may make profits from exporting given by the ex-

                                                  17
pression                                    D                                D (z,L)
                                            j (z,L )
                                                     - P fje            if
                                                                             j
                                                                                       >= P fje
                            Exp c             j -1                            j -1
                            j     (z, L) =                                   D (z,L)
                                                                             j
                                                                                                                     (12)
                                           0                            if    j -1
                                                                                       < P fje
Given that in equilibrium each firm will either export to no foreign countries or to all foreign
countries, a firm's total profits from exporting will be given by
                                           D (z,L)                                   D (z,L)
                                    (C -1) j
                                           -       - (C - 1)P fje               if
                                                                                     j
                                                                                               >= P fje
                      Exp
                      j   (z, L) =       j 1
                                         
                                                                                      j -1                           (13)
                                                                                     D (z,L)
                                                                                     j
                                   0                                            if      j -1
                                                                                               < P fje

It is straightforward to show that domestic profits given by (11) are increasing in z when holding L
                                                                        
constant. As a result, for each sector and city size there may exist a zj (L) such that a firm remains
                                                             
domestic if z < zj  (L) and exports to all countries if z  zj (L)27 . As a result we can write a firm's
operational profits as
                                            
                                             D (z, L)                                  
                             o                     j                           if z < zj (L)
                             j (z, L) =                (C -1)
                                                                                                                     (14)
                                                                 D                    
                                             1+
                                                        j -1
                                                                 j (z, L)      if z  zj (L)

While a firm's total profits before subsidies are given by
                                   
                                    D (z, L)                                                      
                   T                   j                                                  if z < zj (L)
                   j (z, L)    =            (C -1)
                                                                                                                     (15)
                                                       D                                         
                                    1+
                                             j -1
                                                       j (z, L) - (C - 1)P fje            if z  zj (L)

Finally, firms receive subsidies to operational profits (profits gross of any fixed costs of exporting
paid) from the city developers, which yields total profits after subsidies
                          
                          (1 + Tj (z, L))  D (z, L)                                                       
       T                                       j                                                  if z < zj (L)
       Sub,j (z, L)   =                                (C -1)
                                                                                                                     (16)
                                                                 D                                       
                          (1 + Tj (z, L)) 1 +
                                                        j -1
                                                                 j (z, L) - (C - 1)P fje          if z  zj (L)

The problem of the firm thus is to choose the city size L to maximize (16).
3.3    Equilibrium Existence, Uniqueness and Stability
With the setup outlined in the previous two sections, we can define a spatial equilibrium of the
world economy as follows:


  27                                      D                     e                                                     
    This zj (L) satisfies the condition j   (zj (L), L) = P fj    . If for a certain sector j and city size L such a zj (L)
does not exist, it means that in that sector and at that size level we either have that firms of all productivities would
be domestic, or firms irrespective of productivity would be exporters. In this case the relevant expressions for profits
would prevail.

                                                                18
Definition 1. An equilibrium is, for each country, a set of cities L characterized by a city-size
distribution fL (.), a wage schedule w(L), a housing-price schedule pH (L) and for each sector
j = 1, ..., S a location function Lj (z ), an employment function lj (z ) , a production function yj (z ),
a price index Pj and a mass of firms Mj such that:

   1. workers maximize utility given w(L),pH (L) and Pj ,
   2. utility is equalized across all inhabited cities,
   3. firms maximize profits given w(L) and Pj , and choose whether to participate in export mar-
      kets,
   4. landowners maximize profits given w(L) and pH (L)
   5. city developers choose Tj (L, z ) to maximize profits given w(L) and the firm problem,
   6. labor, goods and housing markets clear; in particular, the labor market clears in each city,
   7. firms and city developers earn zero profits.

    Building on the work of Gaubert (2018) it is possible to show that the there exists an unique
equilibrium of the model (proofs are relegated to Appendix A). Moreover this equilibrium is sta-
ble.28 Intuitively, our assumptions guarantee that, within each sector and country, for each firm
type there exists a unique optimal city size that maximizes profits. Moreover, due to the assumed
complementarity between intrinsic productivity z and city size, the optimal city size is increasing
in the firm's intrinsic productivity. The presence of competitive city developers ensures that, within
countries, the optimal city size of each firm type and sector, is provided in equilibrium. As a result,
the assignment of firms to city sizes can be uniquely pinned down in equilibrium for all countries
and sectors, which in turn uniquely pins down the realized productivity of all firms. This in turn al-
lows us to recover the values of general equilibrium quantities: total expenditure for each country,
the mass of firms by sector in each country, the sectoral price indices in each country and sector,
the export productivity threshold in each country and sector. Finally, the mass (or "number") of
cities of each type endogenously adjusts in equilibrium such that labor markets clear.
    The equilibrium is unique in terms of distribution of outcomes within countries, such as firm-
size distribution, city-size distribution and matching functions between firms and city sizes within
countries. It is not unique in terms of which site is occupied by a city of a given size, as all sites
are identical ex ante.
3.4    Equilibrium Properties: Matching the Stylized Facts
In what follows we highlight the main characteristics of the equilibrium, with a focus on describing
how the model matches the stylized facts we've documented above. To set the stage for presenting
  28
     The equilibrium is said to be stable if no deviation of any small mass of individuals or firms from a given city
to another city or empty site enhances their utility. This definition of stability is commonly used in the literature (see
Behrens et al. (2014) for example).

                                                           19
our main results, it is helpful to note that as in Gaubert (2018), the equilibrium is characterized by
strict ranking of firms in terms of productivity, profits and revenues vis a vis city size. We restate
this result, already present in Gaubert (2018), more formally in the lemma below

Lemma 1. In equilibrium, within each country and sector, (average) firm revenues, profits and
productivity increase with city size in the following sense. For any LH , LL  L such that LH >
LL , take zH such that L                                                               
                          j (zH ) = LH and Lj (zL ) = LL . Then r (zH ) > r (zL ),  (zH ) >
  (zL ),   (zH ) >   (zL ).

     These strong predictions are a direct consequence of the perfect sorting of firms, which natu-
rally yields a ranking of firm productivity with respect to city size. In turn this productivity ranking
is reflected in an identical ranking in terms of firm profits and firm size by revenues (as the mapping
from firm productivity to revenues and profits is a monotonic bijection in equilibrium). Notably,
Lemma 1 is silent on the association between employment and city size. This is because the rela-
tionship between (average) firm employment and city size is ambiguous: firm employment can be
either positively or negatively associated with city size due to the effect of wages. More precisely
within a sector, it is straightforward to see that l (z )  r (z )/w(L (z )), where both firm revenues
and wages increase with city size. Firms may thus have lower employment in larger cities, even
though they are more productive and profitable.
     We now proceed to describe the properties of the equilibrium concerning the distribution of
exporting activity across space. These properties speak directly to the stylized facts we have doc-
umented and are described in the following proposition:

Proposition 1. In equilibrium, within each country and sector, (average) firm exports and export
intensity (i.e. exports/sales) weakly increase with city size in the following sense. For any LH , LL 
L such that LH > LL , take zH such that L                             
                                               j (zH ) = LH and Lj (zL ) = LL . Then Exp (zH ) 
                                                                                               

Exp (zL ), Expint (zH )  Expint (zL ).

Corollary 1. Across city*sector cells, export intensity weakly increases with city size.

Corollary 2. If two cities have similar sectoral compositions, the larger one will feature weakly
larger overall export intensity.

    As intrinsically more productive firms sort into bigger cities, they become even more productive
as they benefit from agglomeration economies. This in turn means that firms in larger cities are
more likely to jump over the "Melitz barrier"and engage in exporting. This produces a positive
correlation between export intensity within sectors and city size. One feature of the model is
important to note at this stage: within sectors, larger cities only export strictly more than smaller
cities in the case of a pair of cities that are "on the opposite sides of the sector specific exporting

                                                  20
             
threshold zj  . Above and below the exporting threshold export intensities for a given sector are
constant with city size - export intensity is zero for all cities hosting firms with intrinsic productivity
                         -1                                                                   
z < zj   and given by C j -1 for all cities hosting firms with intrinsic productivity z > zj . This result

is an artefact of the perfect sorting predicted by the model, with each city having a degenerate
firm productivity (and hence firm size) distribution within sectors. An extension of the model to
allow for imperfect sorting would predict a smooth, monotonically increasing relationship between
export intensity and city size.29 .
    Aggregating the exporting result from the firm level to city*sector cell level (Corollary 1) is
trivial, given that in the model each city size bin only hosts a single type of firm, so city*sector
cells preserve all the properties of the unique firm size that they host. For the proof of corollary 2
note that export intensity at the city level is given by:
                                                   S                         S
                          Exportsc                    Exportscj
                                                   j =1                      j =1   Expintcj Outputcj
                Expintc =          =                            =                                                   (17)
                          Outputc                    Outputc                         Outputc

Which can be rewritten as
                                                       S
                                                                        Outputcj
                                      Expintc =              Expintcj                                               (18)
                                                      j =1
                                                                        Outputc
                                                     Output
In the last equation, if the sectoral shares Outputcj
                                                    c
                                                      (i.e. the sectoral composition) are identical for
two cities of different sizes, then the relative export intensity of the two cities will be driven by
the within sector export intensity terms (i.e. the Expintcj terms), which the main proposition has
shown to be weakly higher in larger cities.
    It is important to note that the results outlined in Proposition 1 do not depend on our assump-
tions regarding the presence of city developers. While the presence of city developers ensures the
uniqueness of equilibria, the properties outlined in Proposition 1 would apply to any equilibrium
(in other words, in the absence of city developers the model will have multiple equilibria, but all
equilibria will satisfy the properties outlined in Proposition 1).
    Finally, as in Gaubert (2018), the model is able to account for Zipf's law for cities, which
posits that the city size distribution follows a power law (more precisely a Pareto distribution with
exponent -1). This feature of the model is captured in the next proposition:

Proposition 2. If the firm size distribution in domestic revenues within countries follows Zipf's
law, a sufficient condition for the upper tail of the city size distribution to follow Zipf's law is that
domestic revenues increase with constant elasticity with respect to city size in equilibrium.
  29
    Indeed, in the quantitative section of the paper, we present a stochastic extension of the model that allows for
imperfect sorting of firms across cities of different sizes. In this extended model the results on exporting are stronger.
If we allow firm productivity to be given by a deterministic component given by  (., ., .) and stochastic multiplicative
shock distributed independently of city size, then we obtain the result that average export intensity strictly increase
with city size, at least beyond a certain city size threshold.

                                                             21
3.5   Welfare Analysis
The competitive equilibrium derived in section 3.3 can be shown to be inefficient, as firms tend to
locate in cities that are too small. The intuition for this result is as follows. The social marginal
benefit of choosing a larger city is higher than the private benefit perceived by firms through their
profit function. There are two related benefits of choosing a larger city that are not fully internalized
by firms: (1) first, choosing a larger city increases the productivity of the economy which lowers
the entry cost of firms into a sector (P fj ); (2) second, the same productivity effect of choosing
larger cities lowers the entry cost into exporting (P fje ). The latter is a new effect that appears
in our open-economy, multi-country model and was absent in existing work. Fostering entry and
entry into exporting increases welfare, by the love of variety effect. Firms ignore the effect of their
choice of city size on the cost of entry and the cost of entry into exporting, and therefore choose
cities that are too small compared to the social optimum. This general equilibrium cross-city and
cross-country effect is not internalized by firms nor by city developers who, despite being large
local players, are still atomistic at the national and international levels.
3.6   Comparative Statics
One of the key features of the the model is that allows us to study the joint determination of inter-
national trade and economic geography. In this section we briefly outline some of the comparative
static properties of the model and highlight how the model allows us to study the impact of ge-
ographic policy (i.e. housing supply restrictions) on international trade (and exporting activity in
particularly) and, conversely, the impact of trade policy on within country economic geography.
    We begin with exploring the implications of the model concerning the impact of geographic
policies, such as housing supply restrictions on international trade.

Proposition 3. Weakening housing supply restrictions (i.e. lowering b) increases the export inten-
sity of the economy in all sectors.

    We begin by deriving an expression for aggregate exports and aggregate export intensity in a
sector j :
                                                                                            j -1
                                        -1   C -1          zj,max     (z, Lj (z ), sj )
                Expagg,j =   j k1j Ej Pj j Mj j -1                                                  (19)
                                                          
                                                         zj            w(L  j (z ))
                                                      -1           
                                    Ej = j k1j Ej Pj j     Mj Sj (zj )                              (20)

Dividing (19) by (20) yields an expression for (national) export intensity in sector j :

                                                                     (z,L            j -1
                                                 C -1     zj,max         j (z ),sj )
                                Expagg,j          j -1
                                                          
                                                         zj           w(L j ( z ))
                      Expintj =          =                          
                                                                                                    (21)
                                  Ej                           Sj (zj )

                                                   22
Differentiating the last equation with respect to b yields
                                                                
                              Expintj           Expintj        zj
                                           =       
                                                                      <0                         (22)
                               b                 zj            b
                                                      <0        >0


where the sign of the first bracket on the RHS can be shown easily by direct differentiation, whereas
the sign of the second can be established by applying the implicit function theorem to equation
(A.16).
     Intuitively a lowering of housing supply restrictions increases export intensity by lowering the
intrinsic export productivity thresholds in all sectors, thus causing a higher fraction of firms to
export. As housing supply elasticity is increased the wage gradient in city size becomes flatter and
all firms locate in larger cities and become more productive. As a result the, within sectors the
firm profit distribution shifts to the right, which means that keeping the fixed cost of exporting and
price levels constant, more firms jump over the Melitz barrier associated with exporting. However,
the price level does not remain constant: As productivity increases, all firms cut their prices thus
lowering the price index in all sectors and hence the aggregate price index. Moreover, increased
profits trigger both more entry and more entry into exporting which both cause a reduction of the
overall price index. As a result the fixed cost of exporting declines, further increasing the fraction
of firms that export and further increasing export intensity.
     The model also makes predictions about the economic geography implications of opening up
to international trade. Within sectors, the spatial reallocation of employment associated with trade
liberalization is straightforward to characterise and is outlined in the proposition below

Proposition 4. Within sectors, opening up to international trade leads to a shift in employment to
larger cities in the following sense: for any city size L in the support of the city size distribution
we have that                                             
                         zj (L)
                                Empj (zj )dzj           zj (L)
                                                                Empj (zj )dzj
                         zj (L)
                                                         zj (L)
                                                                                                  (23)
                        0
                                Emp  (
                                   j j z ) dzj open     0
                                                                Emp  (
                                                                   j j z ) dzj closed

    It can easily be seen from equation (A.8) that opening up to trade has no impact on the matching
function between firms and cities in any sector, and hence no impact on realized firm productivities.
Moreover, under the assumption of the presence of city developers this in turn implies that the
support of the city size distribution does not change when trade costs change.
    What opening up to trade does is increase the size of the more productive firms, who become
exporters, relative to less productive firms. This shift takes place within all sectors. In response,
the mass of cities accommodating the workers of these new exporting firms needs to grow for
labor markets to clear. Thus, the fact that exporting firms tend to increase in size relative to non-
exporters will tend to increase the cumulative employment share of the relatively larger cities that

                                                 23
house exporting firms in all sectors.
     On the other hand, the overall implications of trade openness on the city size distribution are
highly complex, as we need to keep track of which sectors are most affected by opening up to trade
and where these sectors tend to locate. If the sectors that tend to locate in large cities have low
fixed exporting costs, opening up to trade will tend to shift population towards the largest cities.
If, on the other hand, the sectors that benefit most from trade openness (because of low fixed costs
of exporting) tend to locate in medium sized or even small cities we may see the largest shifts in
population towards cities in these size bins.

4     Quantitative Analysis
In this section we take the model to the data. We first present the main features of the estimation
procedure. We then show how the model fits our main stylized fact for the Chinese economy.
Finally, we provide quantitative results for the effect of (i) trade liberalization and (ii) spatial
policies on welfare and productivity.
4.1   Structural Estimation
Functional Forms
The first step to estimate the model is to specify the productivity process. In the model, firms
sort perfectly into cities and into exporting according to their raw efficiency z . This produces the
stark prediction that small cities have no productive firms nor exporters. Yet, in the data, small
cities feature both productive and unproductive firms, and they may produce for the domestic or
foreign markets. To accommodate these facts, we modify the baseline model in two ways. First,
we introduce a disturbance term in ex-post productivity that varies across firms and cities. This
reflects the fact that firms may be more productive in certain locations, for example because they
have better knowledge of the local culture and can organize production in a more efficient way.
The resulting productivity process features two sources of randomness: raw productivity (z ), and
a idiosyncratic productivity shock (i,L ) that varies across firms and cities. In this way, we allow
firms to sort imperfectly into cities of different sizes.
    We specify the same functional form for ex-post productivity  (including agglomeration
economies related to the firm's optimal city choice) as Gaubert (2018):
                                                                           sj
                                                                      L
                 log(j (zi , L, sj )) = aj log L + log(zi ) 1 + log             + i,L           (24)
                                                                      L0

where L0 denotes the size of the smallest city, and {aj , sj } are sectoral parameters. Equation
(24) shows that ex-post (log) productivity  is composed by three terms. The first term (aj log L)
represents the classical agglomeration mechanism: Firms are more efficient when they locate in
larger cities. The second term represents the log-modularity between firms' raw efficiency z and

                                                 24
(normalized) city size (L/L0 ). According to this, firms' raw productivity z and city size L are
complementary: Initially more productive (high z ) firms benefit relatively more from locating in
larger cities (provided that s is greater than zero). Finally, the last term i,L is an idiosyncratic term
that varies across firms and cities. Importantly, this term is distributed independently of firm's raw
productivity z . Thus, regardless of the level of raw productivity z , firms can still find optimal to
locate in smaller cities.
     We assume that raw productivity z follows a log-normal distribution with mean zero and vari-
ance Z . We restrict the process for log z to be non-negative to ensure that ex-post productivity 
increases with city size. Consequently, the distribution for log z is truncated at zero. Regarding
the idiosyncratic term i,L , we assume that it is distributed type-I extreme value. We restrict the
parameters so that the mean of the process is equal to zero. With this restriction, the distribution is
determined solely by the scale parameter  .30
     In the model, firms become exporters with probability one after the surpass the export produc-
tivity threshold. Yet, in the data, not all highly productive firms are exporters. To accommodate
this stark prediction of the model, we specify a Pareto distribution for the probability of becoming
exporters, as an increasing function of the relative distance of firms' ex-post productivity from the
                                                
export productivity threshold in each city, j    (L):

                                                         -
                               
                               1 -       j (zi ,L,sj )                                         
                                           j  (L)            , with  > 0   if j (zi , L, sj )  j (L)
            Pr(Export>0) =                                                                                     (25)
                               0                                           otherwise

Note that this parametrization is consistent with more productive firms having a higher probability
of becoming exporters. At the same time, this specification relaxes the step-function for export
probability by the canonical Melitz's (2003) model. Firms with productivity just above the export
productivity threshold have an export probability marginally above zero. The export probability
increases continuously until eventually reaching one for high enough productivity levels.
Estimation Procedure
To estimate the model, we use the data from the Chinese Census of Manufacturing (see Section
2, for details). To match the relative size of China in the world economy in 2004, we consider a
world with 20 symmetric countries. The estimation is carried out sector-by-sector for each 2-digit
manufacturing ISIC industry.31
    The estimation strategy proceeds in two steps and follows Gaubert (2018). We first calibrate
  30
      The location parameter  can be recovered explicitly as a function of the scale parameter  . In particular, the
restriction E() = 0 implies that  = - , where  is the Euler-Mascheroni constant.
   31
      We consider a total of 19 industries. We exclude manufactures of Tobacco products, and merge (i) manufactures
of coke, refined petroleum products and nuclear fuel with manufactures of chemicals and chemical products, and (ii)
office, accounting and computing machinery with manufactures of electrical machinery.

                                                         25
all parameters that can be directly linked to the data {j , j , b(1 -  )/, j }. The elasticity of
substitution j is set to match the average 2-digit markup, computed at the the establishment-level
using the procedure outlined by De Loecker and Warzynski (2012). The Cobb-Douglas sectoral
share j is computed as the share of each sector's value added within the manufacturing sector.
The composite parameter b(1 -  )/ corresponds in the model to the elasticity of wages to city
size. This elasticity is equal to the difference between the elasticity of average value-added to city
size minus the elasticity of average employment to city size.32 Thus, we run regressions for the
logarithm of average city-level value-added, and the logarithm of average city-level employment
as dependent variables, against the logarithm of urban population of the city size, and then subtract
the coefficient on log city size from the former regression to the corresponding coefficient on the
latter regression. Finally, the iceberg variable trade cost j is set to match the average export
intensity within exporting firms.33
    In the second stage, we estimate the remaining parameters {aj , sj , Z ,  , fje , } through sim-
ulated method of moments (SMM). This method compares the objective moments in the data to
the moments derived from a simulated economy, for candidate values of the parameters to be
estimated. The vector of estimated parameters       ^SM M are such that they minimize the weighted
distance between the moments in the data (mj ) and the simulated economy (m       ^ j (j )):

                          ^j,SM M = arg min(m
                                            ^ j (j ) - mj )T Wj (m
                                                                 ^ j (j ) - mj )                                   (26)
                                             j


In equation (26), the matrix WT weights the vector of moments. We set this matrix to be equal
to the inverse of the variance-covariance matrix of the moments. To compute this matrix, we
follow Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz (2011) and compute bootstrapped standard errors of the mo-
ments resampling within industry-cities (with replacement) 5,000 artificial economies with the
same number of firms as in the Chinese Census of Manufacturing in 2004.
Choice of Moments and Identification
We now discuss the moments we choose to target in the SMM estimation. Table 7 summarizes
these moments, together with the parameter each moment aims to identify. The first set of mo-
ments relate to {aj }. This parameter summarizes classical agglomeration forces: as aj gets larger,
productivity and revenues increase with city size. Accordingly, we define the target moment as
the share of value added produced by firms located in cities of different sizes. We construct the
moment in the following way. For each sector, we sort cities in terms of population, and define
city groups in terms of quartiles of cumulative population (e.g., the first group contains all smallest
cities in the economy, until that their population add up to 25 percent of the overall population).
  32
       To see why this is the the case, note that w(L)lj (z, L) = (j - 1)/j rj (z, L), where r represents firm revenues.
                                                                                                      -1
  33                                                                                          j -1
       In the model, the average export intensity conditional on exporting is equal to 1 +   (C -1)        .


                                                           26
Then, we compute four moments as the share of value-added produced by firms located in each of
the population quartiles. Thus, the first set of moments match by how much the share of sectoral
value added increases with the size of the cities.
     The second set of moments relates to {sj }, which determines the strength of the complemen-
tarity between raw productivity z and city size. To identify this parameter, we seek to match the
average value added of firms in relatively large cities. Intuitively, for a given productivity z , the
higher is the value of sj , the stronger is the increase of firm productivity and revenues in city size.
Formally, we divide cities in four quartiles by size, and then compute the average value-added of
the firms locating in each quartile. We emphasize the top quartile of the city size distribution: dif-
ferences in sj will affect relatively more the slope of average value added in relatively large cities,
while it will tend to have a more modest impact in relatively smaller cities.
     The third set of moments relate to the scale parameter of the idiosyncratic productivity shock
( ). This parameter varies by firm and city size, and it accounts for relatively productive firms
locating in small cities. To identify this parameter, we target the average value added of firms in
small cities. Through the lens of the model, if average value added in small cities is high, it must be
because some highly productive firms are choosing to locate in these cities. Thus, as  increases,
we expect the average value added of firms locating in small cities to increase. Formally, this
moment is defined analogously to the second set of moments, but with an emphasis on the bottom
quartile of the city size distribution.
     The fourth set of moments relate to the variance of the truncated log-normal distribution of raw
productivity, z . To identify this parameter, we target the top decile of normalized sales across all
cities.
     Finally, to identify the fixed export cost and the Pareto shape parameter , we target the
national-level export-related moments. First, to identify the fixed export cost, we target the fraction
of firms that are exporters in the data. Intuitively, a higher fixed export cost affects the extensive
margin of exporting. As this cost increases, fewer firms will be sufficiently profitable to pay the
fixed export cost and participate in export markets. Second, to identify , we target the industry-
level export intensity, defined as overall exports over sales across all city sizes. Conditional on the
fixed export cost, a higher export intensity requires a less disperse exporting probability distribu-
tion, leading to a higher level of the shape parameter .
Model Fit
The model generally matches the moments in the data well. Table B.3 shows the estimated coeffi-
cient for each 2-digit sector, and Table B.4-B.5 compares each data moment to the corresponding
moment of the simulated model. Notably, the model replicates the average firm size and the distri-
bution of economic activity across city sizes. Average value-added increases with city size in most
sectors (Figure B.4), which in the model occurs due to agglomeration economies and the sorting

                                                  27
of most productive firms into larger cities. Similarly, the model fits quite closely the distribution of
total employment across quartiles of city size (Figure B.5). Note that the model does not directly
target this last moment. Finally, the model fits well the distribution of overall firm-size distribution
for most sectors (Figure B.6), which is quite surprising given that the estimation of the model only
targets the top decile of the firm size distribution.
     To get a sense of how the model fits export-related moments, we estimate the export-size pre-
mium implied by the simulated model. This is a non-target statistic that combines information
about the estimated productivity distribution and fixed and variable trade costs.34
     Table 8 shows results for the export-size premium, using the Chinese Census of Manufacturing
(columns 1-3) and the simulated model (columns 4-6). Specifically, we estimate a linear regression
of firm-employment (in logarithm) against a dummy taking the value one for exporters, controlling
for industry (columns 2 and 5) or industry-city fixed effects (columns 3 and 6).35 Quite remarkably,
we obtain similar export-size premiums in the model and data, even though the model does not
directly match this moment. Across specifications, the model slightly underestimates the export-
size premium, in about 8-11 percent of the premium observed in the data.
4.2    Export Intensity and City Size
We now discuss the model's fit to our main stylized fact, related to the positive relationship between
export intensity. This pattern is not directly targeted by our estimation strategy. Thus, our results
in this section can be used to evaluate the mechanisms highlighted by the model ­ firm sorting and
agglomeration, plus selection into exporting.
     We simulate an economy with 200 equally-spaced city size bins. The support of the city size
distribution in the simulated economy resembles the Chinese data described in section 2. Note
that although the grid of city sizes is fixed, the effective city size distribution is determined en-
dogenously in the model as a result of sorting and agglomeration forces. For each sector, we draw
20,000 realizations of raw productivity z and 20,000×200 realization of idiosyncratic productivity
shocks (one for each potential city size). Then, we solve the firms' problem and determine: (i)
optimal city size and (ii) export participation.36 Conditional on these choices, we solve the general
equilibrium problem, taking the effective number of firms in each sector as the equilibrium mass
of firms {Mj } of the economy. This leads us to the equilibrium values for sectoral prices {Pj },
  34
      To compute this statistic in the model, we simulate the model using the estimated sectoral parameters. After
obtaining draws for intrinsic (z ) and idiosyncratic productivity (i,L ), we solve the firms' location and export decisions
and the general equilibrium problem. Finally, we use the equilibrium objects and parameters to compute employment,
revenues, and exports for each firm.
   35
      We do not directly include geographical controls because market access does not vary with city size in the model.
Nevertheless, in our most restrictive specification, the industry-city fixed effects account for the average impact of
market access on optimal firm size.
   36
      In the model, these decisions are independent from each other. Firms' location choice weights the strength of
agglomeration economies over ex-post productivity  against congestion forces leading to more expensive labor costs.
Thus, once firms choose their optimal city, the export decision affects the level of revenues and employment demand.

                                                           28
aggregate revenues {R} and the export productivy threshold {  (L)}.37 Once we obtain these val-
ues, we compute revenues and export value, and construct city-level export intensity as the share
of aggregate exports to revenues, both defined at the level of city sizes.
    Figure 2 shows the main result. It plots (log) export intensity against (log) city size for the
model (red-squared symbols) and data (blue-dotted symbols). For both, model and data we plot a
solid line represent the regression line that best fits the data.38 The model produces a remarkable
positive relationship between city size and export intensity: In the model ­ as in the data ­ bigger
cities are more export-intensive. The regression coefficient is very precisely estimated at a value
0.167 (robust standard error 0.020), accounting for a large portion of the data variation.39
    One explanation for the weaker relationship estimated by the model compared to the data
relates to how the selection-into-exporting mechanism operates. Conditional on productivity, the
probability that a firm exports in the model decreases with city size. Firms in larger cities have
to pay higher labor costs, which ultimately reduces the probability of generating enough profits to
pay the fixed export costs.40 In contrast, export activity in the data increases with city size, even
after controlling for firm-productivity (see columns 2 and 4 in Table 6). Then, unless we introduce
an additional force, the model's ability to perfectly fit this dimension of the data is limited.41
4.3    Counterfactual Analysis
This section analyzes the general equilibrium effect of trade and spatial policies. Our goal is to
illustrate how economic geography and international trade interact in the model. We first explore
the quantitative relevance of economic geography for the computation of gains from trade in terms
of productivity and welfare. We then discuss how international trade affects the effectiveness of
spatial policies.



  37
      Unlike the theoretical model, in the empirical model the export productivity thresholds varies with city size. This
is directly related to the fact that in the theoretical model, firms sort perfectly into city sizes. As a consequence, there is
only one city size featuring both domestic firms and exporters. This city defines the only relevant export productivity
threshold. In contrast, in the model with imperfect sorting, all cities may feature exporters. Since labor costs vary
across cities, exporting requires a higher productivity threshold in larger cities.
   38
      In the case of the model, the regression weights each city-size by the number of cities in each bin.
   39
      The model overestimates cities' export intensity, particularly for small cities (less than 500 thousand inhabitants).
In these cities, the observed average export intensity is 3.3 percent ­ 40 percent of the value predicted by the model
(8.2 percent). In contrast, in large cities (over 5 million inhabitants), the difference between data and model closes to
only 1.6 percentage points (12.8 vs. 14.4 percent).
   40
      In the statistical model, this holds in expected values because the conditional idiosyncratic productivity shocks
i,L are distributed independently of firms' raw productivity z . As a consequence, two firms with the same z may
draw very different i,L in large and small cities, leading them to have higher or lower export probability. However,
because i,L has mean zero, it will still be true in expectation that ­ conditional on z ­ export participation decreases
with city size.
   41
      One easy way to improve the fit of the model to the data would be to allow the fixed export cost to fall with city
size, perhaps reflecting the existence of better productive amenities ­ such as infrastructure ­ in larger cities.

                                                             29
4.3.1      Economic Geography and the Effect of Trade Liberalization
We begin comparing the welfare and productivity gains associated with trade openness in our
baseline model to a model without geography (e.g. Melitz, 2003). We implement this counter-
factual exercise as a symmetrical decline in the variable trade cost  from prohibitive levels to
levels consistent with observed trade flows in all C countries. As  decreases, firms with realized
productivity (i.e., including the effect of agglomeration economies) above the export productivity
threshold increase their exports and their share of production sold in foreign markets. Importantly,
the decrease in the variable trade cost allows exporters to offer their production at a lower cost in
all destination markets, lowering aggregate prices in all countries given the symmetry assumption.
This, in turn, induces entry into export markets, as the lower aggregate prices decreases the value
of the entry into exporting. All in all, trade liberalization leads to a reallocation of economic ac-
tivity towards most productive firms, which grow as a result, leading to an increase in aggregate
productivity. Welfare also increases as real incomes grow as the aggregate price index decreases.
     An important feature of the model is that the matching function between firms and cities does
not depend on the degree of openness to trade of the economy. Indeed, optimal city choice only
depends on the strength of agglomeration economies compared to congestion costs. Thus, trade
liberalization does not induce additional within-firm efficiency gains due to firms moving to larger
cities to profit from agglomeration economies. Differences in aggregate productivity will only
arise due to reallocation of resources across existing city size bins.
     Relative to the model without geography, the magnitude of the effects of trade openness on
welfare and productivity in our baseline model may be smaller or larger. In both models, exporters
grow relative to non-exporters by the same scaling factor when the economy is opened to trade,
such that the relative gains from trade in the two models are driven by the share of firms that
become exporters. In turn this is driven by the relative wages (benchmarked against the national
average) faced by the firms on the margin of exporting in the two models. If these are higher in
our model, then the gains from opening up to trade are smaller in our model (as a smaller fraction
of firms become exporters in our model) while if they are lower the converse is true.
     To analyze the effect of trade liberalization, we proceed in four steps. First, we compute gen-
eral equilibrium quantities and values in the full model with geography. For this, we calibrate the
land intensity parameter b as in Gaubert (2018), setting the parameter to match the median housing
supply elasticity across U.S. cities (see Saiz, 2010). Second, we simulate the baseline economy
following the same steps as in section 4.2. Third, we simulate the counterfactual closed economy,
where we set  to a prohibitively high value. This involves recomputing general equilibrium ob-
jects, given that in the counterfactual economy, no firm exports. Finally, we compute aggregate
TFP and welfare.42
  42
       For the economy without geography, we proceed in a similar way, but re-estimating a restricted version of the

                                                         30
    Table 9 computes the aggregate productivity and welfare gains from trade liberalization, both
in the baseline model and in the model without geography. To simplify comparisons, we normalize
productivity and welfare in both models relative to actual open economy. We find that for both,
welfare and aggregate productivity, economic geography considerations substantially dampens the
effect of trade liberalization policies. Opening the Chinese economy to trade in the model without
geography leads to productivity and welfare gains of 30 and 31%, respectively. In contrast, the
gains in our model are about one-third lower: Trade liberalization leads to gains of 23 and 24%
in welfare and productivity, respectively. This is consistent with exporters locating in relatively
larger cities, where operational profits are smaller relative to a model without geography, where
firms face a flat wage schedule across cities.
    Note that the gains from trade reported in Table 9 most likely overestimate actual gains, because
our economy does not consider non-tradable sectors. Nevertheless, to the extent that the non-
tradable sector enters aggregate consumption with a Cobb-Douglas weight, mapping our results to
a model with a non-tradable sector is straightforward. In this case, the welfare gains from trade can
be easily scaled using the expenditure shares of manufacturing and housing. Using the share of
manufacturing and housing in 2004 Chinese real GDP leads to welfare gains of 8.8% in the model
with geography and 11.6% in the model without geography. This numbers closely match results in
Ossa (2015), who estimates gains from trade for China in a multi-sectoral model using a modified
version of the sufficient statistic approach by Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodriguez-Clare (2012).
4.3.2    International Trade and the Effect of Spatial Policies
Our second counterfactual exercise studies the productivity and welfare effect of the reduction in
land-use restrictions studied by Gaubert (2018). We compare the response in the open and closed
economy cases. We implement this policy as a (multilateral) reduction in the parameter b, which
measures the intensity of land use in the housing production function.43 Changing this parameter
affects both housing supply and the cost of labor across cities. In particular, a reduction in the
value of b increases the housing supply elasticity, and flattens the wage schedule across city sizes.
    In the model, a less restrictive spatial policy lead to a higher level of aggregate productivity. As
b decreases, firms have incentives to move (in average) to larger cities. Ultimately, this relocation
process generates improvements in aggregate total factor productivity, due to within-firm efficiency
gains, and gains from reallocation of resources. On the one side, firms that move to larger cities
benefit of larger agglomeration economies, leading to within-firm efficiency gains. On the other
model with the agglomeration parameters, a and s, and the idiosyncratic productivity term i,L equal to zero. We
estimate the parameters {z , fx , } targeting the top decile of the firm size distribution, the aggregate fraction of
exporters and export intensity in each sector. We show the estimated parameters and discuss how this model fits the
data in Appendix C.
   43
      More generally, policies in the open economy case may lead to cross-country spillovers when they are not applied
symmetrically in all countries. While this may lead to interesting quantitative results, for now we focus on the the case
of multilateral policies to emphasize the different responses of the economies in the open and closed economy cases.

                                                          31
side, these firms become larger, and hire relatively more workers. This produces a reallocation of
resources within the economy, which reinforces the within-firm effect and leads to additional gains
in efficiency.
    Relative to the closed economy case, we expect the reduction in land use restrictions to generate
a larger effect on aggregate productivity when the economy is open. Most productive firms have
a greater weight in the open economy case, because they can export and increase their revenues.
This amplifies the impact of the within-firm gains from the closed economy case. In addition, as
we discuss in section 3.6, the model predicts that weakening housing supply restrictions increases
the fraction of firms that are exporters. This leads to additional gains ­ relative to a closed economy
­ in the form of reallocation of resources from domestic firms to new exporters.
    The property of predetermined city sizes, although convenient analytically for solving the equi-
librium of the model, is somehow unrealistic. At least in the short-run, cities grow when the they
face increased housing demand. This, in turn, reinforces the within-firm gains and amplifies the
overall productivity gains. Thus, when analyzing the general equilibrium effect of policies, we
report results a less restrictive interpretation of the model where we allow cities to grow (but the
number of cities of each size is fixed).44
    We proceed in three steps to analyze the effect of changes in b. First, we calibrate the land
intensity parameter b. As in Gaubert (2018), we set this parameter to match the median housing
supply elasticity across US cities (see Saiz, 2010). Second, we simulate the baseline economy as in
section 4.2. Finally, we simulate the various counterfactual economies, where we change the value
of b. This involves recomputing: (i) firms' optimal location, (ii) export decision, and (iii) general
equilibrium objects. In particular, we vary b so that the housing supply elasticity varies between
the 25th and the 75th percentile of the housing supply elasticity across U.S. cities (as defined by
Saiz, 2010). Finally, we compute aggregate TFP for all economies. For the closed economy, we
proceed in a similar way, but we set the variable trade cost equal to a large number, while we keep
the rest of parameters fixed at their open economy values.
    Figure 3 plots aggregate TFP against various levels of the housing supply elasticity. In order
to simplify comparisons, we compute productivity relative to the level in the baseline economy.
Accordingly, when the housing supply elasticity takes the value of the baseline economy (1.75),
the value for normalized aggregate TFP is zero. In each panel, we plot the productivity trajectories
for the closed (dashed line) and open (solid line) economy cases. Both cases show relatively large
changes in aggregate productivity. Taking the economy from the first to the fourth quartile of the
housing supply distribution increases aggregate productivity in approximately 10 percent relative

  44
     Operationally, the counterfactual exercise involves solving a fixed-point problem: A reduction in b leads firms
to move to larger cities. This increases the size of these cities, and their attractiveness in terms of agglomeration
economies. This leads to subsequent waves of firms moving to larger cities. This process continues up to the point
that congestion costs counterbalance the benefits from agglomeration.

                                                         32
to the baseline in the closed economy case. When we compute the same statistic for the open
economy, the productivity gains scale up to almost 15 percent. Thus, open economy considera-
tions increases the estimated effectiveness of spatial substantially. In our particular exercise, the
effectiveness increases in about 50 percent.45

5        Conclusion
Trade policy has received renewed interest in recent years, as globalization has been blamed for
widening spatial disparities in many developed countries. In response to this interest, a nascent
literature has begun to analyze the interplay between trade and economic geography within coun-
tries.
     In this paper, we contribute to this literature in three ways. First, using information from three
major trading nations ­ China, the United States and Brazil ­ we have documented a novel and
highly robust stylized fact: Exporting is more unevenly distributed than overall economic activity,
and in particular, it is disproportionately concentrated in larger cities. Second, we show that a rel-
atively simple framework can explain this stylized fact, by marrying sorting and agglomeration of
heterogeneous firms across space (à la Gaubert, 2018) with an open economy setting and selection
into exporting in the spirit of Melitz (2003). The intuition of the model is straightforward: Due to
both selection and agglomeration, larger cities feature more productive firms that are more likely
to select into exporting. As a result, large and productive cities feature high aggregate export in-
tensities in all sectors. Third, we structurally estimate the model using Chinese firm-level data to
recover the shape of agglomeration externalities and the magnitude of fixed exporting costs. We
then use the model to undertake counterfactual policy analyses.
     Our model is designed to assess the effects of both trade policies and (domestic) spatial policies,
giving rise to novel interactions between these two levers. We find that the corresponding welfare
implications are richer and differ from those in the more parsimonious standard models that are
nested in our framework: a standard trade model that ignores within-country geography, and an
economic geography model that shuts down international trade.
     Our theoretical framework opens the door for fascinating future work that exploits the interplay
of international trade and domestic economic geography. For example, our model naturally lends
itself to exploring the rich interactions between local agglomeration forces and (domestic and
international) trade costs that are at the core of a variety of policies.




    45
     Our estimates are significantly larger than the values estimated by Gaubert (2018) for a closed economy version
of the model estimated for France. We note that our estimates are not directly comparable to hers: Gaubert (2018)
solves the strict interpretation of the model, with predetermined city sizes. This dampens significantly the productivity
response of the economy, as it misses agglomeration gains due to changes in the size of the cities.

                                                          33
References
Ackerberg, D. A., K. Caves, and G. Frazer (2015). Identification Properties of Recent Production Function
  Estimators. Econometrica 83(6), 2411­2451.
Anderson, J. E. and E. van Wincoop (2004). Trade Costs. Journal of Economic Literature 42(3), 691­751.
Arkolakis, C., A. Costinot, and A. Rodriguez-Clare (2012, February). New Trade Models, Same Old Gains?
  American Economic Review 102(1), 94­130.
Au, C.-C. and J. V. Henderson (2006). Are Chinese Cities Too Small? Review of Economic Studies 73(3),
  549­576.
Autor, D. H., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson (2013). The China syndrome: Local labor market effects of import
  competition in the United States. American Economic Review 103(6), 2121­2168.
Bakker, J. D. (2020). Trade and Agglomeration: Theory and Evidence from France.
Behrens, K., G. Duranton, and F. Robert-Nicoud (2014). Productive Cities: Sorting, Selection, and Ag-
  glomeration. Journal of Political Economy 122(3), 507­553.
Behrens, K., C. Gaigne, G. I. Ottaviano, and J.-F. Thisse (2006a). How density economies in international
  transportation link the internal geography of trading partners. Journal of Urban Economics 60(2), 248­
  263.
Behrens, K., C. Gaigne, G. I. Ottaviano, and J.-F. Thisse (2006b). Is remoteness a locational disadvantage?
  Journal of Economic Geography 6(3), 347­368.
Behrens, K., C. Gaigne, G. I. Ottaviano, and J.-F. Thisse (2007). Countries, regions and trade: On the
  welfare impacts of economic integration. European Economic Review 51(5), 1277­1301.
Behrens, K., C. Gaigne, G. I. Ottaviano, and J.-F. Thisse (2009). Industry location and welfare when
  transport costs are endogenous. Journal of Urban Economics 65(2), 195­208.
Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, S. J. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2007). Firms in International Trade. Journal
  of Economic Perspectives 21(3), 105­130.
Brandt, L., J. Van Biesebroeck, and Y. Zhang (2014). Challenges of working with the Chinese NBS firm-
  level data. China Economic Review 30(C), 339­352.
Chauvin, J. P., E. Glaeser, Y. Ma, and K. Tobio (2017). What is different about urbanization in rich and
  poor countries? Cities in Brazil, China, India and the United States. Journal of Urban Economics 98(C),
  17­49.
Cheng, W. and A. Potlogea (2020). Trade Liberalization and Economic Development: Evidence from
  China's WTO Accession.
Combes, P.-P., G. Duranton, and L. Gobillon (2008). Spatial wage disparities: Sorting matters! Journal of
  Urban Economics 63(2), 723­742.
Combes, P.-P., G. Duranton, L. Gobillon, D. Puga, and S. Roux (2012). The Productivity Advantages of
  Large Cities: Distinguishing Agglomeration From Firm Selection. Econometrica 80(6), 2543­2594.
Cosar, A. K. and P. Fajgenbaum (2016). Local Economic Effects of Brexit. American Economic Journal:
  Microeconomics 8, 24­56.
Costa, F., J. Garred, and J. P. Pessoa (2016). Winners and losers from a commodities-for-manufactures trade
  boom. Journal of International Economics 102(C), 50­69.
Dauth, W., S. Findeisen, and J. Suedekum (2014). The rise of the east and far-east: German labor markets
  and trade integration. Journal of the European Economic Association 12(6), 1643­1675.


                                                    34
Davis, D. R. and J. I. Dingel (2014). The Comparative Advantage of Cities. NBER Working Papers 20602,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Davis, D. R. and J. I. Dingel (2019). A Spatial Knowledge Economy. American Economic Review 109(1),
  153­170.
De Loecker, J. and F. Warzynski (2012). Markups and Firm-Level Export Status. American Economic
  Review 102(6), 2437­2471.
Desmet, K. and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2013). Urban Accounting and Welfare. American Economic Re-
  view 103(6), 2296­2327.
Dhingra, S., S. Machin, and H. Overman (2017). Local Economic Effects of Brexit. National Institute
  Economic Review 242, R24­R36.
Dingel, J. I., A. Miscio, and D. R. Davis (2019). Cities, Lights, and Skills in Developing Economies. NBER
  Working Papers 25678, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Dix-Carneiro, R. and B. K. Kovak (2015). Trade Liberalization and the Skill Premium: A Local Labor
  Markets Approach. American Economic Review 105(5), 551­557.
Dix-Carneiro, R. and B. K. Kovak (2017). Trade Liberalization and Regional Dynamics. American Eco-
  nomic Review 107 (10), 2908­2946.
Dix-Carneiro, R. and B. K. Kovak (2019). Margins of labor market adjustment to trade. Journal of Interna-
  tional Economics 117 (C), 125­142.
Ducruet, C., R. Juhasz, D. K. Nagy, and C. Steinwender (2020). All aboard: The effects of port development.
Duranton, G. and D. Puga (2004). Micro-Foundations of Urban Agglomeration Economies. In J. V. Hen-
  derson and J. F. Thisse (Eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Volume 4, Chapter 64, pp.
  2063­2117. Elsevier.
Eaton, J., S. Kortum, and F. Kramarz (2011). An Anatomy of International Trade: Evidence From French
  Firms. Econometrica 79(5), 1453­1498.
Eeckhout, J., R. Pinheiro, and K. Schmidheiny (2014). Spatial Sorting. Journal of Political Economy 122(3),
  554­620.
Garcia-Marin, A. and N. Voigtländer (2019). Exporting and Plant-Level Efficiency Gains: It's in the Mea-
  sure. Journal of Political Economy 127 (4), 1777­1825.
Gaubert, C. (2018). Firm Sorting and Agglomeration. American Economic Review 108(11), 3117­3153.
Henderson, J. V. (1974). The Sizes and Types of Cities. American Economic Review 64(4), 640­656.
Hsieh, C.-T. and E. Moretti (2019). Housing Constraints and Spatial Misallocation. American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics 11(2), 1­39.
Kovak, B. K. (2013). Regional Effects of Trade Reform: What Is the Correct Measure of Liberalization?
  American Economic Review 103(5), 1960­1976.
Krugman, P. and R. Livas Elizondo (1996). Trade policy and the Third World metropolis. Journal of
  Development Economics 49(1), 137­150.
Lyon, S. G. and M. Waugh (2019). Quantifying the Losses from International Trade.
Matano, A. and P. Naticchioni (2012). Wage distribution and the spatial sorting of workers. Journal of
 Economic Geography 12(2), 379­408.
Melitz, M. J. (2003). The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry Produc-
 tivity. Econometrica 71(6), 1695­1725.


                                                    35
Mion, G. and P. Naticchioni (2009). The spatial sorting and matching of skills and firms. Canadian Journal
  of Economics 42(1), 28­55.
Monfort, P. and R. Nicolini (2000). Regional Convergence and International Integration. Journal of Urban
 Economics 48(2), 286­306.
Ossa, R. (2015). Why trade matters after all. Journal of International Economics 97 (2), 266­277.
Paluzie, E. (2001). articles: Trade policy and regional inequalities. Papers in Regional Science 80(1), 67­85.
Parkhomenko, A. (2018). The Rise of Housing Supply Regulation in the US: Local Causes and Aggregate
  Implications. 2018 Meeting Papers 275, Society for Economic Dynamics.
Redding, S. J. (2016). Goods trade, factor mobility and welfare. Journal of International Economics 101,
  148­167.
Rosenthal, S. and W. Strange (2004). Evidence on the Nature and Sources of Agglomeration Economies.
  In J. V. Henderson and J. F. Thisse (Eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Volume 4,
  Chapter 65, pp. 2119­2171. Elsevier.




                                                     36
FIGURES


                         Figure 1: Export intensity and City size in China, United States and Brazil

                                     China                                                                                             United States
           -1




                                                                                                         -1
           -2




                                                                                                         -2
 log(Export intensity)




                                                                                               log(Export intensity)
         -3




                                                                                                       -3
           -4




                                                                                                         -4
           -5




                                                                                                         -5
                         12     13              14                        15        16                                 11        12        13            14     15   16
                                     log(MSA population)                                                                                  log(MSA population)



                                                                                         Brazil
                                                          -2         -3
                                               log(Export intensity)
                                                      -4  -5
                                                          -6




                                                                               12            13                             14    15       16
                                                                                          log(population)



Notes: The figure shows the relationship between city size and export intensity. Cities are defined in terms of
metropolitan areas in the cases of China and the United States, and in terms of microregions for the case of Brazil.
For all countries, the analysis only considers cities with positive exports and population over 100,000 inhabitants.
City-level export intensity is defined as manufacturing exports over manufacturing sales for China; overall exports
over manufacturing sales for the United States, and as overall exports over GDP for the case of Brazil.




                                                                                           37
                  Figure 2: Export Intensity and City Size in the Baseline Model




                                           -1
                                                                                  Data   Model




                                           -2
                       log(Export intensity)
                                           -3
                                           -4




                                                12   13         14        15       16      17
                                                          log(urban population)

Notes: The figure shows the relationship between city size and export intensity predicted by the model. It
simulates an economy with 200 city size bins, and 20,000 firms in each sector 2-digit sector. In the simulated
economy, we define a log-linear grid over 200 equally spaced city-size bins. The support of the grid of city sizes
in the simulated economy resembles the distribution of city sizes in the data. The size of each bubble denotes the
number of cities in each city size. The actual number of cities of each size are determined endogenously within
the model as a consequence of firms sorting into cities.




                                                               38
       Figure 3: Aggregate Productivity Effect of a Reduction in Land Use Restrictions


                                          6

                                                        TFP Open
                                                        TFP closed
                                          4



                                          2




                             Change (%)
                                          0



                                          -2



                                          -4



                                          -6
                                           1.55   1.6     1.65        1.7     1.75     1.8     1.85   1.9   1.95
                                                                     House supply elasticity




Notes: The Figure shows the aggregate of aggregate productivity of reducing land-use restrictions. The hor-
izontal shows the housing supply elasticity of the economy, while the vertical axis shows the aggregate TFP
response relative to baseline economy. In the model, a less restrictive land use policy is mapped to an increase
in the housing supply elasticity. The dashed line shows the closed economy response of aggregate TFP, while
the solid line shows the open economy.




                                                                            39
TABLES


         Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for City Size and Export Intensity Across Datasets


                                               Population ('000s)                Export Intensity
                                               (1)        (2)         (3)       (4)        (5)       (6)
                                            China        U.S.     Brazil     China       U.S.     Brazil
                Observations                1,178         312        420     1,178        312       420
                Mean                        522.5       798.8      439.7     .0800      .1131     .0604
                25th percentile             149.4       157.5      152.1     .0107      .0445     .0031
                50th percentile             215.8       277.5      224.7     .0396      .0853     .0266
                75th percentile             364.2       636.6      378.5     .1031      .1370     .0711
                90th percentile             692.5     1,929.2      717.2     .2075      .2250     .1629
                95th percentile           1,225.6     3,176.1    1,254.8     .3093      .3292     .2460
                Cities without exports         --         --          --       116          0        48
Notes: The Table analyzes the relationship between city size and export intensity. Cities are defined in terms of
Metropolitan Areas for China (as defined by Dingel et al., 2019, using lights at night with a threshold equal to 30 to
define metropolitan areas) and the United States; and in terms of Microregions for the case of Brazil. For all countries,
the analysis only considers cities with positive exports and population over 100,000 inhabitants. City-level export
intensity is defined as manufacturing exports over manufacturing sales for China; overall exports over manufacturing
sales for the United States, and as overall exports over GDP for the case of Brazil.




                                                          40
              Table 2: Export intensity and City size in China, United States and Brazil


                              ------ China ------               ---- United States ----           ------ Brazil ------
                                 (1)             (2)                 (3)              (4)           (5)          (6)
   log City Size              .447***          .308***          .323***             .305***       .322***     .410***
                               (.0476)          (.0434)          (.0351)             (.0366)       (.1188)     (.1442)
   Geographical Controls         No              Yes              No                  Yes            No          Yes
   R2                           .046            .171             .158                .166           .013        .021
   Observations                 1,062           1,062            312                 312             372         372
Notes: The Table analyzes the relationship between city size and export intensity. Cities are defined in terms of
Metropolitan Areas for China and the United States; and in terms of Microregions for the case of Brazil. For all
countries, the analysis only considers cities with positive exports and population over 100,000 inhabitants. City-
level export intensity is defined as manufacturing exports over manufacturing sales for China; overall exports over
manufacturing sales for the United States, and as overall exports over GDP for the case of Brazil. Geographical
controls include a dummy variable for cities located in coastal areas, and the log of the linear distance between the
city center and the nearest port. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Key: *** significant at 1%; ** 5%; * 10%.




          Table 3: Export Activity and City Size: Pooled Industry-City Level Regressions


                                         ----Export Intensity ----                          ----I(Exports>0) ----
                                         (1)              (2)               (3)             (4)      (5)        (6)
      log City Size                .00825***       .0139***           .0133***        .0554***     .112***    .118***
                                    (.00309)       (.000693)          (.000651)        (.00832)    (.00167)   (.00163)
      Geographical Controls             yes              yes                 yes          yes        yes        yes
      Industry FE                       no               no                  yes          no         no         yes
      R2                               .241             .049                .158         .094       .134       .213
      Observations                     1,178           64,139              64,139       1,178      64,139     64,139
Notes: The Table shows the results of estimating 1 at the city-industry level. Regressions 1-3 uses export intensity as
dependent variable. Columns 4-6 uses dependent variable a categorical variable that takes the value one for positive
exports. Regressions in columns 1 and 4 are run at the city level, for comparability with results in Table 3. Cities are
defined in terms of Metropolitan Areas. The analysis only considers cities with population over 100,000 inhabitants.
Geographical controls include a dummy variable for cities located in coastal areas, and the log of the linear distance
between the city center and the nearest port. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Key: *** significant at 1%; **
5%; * 10%.




                                                                41
          Table 4: Export Activity and City Size: Pooled Industry-City Level Regressions


                                                             (1)                      (2)
                            Dependent Variable         Export intensity    Export Probability
                            Mean                           0.0148                  0.1152
                            5th percentile                 0.0003                  0.0450
                            10th percentile                0.0014                  0.0500
                            25th percentile                0.0048                  0.0772
                            Median                         0.0112                  0.1181
                            75th percentile                0.0213                  0.1469
                            90th percentile                0.0323                  0.1797
                            95th percentile                0.0392                  0.1917
                            % [t-stat>0.000]                95.8                    100.0
                            % [t-stat>1.645]                63.6                     97.5
                            % [t-stat>1.960]                54.2                     95.8
                            % [t-stat>2.326]                45.8                     93.2
Notes: The Table shows the results of estimating 1 industry-by-industry. Column 1 uses export intensity as dependent
variable, while column 2 a categorical variable that takes the value one for positive exports as dependent variable. The
analysis only considers cities with positive exports and population over 100,000 inhabitants. Geographical controls
include a dummy variable for cities located in coastal areas, and the log of the linear distance between the city center
and the nearest port. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Key: *** significant at 1%; ** 5%; * 10%.



                      Table 5: Sectoral composition and City-level Export Intensity


           Specification:                 No Controls                              Geographical Controls
                                 (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)               (5)         (6)
           Dep. Var.:        log(X/Y )     log(X/Y )       log(X/Y )      log(X/Y )         log(X/Y )   log(X/Y )
           log(City Emp.)      .447***        .066***        .326**        .308***            .0207      .275***
                                (.0476)        (.0175)       (.0415)        (.0437)          (.0155)      (.0403)
           log(X/Y )              --            --          1.841***         --                --       1.587***
                                                             (.0918)                                     (.0970)
           Controls               --            --             --
           Observations         1,062          1,062         1,062          1,062             1,062       1,062
           R2                    .046          0.013          .307          .171              .179        .332
  Notes: The Table studies the extent to which sectoral composition account could account for the positive relation
  between export intensity and city size. (X/Y ) are city-level export intensity (total exports over sales), and
  (X/Y ) is a counterfactual measure of city-level export intensity that holds fix city-industry export intensity at
  the national average for each industry (i.e, across all cities with positive production in each industry). The sample
  includes all Chinese metropolitan areas with positive exports and population over 100,000 people. Geographical
  controls include a dummy variable for cities located in coastal areas, and the log of the linear distance between
  the city center and the nearest port. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Key: *** significant at 1%; ** 5%; *
  10%.



                                                            42
                    Table 6: Export Activity and City Size: Firm-Level Regressions


                                               --Export Intensity --         --I(Exports>0) --
                                                  (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)
                  log City Size               .00737***       .00463*      .0664***      .0537***
                                               (.00265)       (.00271)      (.00620)      (.00591)
                  log TFP                          --         .0195***         --        .0900***
                                                               (.00205)                   (.00541)
                  Geographical Controls            yes            yes          yes           yes
                  Industry FE                      yes            yes          yes           yes
                  R2                              .153           .159         .107          .144
                  Observations                 1,035,046      1,035,046    1,035,046     1,035,046
Notes: The Table shows the results of estimating 1 at the firm-level. Regressions 1-2 uses export intensity as de-
pendent variable. Columns 3-4 uses dependent variable a categorical variable that takes the value one for positive
exports. All regressions are weighted by the sales share of each firm in city-level sales. Cities are defined in terms
of Metropolitan Areas. The analysis only considers cities with population over 100,000 inhabitants. Geographical
controls include a dummy variable for cities located in coastal areas, and the log of the linear distance between the
city center and the nearest port. Standard errors are clustered at the city level. Key: *** significant at 1%; ** 5%; *
10%.



                                  Table 7: Parameters and Target Moments


                  Parameter       Moment
                    I. Calibrated Parameters
                       j          Average sectoral markup (De Loecker & Warzinsky, 2012)
                       j          Sectoral value added share
                     b(1- )
                                  Elasticity of wages to city size
                       j          Average export intensity across exporting firms
                    II. Estimated Parameters
                      aj          Share of value added across city sizes
                      sj          Average value added across city size (top quartile)
                      j,Z         Top decile firm size distribution
                      j,R         Average value added across city size (bottom quartile)
                      fje         National Export probability
                                  National export intensity

Notes: The Table summarizes the target moments we use when taking the model to the data. With the exception of
the composite parameter b(1 -  )/ , all parameters are computed at the level of 2-digit ISIC sectors (revision 3). The
quantitative analysis considers a mixed strategy, calibrating parameters that can be directly mapped to particular mo-
ments of the data (upper panel), and estimating the remaining parameters (bottom panel) through simulated method
of moments.



                                                         43
                                        Table 8: Export size premium

                                    --------Data --------               --------Model --------
                                   (1)       (2)       (3)              (4)      (5)        (6)
            Export dummy        1.295***    1.225***     1.232***    1.159***    1.134***     1.123***
                                 (.0038)     (.0039)      (.0040)     (.0024)     (.0023)      (.0024)
            Industry FE            no          yes         yes          no          yes         yes
            Industry-City FE       no          no          yes          no          no          yes
            Observations         947,185     947,185     947,185      948,788     948,788     948,788
Notes: The Table shows the results of estimating an OLS regression of firm size, in terms of the logarithm of labor,
against an export dummy variable. All regressions are estimated at the firm-level. Columns 1-3 uses information from
the Chinese Census of Manufacturing of 2004, while columns 4-6 uses simulated data from our structural model. We
winsorize the top and bottom percentiles of the dependent variable in the data and model to avoid the influence of
outliers. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Key: *** significant at 1%; ** 5%; * 10%.




                 Table 9: Welfare and Productivity Gains from Trade Liberalization

                                           Model with Geography       Model without Geography
                                           Welfare        TFP         Welfare          TFP
                  Open Economy              1.000         1.000        1.000          1.000
                  Closed Economy            0.763         0.769        0.686          0.701
                  Gains from Trade (%)      23.7%        23.1%         31.4%          29.9%
Notes: The Table shows the estimated gains from trade in terms of aggregate welfare and measured total factor
productivity (TFP). The model with geography corresponds to the baseline model introduced in section 3. The model
without geography corresponds to an constrained version of the baseline model where agglomeration parameters and
firm-city specific productivity are restricted to be equal to zero. This alternative model is estimated to match the
relevant data moments.




                                                        44
