                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                BORDERS WITHIN EUROPE

                                      Marta A. Santamaría
                                        Jaume Ventura
                                      Uur Yeilbayraktar

                                      Working Paper 28301
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28301


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2020




We acknowledge financial support from the European Research Council (ERC) under the
European Union's Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Program (Grant Agreement No.
693512 - "Globalization, Economic Policy and Political Structure"), the Spanish Ministry of
Economy and Competitiveness through the Severo Ochoa Programme for Centres of Excellence
in RD (CEX2019-000915-S) and from the Generalitat de Catalunya through the SGR Programme
(2017-SGR-1393) and CERCA Programme. We thank Manuel García-Santana, Joan
Monràs,David Nagy, Maria Ptashkina and seminar/conference participants at CREI, Universitat
Pompeu Fabra, London School of Economics, University of Warwick, University of Michigan,
University of Glasgow, CEMFI, European Urban Economics Assocation (EUEA) and Workshop
on International Economic Networks (WIEN) for their useful comments and suggestions. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Marta A. Santamaría, Jaume Ventura, and Uur Yeilbayraktar. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Borders within Europe
Marta A. Santamaría, Jaume Ventura, and Uur Yeilbayraktarr
NBER Working Paper No. 28301
December 2020
JEL No. D71,F15,F55,H77,O57

                                           ABSTRACT

Are country borders still an impediment to trade flows within Europe? Using a rich microlevel
survey with 3 million annual shipments of goods by road across 269 European regions, we
construct a matrix of bilateral trade flows for 12 industries from 2011 to 2017. We then use the
causal inference framework to design an identification strategy to estimate the causal effect of
country borders on trade flows. Take two similar region pairs, the first one containing regions in
different countries and the second one containing regions in the same country. The market share
of the origin region in the destination region for the international pair is only 17.5 percent that of
the intranational pair. We refer to this estimate as the average border effect. When we look at
each industry separately, we find border effects that range from 12.3 to 38.9 percent. When we
look at recent borders, i.e. created after 1910, we find a border effect of 28.8 percent, which is
smaller than the average border effect but still quite large. The implication is clear: Europe is far
from having a single market.

Marta A. Santamaría                               Uur Yeilbayraktar
University of Warwick                             Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Department of Economics                           Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
Gibbet Hill Road                                  Barcelona, 08005
Coventry CV4 7AL                                  Spain
United Kingdom                                    ugur.yesilbayraktar@upf.edu
marta.santamaria@warwick.ac.uk

Jaume Ventura
CREI
Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27
08005-Barcelona
SPAIN
and Barcelona GSE
and also NBER
jventura@crei.cat
                         Figure 1: Market shares of Catalonia in Europe




    Notes: The figure shows the share of spending on Catalan goods in each European region. The
    shading represents the value of the market share, with darker shares representing larger market
    shares. The spending shares come from our newly built regional trade dataset (see Section 2).



                                        1   Introduction

How do country borders affect trade flows within Europe? Using a newly constructed data
set of regional trade in Europe, Figure 1 shows sales from Catalonia (shown in grey) to 268
European regions as a share of total spending in each destination region. A striking aspect
of these market shares is their national bias. Catalonia's total share of Spanish markets,
excluding Catalonia, is 5.8 percent; while its total share of non-Spanish markets is only 0.26
percent. Catalonia is not special in this regard, though. A similar national bias emerges
when we examine market shares for other European regions. For the average region (whose
size is about 25 percent that of Catalonia) the intranational and international market shares
are 2.2 and 0.08 percent respectively.

                                                  1
      To what extent is this bias caused by country borders?1 Comparing intranational and
international trade could be misleading. As Figure 1 shows, Spanish regions are on average
closer to Catalonia than non-Spanish regions. Since geographical distance raises transport
costs and reduces trade, this creates an identification problem. A cleaner strategy would be
to compare neighbouring regions. For instance, the market share of Catalonia in Languedoc-
Rousillon (in France just north of Catalonia) is almost three times smaller than the market
share of Catalonia in Valencia (in Spain just south of Catalonia). Is this difference caused by
the French-Spanish border or the Pyrenees mountain range that coincides with it? We need
to make comparisons that control for factors, such as distance and mountain ranges, that
influenced the placement of borders in the past and may influence trade outcomes today.
      To search for these confounding factors, normalize market shares by their average and
think about them as deviations from the predictions of a naïve gravity model:2

        n's share of market m                                         n's total sales × m's spending
 ln                                  = ln (n's sales to m) - ln
        n's share of all markets                                         spending in all markets

where n and m are the origin and destination regions, respectively. The LHS is the (log) nor-
malized market share, while the RHS is the difference between the actual (log) sales and the
predicted (log) sales using a naïve gravity model. Naïve gravity applies if (i) regions produce
differentiated products; (ii) regions have common homothetic preferences, and (iii) trade
costs are negligible. Under these assumptions, all regions purchase the same proportions of
all goods and, as a result, these proportions must be the average ones:

                              n's sales to m       n's total sales
                                             =
                              m's spending     spending in all markets

Since assuming that regions produce differentiated products is uncontroversial, our search
for confounding factors must focus on differences in preferences and trade costs.
      There is a national bias in preferences if, for a common set of prices across regions, spend-
ing falls disproportionally on national goods, i.e. a violation of assumption (ii). One reason
for such a bias is the behavior of governments. Eager for political support, governments
prefer to award procurement contracts to expensive domestic suppliers instead of cheap for-
   1
     We say that there is a border between two regions if they belong to different countries. Thus, we adopt
a purely political view of borders, i.e. having a border means not sharing a country government.
   2
     To see this relationship, simply note that (i) n's share of market m equals n's sales to m divided by m's
spending; and (ii) n's share of all markets equals n's total sales divided by spending in all markets.




                                                      2
eign ones.3 Another reason for a national bias in preferences is the behavior of individuals,
who often prefer expensive domestic goods than cheap foreign ones. Over the last couple of
centuries, national governments have made massive efforts aimed at creating a common na-
tional identity. Policies such as the adoption of a single official language, the advancement of
shared interpretations of history and traditions, the homogenization of educational systems
and the promotion of internal migration, have all contributed to the creation of a national
culture and, together with it, a preference for national goods. We treat this behavior of gov-
ernments and individuals as endogenous to the border, as channels through which country
borders affect trade.
       There is a national cost advantage if trade costs are lower for intranational than for
international trade, i.e. a violation of assumption (iii). Although tariffs have been eliminated
and technical regulations have been de jure harmonized within Europe, many de facto trade
barriers remain. National courts ruling on contract disputes tend to favor national firms,
raising the costs of foreign firms to operate in the domestic market. National regulators
tend to impede conformity assessments of foreign products to favor domestic firms. National
agencies create infrastructure systems that favor intranational mobility, often at the expense
of international mobility. These factors are endogenous to the border, additional channels
through which country borders affect trade.
       There is an important part of the national cost advantage, however, that is due to geog-
raphy and cannot be attributed to country borders. The cost of transporting goods grows
with distance and the presence of geographical obstacles, such as mountain ranges or seas;
and it shrinks with the presence of geographical advantages, such as navigable rivers or
plains. Individual spending falls disproportionally on goods with low transport costs, and
these tend to be lower for intranational trade than for international trade. Interestingly,
geography might also contribute to the national bias in preferences. Even if technological
improvements were to eliminate transport costs, the effects of geography would still be felt as
past transport costs interact with habit formation to shape present individual preferences.
Since geography precedes borders and causes them (as we shall show formally later), we
need an empirical strategy that effectively controls for geographical factors and produces an
unbiased estimator of the causal effect of country borders on trade.
   3
    Herz and Varela-Irimia (2020) examine 1.8 million European public procurement contracts awarded
from 2010 to 2014 and published in the EU's Tenders Electronic Daily database. The probability that a
firm located in the same region as the contracting authority obtains a contract is 900 times larger than that
of a firm located abroad, but only 2 times larger than that of a firm located in another region of the same
country.


                                                     3
   The first step in our empirical strategy is to find the appropriate dataset to work with.
Measuring the border effect essentially amounts to comparing trade within and across na-
tional borders. Although there is plenty of data on trade across national borders, there is a
surprising scarcity of reliable data on trade within national borders. A first contribution of
this paper is to build a dataset of trade in goods for 269 regions from 24 European countries,
using the European Road Freight Transport survey collected by Eurostat. This survey annu-
ally records around 3 million shipments of goods by road across Europe. For each shipment,
we observe its origin and destination regions, the industry of the goods shipped, the weight
of the shipment and the distance covered. We aggregate these shipments and impute export
prices to build matrices of bilateral trade flows for 12 industries covering the period 2011 to
2017. This dataset provides the first integrated view of regional trade within Europe. Figure
1, for instance, was simply not known or available before.
   The second step in our empirical strategy is to use the causal inference framework (see
Imbens and Rubin (2015)) to design a credible identification strategy. We first estimate the
probability of having a border (or propensity score) as a function of distance, insularity,
remoteness and the presence of mountain ranges and river basins. These covariates explain
almost half of the border assignment. Figure 2 shows the distribution of propensity scores
for Catalonia (again shown in grey). Interestingly, we find regions in Spain, Portugal and
France that have similar propensity scores, i.e. for which the border assignment was equally
likely ex-ante even though ex-post some have a border with Catalonia and some do not.
   We want an estimator that is not only unbiased, but also has a small sampling variance.
Imbens and Rubin (2015) argue that there are two factors that reduce the sampling variance:
(i) the number of observations (region pairs); and (ii) the balance or overlap of propensity
scores between treated (region pairs separated by a border) and control (region pairs not
separated by a border) groups. We first examine the entire sample and find that it is too
unbalanced to produce reliable estimates. This should be apparent by looking at Figure 2.
For almost all non-Spanish regions the probability of a border with Catalonia is higher than
90 per cent. Thus, we trim the sample, eliminating extreme observations with propensity
scores close to zero or one, to achieve a much better overlap of propensity score distributions
between treated and control pairs. We then use the trimmed sample to construct a blocking
estimator. That is, we build subsamples or blocks of region pairs with similar propensity
scores, we estimate the border effect within these blocks and we weight the block estimates
to produce an average border effect. Since the probability of having a border is similar


                                              4
                     Figure 2: Probability of having a border with Catalonia




    Notes: The figure shows the probability of finding a border between Catalonia and each European
    region based on a set of geographical covariates (propensity score). The shading represents the
    value of the market share, with darker shares representing probabilities closer to one.



between treated and control pairs within each block, the difference in trade between them
can be interpreted as the causal effect of the border.
   Take two similar region pairs, the first one containing regions in different countries and
the second one containing regions in the same country. The main result of this paper is that
the market share of the origin region in the destination region for the international pair is
only 17.5 percent that of the intranational pair. We refer to this estimate as the average
border effect, and we say that country borders cause reductions in market shares of 0.175.
This estimate is quite precise and remarkably similar across blocks, i.e. at different levels of
the propensity score. Thus, the specific weighting scheme chosen for the blocking estimator
has little effect on the final estimate. We do find some variation, though, when we estimate


                                                  5
the border effect for each industry separately. In particular, we find that borders cause
reductions in market shares that range from 0.123 to 0.389.
       How should one interpret and use our estimate of the border effect? Importantly, it
should be treated as a "partial-equilibrium" estimate, i.e. as the effect of changing one
border keeping all other borders constant. This partial-equilibrium clause, which is standard
in micro studies that use the causal inference framework, has an added force in this context.
It still contains the standard requirement that region pairs be small so that "treating" one of
them does not have general equilibrium effects on European trade. But this is not enough.
The units of observation are region pairs, but borders are not bilateral variables. It is
not possible in general to "treat" one region pair only, leaving all other pairs "untreated".
For instance, consider a counterfactual scenario in which the French-Spanish border were
southwest of Catalonia rather than north. This produces 37 border changes affecting 22
French regions and 15 Spanish regions. Since these border changes affect only 0.001 percent
of all European region pairs, it seems safe to assume they would have a minor impact on
European trade and the partial-equilibrium assumption holds. Thus, we can use our estimate
to say that, if history had been such that Catalonia were a French region today, its market
shares in other French regions would be 100/17.5 = 5.714 times larger, while its market
shares in Spanish regions would be 17.5/100 = 0.175 times smaller.4
       Is our estimate of the border effect large? The answer to this question naturally depends
on one's own priors. But we can gain some intuition by being more specific about the
counterfactual. After the War of Spanish Succession (1701-1714), the first Bourbon king of
Spain Philip V incorporated Catalonia as a province of the kingdom of Spain. What would
have happened if, instead, it would have been the French Bourbon king Louis XIV who
incorporated Catalonia as a province of the kingdom of France? It is not too far-fetched
to think that this would have made Catalonia quite different from what it is today. French
would co-exist with Catalan and Spanish would be considered a foreign language, Catalans
would exhibit a taste for French goods and traditions rather than Spanish ones, transport
systems would foster mobility north rather than south, many Catalans would have their
origins and family ties in other French regions rather than in Spanish ones, and so on. Is it
surprising to find that, in this scenario, Catalonia would be trading 5.714 times more with
other French regions and 0.175 times less with Spanish regions today?
   4
    As we explain in Section 3, our estimate is also conditional on the number of borders that regions have.
In this counterfactual scenario, the number of borders in Catalonia would drop by 7, and we should adjust
our estimate to take this into account. Orders of magnitude do not change, though.



                                                     6
       An important observation is that our estimate should be treated as an "average" border
effect. One potential source of heterogeneity is the age of the border. It takes a long time to
build a common national identity, or an infrastructure system aimed at promoting internal
interactions. It takes less time to implement a procurement system that favors domestic firms
or to enact laws and regulations that protect them from foreign competition. Thus, borders
with different ages might have different effects. Fortunately (at least for our purposes!),
since 1910 Europe has experienced a process of political fragmentation. Indeed, about one
third of the region pairs that shared a government in 1910 no longer share a government in
2010. Using the methodology explained above, we find that post-1910 borders reduce market
shares to 28.8 percent of their potential. This estimate is still large, but substantially smaller
than our estimate of 17.5 percent obtained by pooling pre- and post-1910 borders.
       The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes how we construct the dataset.
Section 3 explains our identification strategy. Section 4 presents our results. Section 5
concludes. Before all of this, we review previous efforts to estimate the border effect.


Literature review: In his pioneering study, McCallum (1995) estimated a gravity equa-
tion (that is, a linear regression of bilateral trade on economic size and distance) extended to
include a border dummy. The estimated coefficient indicated that, after controlling for eco-
nomic size and distance, trade between Canadian provinces was on average 22 times larger
than trade between Canadian provinces and US states. Although the notion that borders
hinder trade was not surprising, the magnitude of the effect came as a shock, as model-based
explanations based on conventional trade barriers seemed unable to account for the size of
the border coefficient.
       A first reaction to McCallum's result was mostly methodological, and it centered on how
to estimate gravity equations that are consistent with the theory. In an influential paper,
Anderson and Van Wincoop (2003) showed that controlling for differences in price levels,
something that McCallum (1995) had not done, reduced McCallum's estimate from 22 to
5. The estimation procedure used by Anderson and Van Wincoop (2003) was somewhat
burdensome and model-dependent. Feenstra (2002) proposed a much simpler fixed-effects
strategy that soon became the standard to estimate gravity equations. This did not affect,
though, the finding that controlling for price levels reduces McCallum's estimate from 22 to
5. The methodology to estimate gravity equations evolved rapidly over the next few years.5
   5
    The use of log-linear OLS came under scrutiny due to concerns regarding its performance in the presence
of heteroskedasticity (Silva and Tenreyro, 2006) and its inability to incorporate zero trade flows (Helpman


                                                    7
But this has not led to a revision of the effect of the US-Canadian border.
    The first contribution of our paper is to shift the focus away from the gravity framework,
and towards the causal inference framework. The gravity equation is a relationship between
endogenous variables that holds in an interesting class of models that share some assumptions
about functional forms. It is useful and reassuring to know that this relationship holds
both in the data and in the models. But the coefficient of a border dummy in a gravity
equation cannot be interpreted as causal. Borders reduce the spending on goods produced
by a region, lowering its income. And yet gravity equations include incomes as independent
variables alongside the border dummy. This creates a classic "bad-control" problem when we
try to interpret the coefficient of the border dummy as causal.6 A similar problem applies
to bilateral variables that are typically thrown into gravity equations, such as dummies
indicating a common language or a common currency. The causal inference framework
prescribes specific conditions under which observational data can be used as if it came from
an experimental setting, and it forces us to be explicit about the assumptions needed to
estimate the causal effects of borders on trade. Moreover, by abandoning gravity (only for
this purpose!) our estimates do not rely on specific functional forms or models.
    A second reaction to McCallum's result was to go beyond the US-Canadian border and
look at the effects of other borders. A major obstacle, though, was the absence of readily
available datasets on regional trade for other country pairs. Wei (1996) and Nitsch (2000)
computed intranational trade as national production minus exports and compared it to
international trade for OECD and European countries, respectively. Later studies measured
intranational trade using data at the region-region level and international trade using data
at the region-country level (See, for instance, Gil-Pareja et al. (2005) and Coughlin and Novy
(2016)). This was indeed an improvement, although comparisons between different units are
still far from ideal.7
    The second contribution of our paper is the construction of a new dataset of bilateral
et al., 2008). As a consequence, more flexible estimation methods such as Poisson-Pseudo Maximum Like-
lihood and Gamma-Pseudo Maximum Likelihood became customary. Head and Mayer (2014) provide a
review of these developments.
   6
     This problem cannot be solved by using origin and destination fixed effects, which are precisely designed
to capture economic size and other factors that are endogenous to the border.
   7
     The problem is aggravated because working with the wrong units also makes it difficult to measure
distance. Head and Mayer (2009) showed that accurate measurement of distance is critical to having a
precise estimate of the border coefficient. Moreover, Hillberry and Hummels (2008) and Coughlin and Novy
(2016) have shown that using large geographical units overlooks the non-linear effect of distance on trade,
generating an upward bias on the border coefficient.



                                                      8
regional trade for 269 regions in 24 European countries that allows region-region level com-
parisons.8 As we show next, this dataset constitutes a major leap forward in terms of data
quality and coverage. We are not aware of any other dataset with similar characteristics
that could be used to reliably measure the causal effect of country borders on trade.


                       2   European regional trade: a new dataset

The European Road Freight Transport survey (ERFT) is a micro-level survey of freight road
shipments collected by the statistical office of the European Union, Eurostat. The ERFT
data is collected from a survey of shippers in the industry, and is therefore similar in nature
to the Community Flow Survey data available for the United States that has been used in
a number of empirical studies. This section describes the main features of the ERFT survey
and shows how we use it to build our dataset.
       A natural question is whether freight road shipments are representative of all trade flows.
According to Eurostat's own statistics, between 2011 and 2017 road freight accounted for
about 49 percent of all intra-EU trade in tonne-km terms, while the share of maritime short-
sea shipping and rail transport were 32 percent and 11 percent respectively (the other modes
of transportation reported are inland waterways 4, pipelines 3 and air 0.1). Thus, we think
that our dataset measures a sizeable fraction of intra-European trade.


2.1      From road shipments to regional trade weights


The ERFT survey covers shipments by road aggregated every year from micro-data collected
by a total of 29 European countries, all European Union members except for Malta plus
Norway and Switzerland.9 Each participating country chooses a stratified sample of vehicles
from the national register of road freight vehicles, following Eurostat guidelines.10 The
   8
      Gallego and Llano (2015) is the only study we have found that uses region-region level data to measure
both types of trade and focuses on a border other than the US-Canadian one. This study uses a road
transport survey to construct a dataset of flows from each Spanish region to itself, other Spanish regions and
to the regions of Spain's 7 main trade partners in the EU. The paper however follows the gravity methodology
and does not attempt to estimate the causal effect of the border.
    9
      The European Union adopted in 1998 regulation to provide a legal base for the collection of a wide
range of data on road freight transport ((EC) 1172/98), laying the emphasis on quality and comparability
of statistical information. This regulation has introduced major changes in the data collected in order to
describe the regional origin and destination of intra-European Union transport on the same basis as national
transportation (Road Freight Transport methodology, 2016 edition).
  10
      The selection of the sample is made to ensure that the raw survey results are representative of the total
numbers recorded on the vehicle register. In countries where such a registry is not available or sufficiently


                                                      9
operators of the sampled vehicle are required to report, for a limited number of days in a
month, the characteristics of all the shipments completed.
    The survey requests information at the level of the vehicle, the journey and the specific
goods shipped. At the level of the vehicle, the survey records vehicle characteristics such as
age, type of vehicle and ownership. At the journey level, the questionnaire records whether
the journey is loaded or unloaded, the type of transport (hired or own account) and the type
of journey.11 At the goods level, the record includes the shipment's weight (kg), the type
of goods carried according to the 2 digit NST 2007 classification, the region of origin and
destination (at NUTS3 level), the actual shipping distance covered and a sampling weight
for each shipment.12 Eurostat aggregates the origin and destination of each shipment into
larger regions (at NUTS2 level) for anonymity reasons. The ERFT survey is available for
the period 2011 to 2017. Using this micro-dataset has several advantages relative to using
aggregate trade data. It also requires us to make some adjustments.
    A first advantage of the survey is that it allows us to overcome one of the main challenges
to estimate the border effect: the lack of subnational trade data. The ERFT survey allows us
to distinguish between flows within a region and flows between regions in the same country
for all countries surveyed except for five one-region countries: Cyprus, Estonia, Latvia,
Lithuania and Luxembourg. For this reason, we drop these countries from the dataset. This
leaves us with 24 countries in our sample: the remaining 22 European Union countries plus
Norway and Switzerland.
    A second advantage of the survey is that it is collected from a stratified sample of actual
shippers rather than imputed from different aggregated data sources. This means that our
data captures, with higher accuracy, the movement of goods within countries. The survey
includes two types of flows: shipments that move goods between producers and consumers
and shipments that move goods from a producer to an intermediary or from intermediary
to intermediary. What the survey actually captures is the region to region distribution of
reliable, a register of persons licensed to operate as road hauliers (company/registered owner for private
hauliers) or a business register of companies could be considered. In this case, the sampling unit could be
the vehicle operators or transport companies. (Road Freight Transport methodology, 2016 edition) Further
details are provided in the ERFT survey documentation.
  11
     The type of journey records whether the journey involved one single transport operation, several trans-
port operations or a collection/distribution of goods, with many stopping points for loading and/or unloading
in the course of a single journey.
  12
     The weight of shipments is calculated by multiplying reported estimates by the inverse of the sampling
weight. The industry classification followed in the survey is the NST 2007 classification, the "statistical
classification of economic activities in the European Community".



                                                     10
goods. In most cases, these shipments will take goods from the origin to the destination
region. Yet, in other cases, these shipments will be a middle step in a longer distribution
chain across European regions, not coinciding with the observed origin and destination of
the trade flow.
       To address this limitation, we restrict our sample in three ways. First, we use the de-
tailed information in the survey to drop journeys that are classified as distribution journeys.
These journeys are characterised by the existence of several stops between the origin and
the destination to load and/or unload goods. Dropping these journeys seeks to bring our
shipment data closer to trade data.
       Second, we restrict the number of industries in the analysis. The shipments are classified
into 20 industries enumerated in Table B.1 in the Appendix. We adopt two criteria for
industry coverage: (i) the industry must be unambiguously associated with trade; and (ii)
transport by road must be an important mode of transport for the industry. The first
criterion leads us to discard eight industries.13 The second criterion leads us to discard one
additional industry.14 Thus, we are left with twelve industries.
       Finally, we want to make sure that the survey on road shipments is representative of
aggregate trade. This would not be the case for regions with a very small share of shipments
traveling by road. To ensure this, we restrict the number of regions by dropping insular
regions very far from continental Europe. For these small and far away regions, shipments
by road are not likely to be representative.15 Table B.2 in the appendix provides a list of all
regions.
       After all these adjustments, our dataset contains 269 regions (in 24 countries) and 12
industries. We use the dataset to construct a set of industry-year matrices:

                                           W it = Wnm
                                                   it
                                                           269×269

  13
       These industries are: 14 Secondary materials, municipal wastes and other wastes; 15 Mail, parcels; 16
Equipment and materials utilized in the transport of goods; 17 Goods moved in the course of household and
office removals, 18 Grouped goods; 19 Unidentifiable goods; and 20 Other goods n.e.c. It is unclear to us
what fraction of the shipments included in these categories can be safely classified as trade in goods. For
instance, disposing of waste, distributing mail or moving furniture is clearly not associated with trade.
    14
       This industry is: 2 Coal and lignite, crude petroleum and natural gas. A large fraction of trade in this
industry is transported by railways or through pipelines.
    15
       We keep large, close-by islands like Sardinia or Sicily. The survey includes shipments taken by truck
when the truck is loaded on a ship and unloaded after crossing to an island. Therefore, we can include these
larger islands since their trade is well represented in the survey.




                                                      11
                   Figure 3: Correlation with aggregate international trade data




            Notes: The figure shows the correlation between exports and shipments in the ERFT
            survey in kilograms. The Y-axis represents (log) bilateral trade (kg) by country-
            pair-industry-year using international trade data from Eurostat. The X-axis shows
            bilateral shipments by road (kg) aggregated by country-pair-industry-year obtained
            from the ERFT survey.



       it
where Wnm is the weight (kg) from industry i shipped from region n to region m in year t.
Since our dataset contains 12 industries and 7 years, we have 84 such matrices.
      Figure 3 plots exports (kg) across the countries in our sample in the Y-axis against
bilateral shipments (kg) obtained by aggregating the survey data at the country level on the
X-axis. As we can see, most observations concentrate along the 45 degree line (Rsq=0.55),
showing that our data is very correlated with aggregate exports data from Eurostat. Figures
A.1 and A.2 in the appendix plot the same relationship, industry-by-industry and year-by-
year. These figures show that this correlation is also strong when we use data disaggregated
by industry and/or year.


2.2    From trade weights to trade values


The survey provides trade weights, and we would like to convert weights into values. Thus,
we look for other data sources. The statistical agencies of France, Germany, Spain and


                                                   12
United Kingdom release data of exports from individual regions to foreign countries in value
and volume. These data allows us to observe export flows from 66 regions in our sample
(belonging to the four countries mentioned above) to all the remaining countries in our
sample. For these export flows, we observe the value in euros and the quantity in kilograms
of export flows, allowing us to compute the price per kilo of exports. Unfortunately, similar
data could not be collected for the remaining countries in our sample. The reason why such
regional level data on exports is not available for other countries is unknown to us and,
hopefully, not systematically related to the price of exports in those regions. Therefore, we
think of our data as incomplete data in which the price of exports is missing for part of the
sample.
    Imputation methods replace missing values by suitable estimates and then apply standard
methods to the filled-in data. Imputations are means or draws from a predictive distribution
of the missing values, and require a method for creating a predictive distribution for the
imputation that is based on the observed data. We choose an explicit modelling approach,
where the distribution is based on a formal statistical model. In particular, we use regression
imputation, a standard choice of conditional mean imputation. First, the regression of the
variable with missing values on other covariates is estimated from the complete cases, and
then, the resulting prediction equation is used to impute the conditional mean of the missing
values. Regression imputation is a plausible method, particularly when the chosen covariates
explain most of the variation of the variable with missing values.
    Our preferred specification is to pool all time periods and industries to estimate a linear
regression for the (log) of the price of exports, calculated as the ratio between the value
of exports and the weight of exports for each industry, origin, destination and year. As
explanatory variables, we use a vector of origin and destination characteristics. The only
bilateral variable that we use is distance.16 We also include industry-time dummies to allow
for different time trends in prices across industries. Table C.2 in the appendix contains the
full list of variables included in the price regressions.
    Our regression model seems to perform well, as shown in Table B.3 in the Appendix.
The R-squared in the above specifications is higher than 50 percent. Since the collected
variables explain a large share of the variation in export prices in the subsample with no
  16
     As shown in Hummels and Skiba (2004), the presence of transport costs leads firms to ship high-quality
goods abroad while keeping low-quality goods for the domestic market. This is known as the "Alchian and
Allen conjecture" (see Alchian and Allen (1964)). Another reason why export prices per kilogram could
increase with distance is transport costs. However, our export prices are Free On Board (F.O.B), meaning
that they are net from transport and insurance costs.

                                                    13
                     Figure 4: Correlation with aggregate international trade data




             Notes: The figure shows the correlation between exports and shipments in the ERFT
             survey in euros. The Y-axis represents (log) bilateral trade (euros) by country-pair-
             industry-year using international trade data from Eurostat. The X-axis shows bi-
             lateral shipments by road (euros) aggregated by country-pair-industry-year obtained
             from the ERFT survey after imputing missing prices.



missing values, we can use the estimated coefficients from the linear regression to impute the
values that are missing.17
       With our estimated prices per unit, we can finally construct the trade value data for each
industry i and year t as follows:

                                     it
                            V it = Vnm                        it
                                                      where Vnm     it
                                                                 = Pnm    it
                                                                       · Wnm
                                          269×269

        it
where Vnm  is the value (euros) from industry i shipped from region n to region m in year t.
  17
     In order to further assess the accuracy of our imputed prices we perform two sets of checks. First, we
perform a series of out-of-sample estimations where we drop one of the four countries for which we observe
regional export prices and we predict export prices for this dropped country. We then compare our out-
of-sample estimates with the actual regional prices (See Figure A.7 in the Appendix). Second, we collect
export value and weights from Eurostat for all European countries and compute unit export prices for every
country-pair at the industry and year level. We aggregate our region-pair estimated prices to a country-pair
level and compare them to the country-pair price of exports from international trade data (See Figure A.8
in the Appendix). Both tests suggest that our imputed prices are reasonable.




                                                      14
       Figure 4 plots exports (euros) across the countries in our sample in the Y-axis against
bilateral shipments (euros) obtained by aggregating the survey data at the country level on
the X-axis. As we can see, most observations concentrate along the 45 degree line (R-squared
= 0.55), showing that our data is very correlated with aggregate exports data that come from
Eurostat when we use values. Figures A.4 and A.5 and plot the same relationship, industry-
by-industry and year-by-year. These figures show that this correlation is also strong when
we use data disaggregated by industry and/or year.


2.3     European Regional trade: A first look at the data


Our dataset contains region pairs such that: (i) origin and destination regions belong to the
same country; and (ii) origin and destination regions belong to different countries. We refer
to these two types of trade as intranational and international, respectively.18 Out of a total
of 72,092 region pairs in our sample, 4,958 are intranational, and 67,134 are international.19
       Panel A of Table 1 shows the average values of the two types of trade at the region-pair
and annual level. We see that the average value of trade among intranational pairs is almost
30 times larger than among international pairs. This average is unweighted, and one might
think that it could be affected by differences in economic size between groups. We obtain a
similar picture, however, when we look at normalized market shares.
       Panel B of Table 1 shows another important feature of our data, the prevalence of region
pairs that do not trade. Among intranational pairs, 96.8 percent exhibit positive trade.
The picture is quite different when we look at international pairs. Among them, only 61.7
percent of pairs trade with each other. Taking this into account, Panel C of Table 1 shows
the same statistics as in Panel A but now conditional on observing a positive flow of goods.
Not surprisingly, this increases the average trade values among international pairs, without
affecting much the average trade values of the other group. The main takeaway is that the
national bias manifests itself both on the intensive and the extensive margins.
  18
     We exclude from our sample pairs for which the origin region is the same as the destination region.
Therefore, intranational trade does not include trade within a region.
  19
     These numbers take into account origin and destination. Thus, we count region pair (n, m) as different
than (m, n).




                                                    15
                                   Table 1: Summary statistics
          Trade type                           Intranational trade    International trade
                                                     Mean                    Mean
          Panel A: Unconditional
          Value (Mill. euros)                           553.52               18.61
          Weight (Mill. Kg)                             601.49                9.98
          Normalized Market share                        10.87               0.27
          Panel B: Zero trade observations

          Region pairs                                  4958                 67134
          Region pairs with no trade                     157                 25699
          Regions pairs with positive trade             4801                 41435
          Panel C: Conditional on positive trade

          Value (Mill. euros)                           571.62               30.15
          Weight (Mill. Kg)                             621.15               16.17
          Normalized Market share                        11.22               0.44
          Notes: This table reports the (unweighted) average bilateral trade flow (euros and
          kilos) and the (unweighted) average normalised market share in our new European
          regional dataset. Column 1 reports the average flow between intranational region
          pairs (origin and destination in regions in the same country) and column 2 reports
          the average flow between international region pairs (origin and destination regions
          in different countries). Panel A reports unconditional statistics. Panel B repors the
          number of region pairs that display positive trade and zero trade. Panel C reports
          statistics conditional on trading.



                            3    Identifying the border effect

The causal relationship of interest is the effect of country borders on trade. In this section,
we describe our empirical strategy to identify this effect which draws heavily from the causal
inference framework (see Imbens and Rubin (2015)). We use as an outcome variable, the
normalized market share:

                                                   Vnm /Em
                                           Snm                                                         (1)
                                                    Yn /E
where Yn =     n   Vnm are the total sales or income of region n; Em =               m   Vnm are the total
purchases or spending of region m, and E =              m   Em is total spending by all regions. The
variable Snm measures region n's share of region m's market normalized by region n's share
of all markets, including its own. If market m has an average importance to producers
of region n, i.e. Vnm /Em  Yn /E ; the market share is one. If instead market m has a
larger (smaller) than average importance, the market share is above (below) one. Unlike


                                                   16
trade values, normalized market shares are not affected mechanically by the economic size
of origin and destination regions. This makes them more helpful than trade values to infer
preference biases and trade costs.


3.1    The border effect


The French-Spanish border runs across Catalonia and Languedoc-Roussillon, and not across
Catalonia and Valencia. Catalonia's average market share in all the 269 regions in our sample
is 1.5 percent. Given how close Catalonia is geographically and culturally to Languedoc-
Roussillon and Valencia, it is not surprising that these two markets be specially important for
Catalan exporters. Indeed, the normalized share of Catalonia in the Languedoc-Roussillon
market is well above one, 1.79, implying that 1.79 × 1.5 = 2.7 percent of all the spending of
Languedoc-Roussillon is on products that come from Catalonia. Yet Catalonia's normalized
share of the Valencia market is almost three times larger than this, 5.21, implying that
5.21 × 1.5 = 7.9 percent of all the spending of Valencia is on products that come from
Catalonia. To what extent is this difference caused by the French-Spanish border? What
would have happened if this border were southwest of Catalonia instead of north? How
much would Catalonia's share of the Languedoc-Roussillon market grow? How much would
Catalonia's share of the Valencia market shrink?
      Answering these questions involves comparing observed market shares with the counter-
factual market shares that would have occurred if the French-Spanish border were southwest
of Catalonia. More formally, let (n, m) be a region pair, and let Bnm  {0, 1} be a dummy
variable that takes value one if the regions in the pair belong to different countries, and zero
otherwise. Let Snm be the observed market share for region pair (n, m) in our sample. We
define two potential market shares as follows:
                                      
                                        nm (1) if Bnm = 1
                                       S
                               Snm   =                                                      (2)
                                       Snm (0) if Bnm = 0

where Snm (1) and Snm (0) are region n's share of market m with a border (active treatment)
and without a border (control treatment), respectively. For each region pair, we observe
only one potential outcome. For instance, we observe SCAT,L-R (1) = 1.79 for the pair (Cat-
alonia, Languedoc-Roussillon) and SCAT,V AL (0) = 5.21 for the pair (Catalonia, Valencia).
Unfortunately, we do not observe SCAT,L-R (0) or SCAT,V AL (1).


                                              17
   We define the border effect nm as the log change in market shares caused by the border:

                                                 Snm (1)
                                       nm = ln                                              (3)
                                                 Snm (0)

Since one potential outcome is unobserved, we cannot observe border effects. It is tempting
however to assume that, if the French-Spanish border were southwest of Catalonia, the
roles of these two markets for Catalan exporters would reverse, that is, SCAT,L-R (0) =
SCAT,V AL (0) and SCAT,V AL (1) = SCAT,L-R (1). This identification assumption allows us to
estimate a common border effect for the two region pairs as follows:

                                        SCAT,L-R (1)
                                 = ln                 = -1.07                               (4)
                                        SCAT,V AL (0)

That is, the French-Spanish border reduces Catalonia's share of the Languedoc-Roussillon
market to a third of its potential: 100 × e-1.07 = 34.3 percent. Should we take this estimate
very seriously? How good is the identification assumption that underlies it? The main
challenge we face in this paper is to construct samples for which this type of comparisons
can be interpreted as causal.
   There are a couple of assumptions embedded in our notation worth mentioning explicitly.
The first one is that the unobserved potential outcome is unique. As mentioned, moving
Catalonia to France would remove the border between Catalonia and Languedoc-Roussillon.
But so would moving Languedoc-Roussillon to Spain, or creating a new country containing
both regions. Our framework implies that SCAT,L-R (0) is the same in all these cases and,
indeed, in any other possible case. This assumption captures the view that, to a first-order
approximation, what matters is whether there is a border or not. The specific type of border
only matters to a second or third-order approximation. We think this is quite a reasonable
view.
   Our notation also embeds the notion that the difference in potential outcomes measures
the effect of changing the border for one region pair, keeping all other borders constant. This
partial-equilibrium clause, which is standard in micro studies that use the causal framework,
has an added force in this context. It still contains the standard requirement that region pairs
be small so that "treating" one of them does not have general equilibrium effects on European
trade. But this is not enough in this context. The units of observation are region pairs, but
borders are not bilateral variables. It is not possible in general to "treat" one region pair
only, leaving all other pairs "untreated". Consider again moving the French-Spanish border

                                              18
southwest of Catalonia. This experiment would remove the border between Catalonia and
22 French regions and create a border between Catalonia and 15 Spanish regions. Thus,
it would produce 37 border changes. Since these border changes affect only 0.001% of all
region pairs, it seems safe to assume they would have a minor impact on European trade
and the partial-equilibrium assumption holds.
   Since we cannot experiment with borders, we must rely on observational data to estimate
an average border effect. In particular, we define the average border effect  as the average
log change in market shares caused by the border as:

                    = E ( ln Snm (1) - ln Snm (0)| Snm (1) > 0, Bnm = 1)                   (5)

The value of  is expected to be negative since the border is expected to reduce trade.
The larger is | |, the larger is the average reduction in market shares caused by the border.
Throughout, we assume that there are no region pairs such that Snm (1) > 0 and Snm (0) = 0.
Obviously, this cannot be verified.
   The causal inference framework shows that we can use observational data as if it came
from an experiment if the assigment of treatment is (i) probabilistic, (ii) individualistic and
(iii) uncounfounded. If the assignment mechanism satisfies these conditions, the comparison
of units with different treatments but identical pre-treatment covariates can be given a causal
interpretation.
   We believe that the first two conditions hold in our setting. Probabilistic assignment
requires a nonzero probability for each treatment value, for every unit. The probability
that two far-away regions belong to the same country might be very small, but it is not
zero. Individualistic assignment requires limited dependence of a particular unit's assignment
probability on the values of covariates and potential outcomes for other units. This is the
partial-equilibrium clause mentioned above, which we argued is a reasonable one.
   The last condition, unconfounded assignment, deserves much more attention. Under un-
confoundedness, all the assignment probabilities are free from dependence on potential out-
comes, after conditioning on a vector of pre-treatment covariates. This assumption is often
referred to as the Conditional Independence Assumption (see Dawid (1979)) and written as
Bnm  Snm (0) , Snm (1)| Xnm . In our setting, unconfoundedness means that the assignment
of borders must be independent of potential trade outcomes across regions, after condition-
ing on a vector of pre-treatment geographical covariates Xnm . We describe this vector and


                                              19
explain our control strategy in the next couple of sections.
   Let us assume for now that we have a vector of pre-treatement geographical covariates
Xnm such that, after conditioning for them, the border assignment is unconfounded. This
allows us to interpret comparisons between units with different treatments as causal. Does
this mean that we can estimate the border effect by simply comparing the average market
shares of international and intranational pairs with the same covariate values Xnm = x? The
answer, unfortunately, is negative. The following estimator makes exactly this comparison:



                   ^ = E (ln Snm (1)| Snm (1) > 0, Bnm = 1, Xnm = x)
                                                                                            (6)
                          -E ( ln Snm (0)| Snm (0) > 0, Bnm = 0, Xnm = x)

It is straightforward to see that ^ suffers from two potential sources of selection bias:


                  ^- =        E ( ln Snm (0)| Snm (1) > 0, Bnm = 1, Xnm = x)
                                                                                            (7)
                             -E ( ln Snm (0)| Snm (1) > 0, Bnm = 0, Xnm = x)
                                     Selection bias due to the number of borders

                      E ( ln Snm (0)| Snm (1) > 0, Bnm = 0, Xnm = x)
                  +
                      -E ( ln Snm (0)| Snm (0) > 0, Bnm = 0, Xnm = x)
                             Selection bias due to changes in participation



   Consider first the selection bias due to the number of borders, which is the first term
of Equation (7). It might seem surprising that we condition on the border after assuming
that the border assignment is unconfounded. But there is a subtle source of selection bias
that arises from any random border assignment, including those that are unconfounded. To
understand its nature, consider a world with 6 regions and 2 countries. The six regions are
identical in any possible way, except for the border assignment. The latter is random, with
all regions being equally likely to belong to any country. Let us assume that the realization
of the border assignment is such that regions 1 and 2 belong to country A, while regions 3,
4, 5 and 6 belong to country B . This introduces the only source of asymmetry in this world:
regions in A have four borders, while regions in B have only two borders. Assume there are
no trade costs other than those caused by the border, which result in the same percentage




                                                   20
reduction in market shares for all pairs:

                                              Snm (1)
                                       = ln               for all n, m                                    (8)
                                              Snm (0)

     D      D
Let SA and SB be the market share of any region in A and B in a domestic market (including
itself), respectively. Symmetry and the absence of non-border related trade costs ensure that,
                                                                             F      F
within each country, these shares are identical for all relevant pairs. Let SA and SB to be
the market share of any region in A and B in a foreign market, respectively. Symmetry and
the absence of non-border related trade costs also ensure that, within each country, these
shares are identical for all relevant pairs. By construction, normalized market shares must
add to one. Thus, we have that

                               D         F         D         F
                             2SA (0) + 4SA (1) = 4SB (0) + 2SB (1) = 1                                    (9)

It is straightforward to show that Equations (8) and (9) imply that:

                                     D        F
                                    SA (0)   SA (1)   2 + e
                                     D
                                           =  F
                                                    =        >1                                          (10)
                                    SB (0)   SB (1)   2e + 1

for any value of  < 1. That is, regions with many borders have larger market shares.
The key observation is that region pairs with many borders tend to be over-represented
among international pairs and under-represented among intranational pairs. This creates a
positive selection bias that makes the observed difference in average market shares smaller
(in absolute value) than the true average border effect.20
    Fortunately, there is a simple solution to this problem, namely, to estimate border effects
conditioning on the number of borders. We shall show later that this type of selection bias
is important empirically. But one can already suspect this by looking at Figure 5, which
shows average intranational and international market shares in panels A and B, respectively.
The color of a region represents the value of the average normalized share, with dark blue
shades representing the smallest values and dark red shades representing the highest values.
In countries with many regions, such as United Kingdom or Germany, regions have smaller
than average intranational and international market shares (predominantly blue shades). In
  20
     The existence of this type of selection bias was noted first by Anderson and Van Wincoop (2003). In
their sample, however, the group of intranational pairs contained only Canadian provinces, i.e. regions with
many borders; while the group of international region pairs contained mostly US states, i.e. regions with
few borders. Thus, they found that this type of selection bias leads to overstating the average border effect.
Here, with a balanced sample, this selection bias leads to understating the border effect.


                                                     21
                    Figure 5: Average market share and number of borders




      A) Intranational market share                        B) International market share
 Notes: The figure shows the average market share of each region with its intranational partners (panel
 A) and with its international partners (panel B). The color shading represents the value of this average,
 with cooler colours representing lower market shares and warmer colors representing higher market shares



countries with few regions, such as Belgium, Slovenia, or Portugal, regions have larger than
average intranational and international market shares (predominantly red shades).
   Consider next the selection bias due to changes in participation, which is the second term
of Equation (7). This type of selection bias arises because some region pairs trade without
a border, Snm (0) > 0, but would not trade with a border, Snm (1) = 0. Let us refer to these
pairs as switchers. Average market shares for intranational pairs include switchers, while
average market shares for international pairs do not. If average market shares for switchers
and non-switchers were the same, there would be no selection bias and the second term
in Equation (7) would be zero. But it is reasonable to expect average market shares for
switchers to be lower than those of pairs that always trade. This creates a positive selection
bias that makes the observed difference in average market shares smaller (in absolute value)
than the true average border effect.
    The importance of this bias depends on the fraction of switchers in the sample. Without
this information, we must treat  ^ as a lower bound for the border effect. We show later,



                                                    22
however, that the fraction of switchers must be quite small in the samples we work with.
This means that the bias due to changes in participation cannot be important quantitatively
and, as a result, ^ provides a good estimate for the border effect.

      To sum up, if the border assignment is probabilistic, individualistic and unconfounded,
we can compare intranational and international pairs and be confident to obtain a good
estimate of the border effect if (i) we condition on the number of borders; and (ii) we check
that the fraction of switchers is small.


3.2    Understanding the border assignment


Geography affects trade costs and market shares. Since geography precedes borders, this
poses an identification problem if the border assignment is also affected by geography. But
it is easy to see that this is indeed the case. Our comparison of the (Catalonia, Languedoc-
Rousillon) and (Catalonia, Valencia) region pairs shows how difficult it is to escape from
this conclusion. Both pairs are contiguous, continental and located on the Mediterranean
coast. Thus, comparing their market shares already `controls' for some of the most relevant
geographical factors. But even then, we cannot conclude that the location of the French-
Spanish border is unrelated to geographical factors that also affect trade. On its north,
Catalonia is separated from Languedoc-Roussillon by the Pyrenees mountain range. On its
south, Catalonia shares the Ebro river basin with Valencia. This geographical difference,
which affects trade costs, might have also contributed to the French-Spanish border being
north of Catalonia rather than southwest.
      To satisfy the unconfoundedness condition, causal inference must be conditional on those
factors that precede and influence both the treatment assignment and the outcome variable.
In our framework, these are the geographical covariates that affect the border assignment
and trade outcomes simultaneously. With this idea in mind, we collect the following set of
covariates for each region pair:


  1. Distance. Length of the curve linking the central point of the origin region (centroid)
        and the central point of the destination region, in kilometers. We use a curve since we
        take into account the curvature of earth's surface.

  2. Insularity. Dummy variable taking value one if there is the need to cross a sea to reach
        from one region to the other, and zero otherwise.


                                               23
   3. Mountain ranges. Largest altitude difference between two regions, computed as the
         difference between the highest altitude point and the lowest altitude point along the
         straight line that joins the centre the origin region (centroid) and the centre of the
         destination region.

   4. River basin. Dummy variable taking value 1 if both regions belong to the same river
         basin. We consider the largest rivers in Europe. A map of the areas covered by each
         river basin can be found in figure D.1 in the Appendix.

   5. Remoteness. We calculate the remoteness of a region as the sum of the bilateral
         distance from that region to every other region in the sample. Then, we calculate the
         remoteness of a pair as the average remoteness of both regions.


       All these covariates are known to affect bilateral trade, and they can be treated as pre-
treatment covariates when considering the border assignment. The next question is whether
these covariates also affect the border assignment. Unlike the theory of bilateral trade,
which is quite sophisticated and developed at this time, the theory of borders is rough and
underdeveloped. Thus, we are forced to rely on some basic conjectures about how these
geographical factors affect the costs and benefits of sharing a government.21
       It seems reasonable to think that distance, insularity and the presence of mountain ranges
all raise the costs and lower the benefits of sharing a government. Thus, we would expect
these variables to raise the probability of a border assignment. It is less clear however to
predict the effects of sharing a river basin. Rivers could be a geographical obstacle such as
mountain ranges, but they could also provide a geographical mobility advantage or create
externalities that raise the benefits of a shared government. Thus, we do not know a priori
whether being in the same river basin raises or lowers the probability of a border assignment.
Unconditionally, we would expect remote region pairs to have more borders because they
are farther away from each other. Conditioning on distance, however, we would expect the
probability of a border assignment for a region pair to increase with their remoteness because
they have fewer alternative partners to share a government.
       Table 2 provides summary statistics of these geographical covariates in the treatment
and control groups. Intranational pairs are closer to each other, less likely to be insular
  21
   The relevant costs and benefits are those borne by whomever makes the decision. The decision-maker(s)
might be regions in the pair, or other regions elsewhere. Admittedly, the discussion here is quite superficial.




                                                      24
                    Table 2: Covariate distributions across treatment groups

                                      Treatment group        Control group      Difference
                                           mean                 mean              (t-stat)
               Distance                   1213.62               315.64          -898.0***
                                                                                 (-71.79)
               Insularity                     0.32                 0.06         -0.258***
                                                                                 (-27.23)
               Mountain Ranges             1473.66               496.08         -977.6***
                                                                                 (-37.95)
               River Basin                    0.04                 0.19          0.153***
                                                                                  (35.81)
               Remoteness                  1157.47               1075.85        -81.62***
                                                                                 (-17.19)
               N                             33567                2479             36046
             Notes: This table reports the average value of each geographical covariate in
             the treatment group (column 1) and in the control group (column 2). The last
             column reports the difference in means (defined as control minus treated). The
             t-statistics in parentheses. * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** sig-
             nificant at 1%. Distance is bilateral distance between origin and destination in
             kilometers, Insularity takes value 1 if one of the regions is an island. Moun-
             tain Ranges is the highest difference in elevation between two regions in metres
             (difference between highest point and lowest point), River Basin takes value 1 if
             the region pair shares a river basin and Remoteness is the average remoteness
             of the origin and the destination regions.


or separated by a mountain range, more likely to share a river basin, and on average less
remote. These differences are significant, and have the expected sign.22
    To obtain a more convincing assessment of the role of geographical covariates on the
border assignment, we estimate the propensity score.23 In particular, we estimate a logistic
regression model, where the log odds ratio of receiving the treatment is modeled as linear
in a number of the geographical covariates, with unknown coefficients. We estimate the
coefficients by maximum likelihood. To choose how many of our geographical covariates to
include in the logistic regression, we follow the recursive procedure recommended in Imbens
and Rubin (2015). We find that all the covariates described above should be included.
    Table 3, column (1) presents the estimation results from the logit model. The coefficients
of the covariates are all significative at the 1 percent level and the model has an R-squared
  22
     The positive sign on the river basin variable is not informative. International pairs are more distant
than intranational ones, making it unlikely that the former be located in the same river basin. One needs
to control for distance to determine how sharing a river basin affects the border assignment.
  23
     The propensity score at covariate values x is the average probability of border assignment for region
pairs (n, m) with covariates Xnm = x.


                                                     25
                                   Table 3: Propensity Models

               Dependent Variable: Border           Full sample      Trimmed sample
                                                         (1)                (2)
               Distance                              2.998***            1.893***
                                                      (0.056)             (0.078)

               Insularity                               1.096***          1.059***
                                                         (0.096)           (0.128)

               Mountain Ranges                          0.179***          0.283***
                                                         (0.030)           (0.031)

               River Basin                              0.767***          0.420***
                                                         (0.089)           (0.089)

               Remoteness                            -3.857***           -3.341***
                                                      (0.155)             (0.168)

               Constant                                 9.129***         11.180***
                                                         (0.992)          (1.029)
               N                                          36046             6110
               Pseudo R2                                  0.476            0.143
              Notes: This table reports the estimation of the logistic regression model,
              where the log odds ratio of receiving the treatment (having a border) is mod-
              eled as linear in a number of the geographical covariates. Distance is (log)
              bilateral distance between origin and destination in kilometers, Insularity
              takes value 1 if one of the regions is an island. Mountain Ranges is the
              highest difference in elevation between two regions in metres (difference be-
              tween highest point and lowest point, in logs), River Basin takes value 1
              if the region pair shares a river basin and Remoteness is the log of the
              average remoteness of the origin and the destination regions.


of 0.476. As expected, distance, insularity and mountain ranges raise the probability of a
border assignment, while remoteness lowers it. Interestingly, we find that being in the same
river basin raises the probability of having a border. It seems thus that rivers promote
borders rather than the opposite.
   By its own nature, the unconfoundedness assumption cannot be proved formally. But
economic theory identifies as potential confounding factors a set of geographical covariates
that precede the border assignment and affect trade costs. We have shown that, indeed,
these covariates affect the border assignment. Thus, comparisons of units with different
treatments can be given a causal interpretation only if we condition for these pre-treatment
covariates. The next step is to find the right way to do this necessary conditioning.

                                                   26
3.3     Constructing the `right' samples


To measure the border effect we estimate a linear regression model of normalized market
shares on the border dummy, controlling for the number of borders and the set of geographical
covariates:
                          ln Snm =  +  · Bnm +  · Nnm +  · Xnm + unm                                      (11)

where Nnm is the log of the number of borders faced by the region pair, and unm is a zero-
mean error term uncorrelated with the regressors.24 Since this regression controls for both
the number of borders and the pre-treatment covariates, we can use the estimated value  ^ as
a lower bound for the border effect. If we are also able to show that the fraction of switchers
is small, then ^ is an unbiased estimate of the border effect.

       The question we address now is that of choosing the right sample to estimate the re-
gression model in Equation (11). One might initially think that we should use the entire
sample. After all, using all the information available is a principled way to proceed. How-
ever, Imbens and Rubin (2015) show that the sampling variance of the estimator      ^ will be
large if the population distribution of covariates is unbalanced between treated and control
units. Before using regression methods on the entire sample, one needs to ensure that there
is enough balance or overlap in the two covariate distributions.
       To determine whether there is sufficient overlap in our entire dataset, the left panel of
Figure 6 plots the distribution of the estimated propensity score for control units (empty bars)
and for treated units (blue shaded bars). The overlap of the propensity score distribution
for treated and control units is small. Thus, we trim the data to drop units with extreme
values for the estimated propensity score, following the procedure recommended by Crump
et al. (2009). This trimming procedure amounts to dropping all observations for which the
propensity score is above or below a threshold determined following a variance criterion.25
  24
      The number of borders of a given region equals to 268 minus the number of regions within its country plus
1. The smallest number of borders corresponds to the 38 regions of Germany, with 231 borders. The largest
number of borders corresponds to the 2 regions of Slovenia and Croatia, with 267 borders. The variable Nnm
is the (log) sum of the borders of the region pair. Thus, the values of Nnm lie between ln (231 × 2) = 6.1355
and ln (267 × 2) = 6.2804.
   25
      The idea in Crump et al. (2009) is to choose a subset A of the covariate space X so that there is
substantial overlap between the covariate distribution for the treated and control units. Crump et al. (2009)
use the asymptotic efficiency bound for the efficient estimator for the treatment effect in subset A to choose
the trimming threshold. The intuition is that if there is a value of the covariate space such that there are
few treated units relative to the number of controls, for this value the variance for an estimator for the
average treatment effect will be large. Therefore, excluding units with such covariate values should improve
the asymptotic variance of the efficient estimator.



                                                      27
                                    Figure 6: Histogram of propensity score
     80




                                                                             15
     60




                                                                             10
  Percent




                                                                   Percent
    40




                                                                             5
     20
     0




                                                                             0
            0    .2         .4            .6             .8   1                   0   .2        .4            .6             .8   1
                       Estimated propensity score                                          Estimated propensity score

                          Treated              Control                                        Treated              Control



                 A) All region pairs                                                  B) Trimmed sample
      Notes: This figure shows the distribution of the estimated propensity score, probability of having a
      border, for control units (empty bars) and for treated units (blue shaded bars). Panel A reports the
      results using the full sample while panel B reports the results using the trimmed sample (dropping
      region pairs with extreme estimated probability of having border).



We apply this methodology to our sample and obtain a value of the threshold equal to 6.5
percent. We trim the sample accordingly and re-estimate the propensity score. Column (2)
in Table 3 presents the results. The R-squared is now smaller, showing that our covariates
explain now a smaller fraction of the variation in the border assignment, as expected after
dropping observations in the extremes of the propensity score distribution. The right panel
of Figure 6 shows that the distribution of the propensity score across control and treated
pairs has a much higher overlap after trimming the initial sample.
    There are two possible methods to perform inference using the propensity score that are
recommended by Imbens and Rubin (2015): matching and blocking. In our setting, we think
a blocking estimator, based on grouping region pairs with similar propensity score values,
is more appropriate. Thus, we build subsamples of pairs such that the border probability is
similar. We call these subsamples blocks. To create them, we follow the procedure recom-
mended by Imbens and Rubin (2015), using the algorithm in Becker and Ichino (2002). This
algorithm starts by splitting the sample into 5 equally spaced intervals of the propensity
score and then testing whether the average propensity score of treated and control units
does not differ much within blocks. If it does, the algorithm splits the interval in half and
tests again, until the average propensity score of treated and control units no longer differs
within blocks. Starting from the trimmed sample, this procedure delivers nine blocks. We


                                                              28
                                         Table 4: Summary statistics of covariates by block

                             (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)          (9)

                         mean/sd      mean/sd       mean/sd      mean/sd      mean/sd       mean/sd      mean/sd      mean/sd       mean/sd
 Distance                 154.36       186.07        240.35       298.82       349.83        383.02       440.94       480.01        446.70
                           61.03       74.23          93.43       121.79       143.55        143.03       161.45       136.84         61.64
 Insularity                 0.01        0.01           0.01        0.02         0.04          0.07         0.08         0.12           0.22
                           0.08         0.12          0.12         0.15         0.20          0.25         0.28         0.33           0.42
 Mountain Ranges          208.38       291.05        351.19       466.84       533.75        549.99       596.98       735.32       1244.59
                          232.38       320.38        376.25       457.99       528.13        545.14       561.71       681.78        888.16
 River Basin                0.29        0.28          0.21         0.19         0.17          0.14         0.12         0.10           0.06
                           0.45         0.45          0.41         0.39         0.37          0.35         0.32         0.31           0.24
 Remoteness              1169.05      1097.32       1092.09      1087.40      1081.35       1051.59      1038.82      1002.73        938.72
                          307.02       268.01        273.50       276.93       275.84        249.16       229.19       187.51        140.79
 Propensity score           0.20        0.31          0.44         0.57         0.66          0.72         0.78         0.84           0.89
                           0.04         0.04          0.04         0.04         0.02          0.02         0.02         0.02           0.01
 N                          323         408            515         698          507           660          1062         1582           354
Notes: This table reports the mean and standard deviation of each geographical covariate and the propensity score in each block. Distance
is bilateral distance between origin and destination in kilometers, Insularity takes value 1 if one of the regions is an island. Mountain Ranges
is the highest difference in elevation between two regions in metres (difference between highest point and lowest point), River Basin takes
value 1 if the region pair shares a river basin and Remoteness is the average remoteness of the origin and the destination regions.



have ordered these blocks such that the propensity score is increasing.
     Table 4 reports the summary statistics of the covariates and the propensity score by
block. Recall that there are two factors that reduce the sampling variance of the estimates:
(i) the number of observations; and (ii) the balance between treated and control groups. The
number of observations varies substantially across blocks, ranging from 323 in Block 1 to
1582 in Block 8. Blocks also vary substantially in terms of their propensity score, ranging
from 20 percent in the first block to 89 percent in the ninth one. Blocks 3, 4 and 5 are the
most balanced ones with a propensity score of 44, 57 percent and 66 percent, respectively.
     Table 5 reports the t-statistic from a difference in means test between treated and controls
(test is defined as control mean minus treatment mean). Covariates are well balanced within
blocks, with only small differences in means that do not seem to follow a systematic pattern.
If the covariates were perfectly balanced within blocks, we could estimate causal effects as
if assignment was random within each block. That is, we could compare the means of the
international and intranational pairs controlling only for the number of borders. Since three
out of five covariates are continuous, however, it is unavoidable to have some small variation
in covariates within blocks. In this case, Imbens and Rubin (2015) recommend that these
comparisons also control for covariates. Thus, we shall estimate the regression model in
Equation (11) for each of the blocks.
     To give a sense of the composition of the blocks in terms of regions, Figure 7 shows the


                                                                      29
                                             Table 5: Balancing test of covariates by block

                             (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)         (7)            (8)           (9)

 Distance                -22.24***       8.207        5.049        4.693          17.13        -11.79     -24.16**      -33.09***      28.87***
                          (8.077)       (8.126)      (8.290)      (9.269)        (13.42)      (12.40)      (12.07)       (9.763)        (9.636)

 Insularity               -0.00990      0.0206       0.0166       0.0187*        0.0302       0.0125      -0.00573     -0.0613***      -0.00663
                          (0.0105)     (0.0132)     (0.0103)      (0.0110)      (0.0190)     (0.0216)     (0.0208)      (0.0234)       (0.0660)

 Mountain Ranges            -31.46       25.23        -16.62     -120.6***     -148.1***     -114.3**     -96.62**      -139.1***        45.43
                           (31.06)      (35.09)      (33.39)      (34.56)       (49.01)       (47.07)      (41.96)       (48.70)        (140.6)

 River Basin               0.0528       -0.0328 -0.00768           0.0366        0.0247       -0.0101     -0.00522       -0.0304        0.0285
                          (0.0608)     (0.0495) (0.0362)          (0.0296)      (0.0350)     (0.0303)     (0.0242)      (0.0219)       (0.0382)

 Remoteness              -109.7***      51.41*        30.83        20.83         44.75*        -5.539       -21.53      -54.87***      59.66***
                          (40.65)       (29.26)      (24.24)      (21.06)        (25.75)      (21.61)      (17.15)       (13.36)        (22.06)
 N                          323           408          515          698            507          660          1062         1582            354

Notes: This table reports the difference in means between treated and control region pairs for each geographical covariate by block (defined
as control minus treated). * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%, standard errors in parenthesis. Distance is bilateral
distance between origin and destination in kilometers, Insularity takes value 1 if one of the regions is an island. Mountain Ranges is the
highest difference in elevation between two regions in metres (difference between highest point and lowest point), River Basin takes value 1 if
the region pair shares a river basin and Remoteness is the average remoteness of the origin and the destination regions.



frequency with which each region appears (as a part of a pair) within the control and treated
groups in block 4. This block has an average propensity score of 57 percent. That is, region
pairs within this block had roughly an equal chance of having a border than not having one.
In this block we find regions from all around Europe both in the treated and in the control
units. The composition of regions changes across blocks. As we would expect, blocks 1 and
2 source mostly from region-pairs that are at short distances while blocks 7, 8 and 9 contain
regions located in the largest countries, since region-pairs are, on average, further away. The
figures for all the blocks can be found in the Appendix.
     Let us go back to our example of Catalonia, Languedoc-Roussillon and Valencia. Figure
8 shows all the pairs that contain Catalonia (shown in grey) in our sample. The color of
each region represents the block in which the corresponding pair is located. White-colored
regions are pairs that have been dropped after trimming, for which the probability of a
border was close to 1. There is no pair that includes Catalonia in block 1, indicating that
the probability of Catalonia having a border with any of its neighbours was always 20 percent
or larger. Languedoc-Roussillon is in block 5, where the average probability of a border is
about 66 percent; and Valencia is in block 3, where the average probability of a border is
about 44 percent.
     Figure 8 allows us to illustrate our identification strategy, and the motivation behind our
approach. Notice that block 7 contains intranational pairs, in Spain, as well as international

                                                                       30
                           Figure 7: Composition of regions in block 4




               A) Control group                                   B) Treated group
    Notes: This figure shows the regions that are part of the block. The shading represents the
    frequency with which each region appears (as a part of a pair) in the control group (first panel)
    and treated group (second panel) in the block.



pairs, in France and Portugal. The former will be used as control units, while the latter will
be used as treated units. Region pairs in block 7 have a probability close to 78 percent of
being separated by a border. Given that this probability is very similar across treated and
control units, the difference in trade between them can be interpreted as the causal effect of
the border.
   We have now constructed the samples we needed to estimate the border effect. Before
using them, though, we need to assess how important is the participation bias in these
samples (recall Equation (7) and the discussion after it). Table 6 shows how participation
rates differ between treated and control groups in the entire sample, the trimmed sample and
in each of the blocks. Participation rates among control units are high in all the samples. In
the entire sample, however, the participation rate among treated units is only 61.7 percent.
This must be due to the fact that many international pairs are far away and likely to have a
border. Indeed, participation rates in the trimmed sample increase dramatically among the
treated, becoming quite close to those in the control group. The participation rates within
blocks are even more balanced. Thus, we conclude that the participation bias cannot be

                                                   31
                 Figure 8: Distribution of Blocks for region-pairs with Catalonia




           Notes: This figure shows the regions that are part of a pair that includes Catalonia
           in the trimmed sample. The colors represent the block in which each region pair
           is included. The blocks are ordered as increasing in the propensity score. Darker
           shading represents higher probability of having a border.



large within these blocks. Remarkably, our construction of blocks has achieved an almost
perfect balance in participation rates without using any outcome variables in the procedure.
This provides additional support for our chosen empirical strategy.

                                     Table 6: Participation rate: Control vs. Treated

                               All      Trimmed                                Blocks
                                                     (1) (2)         (3)     (4)   (5)       (6)      (7)     (8)  (9)
     Part. rate control 0.968             0.976       1  .997       .993    .987 .968       .968     .936    .952 .915
     Part. rate treated 0.617             0.946     .993 .996       .996    .969 .947       .957      .95    .928 .894
     N                  72092             12220      646 816        1030    1396 1014       1320     2124    3164 710
    Notes: This table reports the share of region pairs that engage in positive trade in our regional trade dataset (partic-
    ipation rate) for the region pairs in the treated and control groups.




                                                              32
                        4   Causal effect of borders on trade

Finally we are ready to present our results. We show first our estimation of the average
border effect and we continue with the estimation of the border effect across industries.
Finally, we present our estimation of the effect recent borders.


4.1    Average Border effect


Table 7 shows the results of estimating Equation (11) for each of the blocks. Recall that the
estimated coefficient on the border dummy is the log reduction in the normalized market
share caused by the border, that is, the average border effect within the block. This effect is
large, statistically significant at the one percent level, and it varies little across blocks. The
border effect ranges from a minimum of -1.686 in block 5 to a maximum of -1.858 in block
9, which indicate that borders reduce trade to somewhere between 18.5 (= exp {-1.686})
and 15.6 (= exp {-1.858}) of their potential.
      Table 7 also shows the effect on normalized market shares caused by the number of
borders. Recall that the coefficient on this variable measures the elasticity of the normalized
market share with respect to the number of borders. This elasticity varies across blocks,
ranging from 6.695 in block 2 to 11.833 in block 6. Since Nnm  [6.1355, 6.2804] in our
sample, we have that the difference in market shares caused by differences in the number of
borders might be substantial. To put an upper bound to this difference, compare the region
pair containing the two Slovenian regions, which is in block 1, with a region pair containing
two German regions in the same block. According to our estimates, the normalized market
share for the Slovenian pair is about 2.78 (= exp {7.058 × 0.1449}) larger than that of the
German pair. Thus, our estimates reveal an additional important channel through which
the border assignment affects trade. It is not only whether a border is assigned to a specific
region pair that matters, but also how many borders are assigned to each region in the pair.
      Let us now use these results to be a bit more precise about the counterfactual scenario
discussed in the introduction, in which the French-Spanish border is southwest rather than
north of Catalonia. Recall that the region pair (Catalonia, Languedoc-Roussillon) is in block
5, and that the change in the French-Spanish border reduces the number of borders of Cat-
alonia by 7 and for Languedoc-Roussillon by 1. Then, we can compute the effect of this
change in the border as the product of two separate effects: (i) the average border effect
which increases the market share by a factor 5.398 (= exp {1.686}); and (ii) the number-of-

                                               33
                                                           Table 7: Average border effect

 Dep. Var: ln(Sn,m )           Block 1      Block 2       Block 3       Block 4        Block 5       Block 6       Block 7       Block 8       Block 9
                                  (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)
 Border                       -1.786***    -1.721***     -1.699***     -1.768***      -1.686***     -1.796***     -1.687***     -1.754***     -1.858***
                               (0.182)      (0.178)       (0.175)       (0.175)        (0.238)       (0.289)       (0.268)       (0.290)       (0.201)

 Number of Borders            7.058***      6.695***      7.041***     10.779***      11.294***     11.833***      9.234***      8.091***       0.420
                               (1.756)       (1.970)       (2.034)      (1.730)        (2.064)       (2.783)        (2.792)       (3.063)      (2.944)

 Geographic covariates           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
 N                                645          813          1024          1364           968           1267          2011          2948           637
 R2                              .572          .533         .501           .47           .375          .388           .31          .285          .299
Notes: Standard errors clustered at the country-pair level, are in parentheses.* significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%. Dependent
variable is the (log) normalized market share of n in m. Border is a dummy for international border. Number of borders is the (log) sum of the number of
borders that are faced by n and m.



borders effect which lowers the market share by a factor 0.839 (= exp {11.294(-0.0155)}).
Thus, our estimates indicate that Catalonia's market share of the Languedoc-Roussillon
market would be 4.530 (= 5.398 × 0.839) larger than it is today. Since the region pair (Cat-
alonia, Valencia) is in block 3 and the change in the French-Spanish border increases the
number of borders of Valencia by 1, Catalonia's share of the Valencia market would be
0.153 (= exp {-1.796 + 7.041(-0.0119)}) smaller than it is today. These numbers are a bit
different from those we showed in the introduction because the latter did not take into
account the number-of-borders effect.
     Table 8 reports the average border effect, after aggregating our regression results by
block. We present two possible average treatment effects, weighting the coefficients by the
size of the block (row 1) and weighting by the number of treated units in each block (row
2) (see Imbens and Rubin (2015)). The average effect of the border is negative and large
in magnitude, and the weighting method does not make much of a difference. Our findings
suggest that the border reduces trade between two regions to 17.5 percent of what they
would trade without the border (exp{-1.744} = 0.175).

                            Table 8: Average Border Effect (Average treatment effect)

                                                                           Estimated  AT E
                                                               All controls Without number of borders

                    Weights: Size of blocks                          -1.744                              -1.299
                    Weights: Treated pairs                           -1.747                              -1.303
                  Notes: Average treatment effect calculated by computing the weighted average
                  of the estimated coefficient of the Border dummy. The first row uses the number
                  of observations in each blocks as weights, while the second row uses the number
                  of treated units in each block.



                                                                           34
                   Table 9: Average Border effect using the full and trimmed samples

                    Dependent variable: log (Snm ) Full sample            Trimmed sample
                                                        (1)                      (2)
                    Border                          -1.968***                -1.716***
                                                     (0.211)                  (0.184)

                    Number of Borders                       7.944***           8.346***
                                                             (1.807)            (1.647)

                    Geographic Covariates                     Yes                 Yes
                    N                                        46236               11677
                    R2                                        .482                .642
                   Notes: Standard errors clustered at the country-pair level, are in parenthe-
                   ses.* significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%. Depen-
                   dent variable is the (log) normalized market share of n in m. Border is a
                   dummy for international border. Number of borders is the log of the total
                   number of borders that are faced by n and m.


   A key step in our identification strategy is to control for the number of borders. This
matters not only in itself as argued already, but also to avoid a selection bias problem
when estimating the average border effect. As discussed in section 3.1, region pairs with
many borders tend to have larger market shares and tend to be over-represented among
international pairs and under-represented among intranational pairs. This creates a positive
selection bias that makes the observed difference in average market shares smaller (in absolute
value) than the true average border effect. To show that this source of selection bias is
relevant, the second column of Table 8 reports the estimated average border effect that we
would obtain if we failed to control for the number of borders. This biased estimate of
-1.299, would lead us to believe that the border reduces normalized market shares to 27.3
percent of its potential instead of the true estimate of 17.5 percent.
   Another key step in our identification strategy is trimming the data set. Table 9 shows
the results of running Equation (11) with the entire sample and the trimmed sample. For
the full sample we obtain an estimate of -1.968, which would lead us to believe that the
border reduces normalized market shares to 14 percent of its potential. For the trimmed
sample we obtain an estimate of -1.716 which is essentially the same as the one provided
by the blocking estimator. This is consistent with our finding that the average border effect
varies very little across region pairs with different propensity scores.




                                                       35
                               Table 10: Border effect across industries and blocks
                    Block 1    Block 2    Block 3    Block 4    Block 5      Block 6   Block 7    Block 8    ATE: W   ATE: T
 INDUSTRY
 1. AGRI           -1.479     -1.544     -1.774     -1.513      -1.244       -1.425    -1.340     -1.568     -1.491    -1.479
 3. MINE           -1.534     -2.008     -1.897     -1.638      -1.407       -1.356    -1.162      -0.941    -1.401    -1.299
 4. FBT            -2.000     -2.269     -2.262     -2.289      -2.439       -2.387    -2.304     -2.046     -2.220    -2.206
 5. TEX            -1.253     -1.478     -1.239     -1.125      -1.210       -0.933    -1.126     -0.985     -1.127    -1.083
 6. WOOD           -1.315     -1.474     -1.690     -1.491      -1.362       -1.610    -1.542     -1.699     -1.574    -1.594
 7. COKE/PET       -1.584     -1.793     -1.272     -0.986        -0.197     -1.188      -0.551     -0.525   -0.930    -0.802
 8. CHEM           -1.399     -1.480     -1.276     -1.498      -1.612       -1.551    -1.484     -1.508     -1.488    -1.499
 9. NON-MET        -1.837     -1.789     -1.898     -1.731      -1.850       -1.896     -1.380     -1.553    -1.651    -1.612
 10. MET           -1.392     -1.520     -1.420     -1.566      -1.586       -1.565    -1.344     -1.407     -1.451    -1.440
 11. MACH          -2.395     -2.109     -1.898     -2.000      -1.790       -1.381    -1.411     -1.466     -1.673    -1.587
 12. VEH           -1.989     -1.929     -1.648     -1.621      -1.407       -1.393    -1.454     -1.558     -1.577    -1.541
 13. OTHER         -1.901     -1.702     -1.754     -1.505      -1.459       -1.467    -1.326     -1.256     -1.442    -1.380

 Aggregate BE        -1.641     -1.724     -1.796     -1.776        -1.784    -1.835    -1.729     -1.694    -1.737    -1.730


Notes: This table reports the estimated border effect (coefficient on dummy Border, in regression equation (11)) by
industry (rows) and block (column).The last two columns report the average border effect computed using as weights the
size of the block (ATE: W) and the number of treated region pairs (ATE: T). The last row (Average BE) reports the
average border effect across industries, as reported in table 7. * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at
1%.


4.2      Border effect across industries


The average border effect may hide some cross-industry heterogeneity.26 We report now
the results of estimating Equation (11) industry by industry. Importantly, we can use the
estimated propensity score and the same blocks, since both are constructed from region-pair
covariates that are constant across industries.
       Table 10 presents the results for all industries. The border effect is negative and sta-
tistically significant in all blocks in all industries (coefficients represented with confidence
intervals in figure A.17 in the Appendix). As we could anticipate, the average border effect
masks some heterogeneity. The industry "Food, Beverage and Tobacco", in column (10) of
row (3), has a weighted coefficient of -2.095, meaning that the border effect is 0.123. The
industry "Textiles", in column (10) of row (4), has a weighted coefficient of -.945, implying
that the border effect is 0.389.
       Our industries are very aggregated and it is difficult to say much about these differences
in the border effect. But we do notice that lower border effects, of around -1.4 are estimated
in Chemicals, Metals and Vehicles. While higher border effects, of around -1.6, are found
in Wood and Cork Products and Paper, Non Metals, Machinery and Agriculture. This is
suggestive of an increasing border effect for more differentiated or more transformed goods.
  26
   Using total trade flows misses the fact that industries have varying trade cost elasticities (Chen and
Novy, 2012) and select into geographies taking into account border related costs. Therefore estimates that
employ aggregated data at the industry level risk suffering from compositional bias (Hillberry, 1999).



                                                               36
       The last row of Table 10 reports the average border effect estimated in the previous
subsection. In all industries but two this average effect is larger than the industry border
effect. In the first blocks, columns 1 to 4, the estimates of the border effect for some industries
are below the average and some are above. However, in blocks 5 to 8 we see that the estimates
of the border effect for almost all industries are below the average. At first sight, this seems
puzzling, since the average border effect is estimated by aggregating the industry-level data.
The explanation for this observation is the imbalance in participation rates between treated
and controls in this second set of blocks. As explained in the previous section, this generates
a participation bias that leads to an underestimation of the border effect.27


4.3     Effects of post-1910 borders


We next examine whether the border effect varies with the age of the border. Our sample
contains borders that were created several centuries ago, such as the French-Spanish border,
together with borders that were put in place only some decades ago, like the border between
the Czech Republic and Slovakia that was established in 1993. It is plausible to think that
effects of these borders might be quite different.
       Figure 9 shows borders in Europe in 1910 and 2010. The 1910 set of borders is the
culmination of a process of political integration that included, for instance, the unification
of Italy and Germany. After 1910, this trend reversed. The 2010 set of borders shows the
effects of a process of political disintegration which included, for instance, the collapse of the
Austro-Hungarian empire and the former Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia. Indeed, about one
third of the region pairs that shared a government in 1910 no longer share a government in
2010.
       We take 1910 as our reference year and split our sample of region pairs into four groups,
according to their border history. The largest group consists of regions that are in different
countries both in 1910 and in 2010, and contains 90 percent of our observations. The second
largest group consists of regions that have always been in the same country, and contains
6.3 percent of our observations. The third largest group consists of regions that were in the
same country in 1910, but are no longer in the same country in 2010. This group contains
about 3.1 percent of our observations. The final and smallest group consists of regions that
  27
    Figure A.18 in the Appendix plots the differences in participation (share of trading pairs) between
treated and control units in each industry and block. As expected, participation rates are very similar in all
industries in blocks 1 to 3, but much larger for control pairs in other blocks.



                                                     37
                                  Figure 9: Recent and old borders




                  A) Borders in 1910                           B) Borders in 2010
            Notes: This figure shows European borders in 1910 (panel A) and in 2010 (panel B).



were in different countries in 1910 and now are in the same country. This group contains
only 0.5 percent of our observations.
       To measure the effects of adding a new border, we compare outcomes between the groups
that were in the same country in 1910. As mentioned, about a third of the regions who
shared a country in 1910, no longer do so in 2010. Thus, we have a good balance between
treated and controls to perform inference. It would be interesting also to measure the effects
of removing an old border by comparing outcomes between the groups that were in a different
country in 1910. Unfortunately for our purposes, almost none of the regions in these two
groups share a country today. There is simply too much imbalance between treated and
controls to perform inference.28
  28
    Previous studies in the literature have found persistent effects of bygone borders on trade. Nitsch and
Wolf (2013) find persistence of the former inner German border on current intra-German trade by road,
although the estimated border effect has been declining over time. Beestermöller and Rauch (2014) explore
how the trading capital accumulated between members of the Astro-Hungarian empire still drives preferential
trade between European countries even after the Fall of the Iron Curtain.




                                                    38
                             Table 11: Propensity Models for region pair with border 1910=0

          Dependent Variable: Border          Full sample (Border 1910=0)          Trimmed sample (Border 1910=0)
                                                           (1)                                   (2)
          Distance                                      2.254***                              2.414***
                                                         (0.108)                               (0.134)

          Insularity                                        0.270                                    0.257
                                                           (0.186)                                  (0.192)

          Mountain Ranges                                   0.071                                    -0.007
                                                           (0.052)                                  (0.055)

          Same River Basin                                1.835***                                 1.914***
                                                           (0.120)                                  (0.136)

          Remoteness                                      -2.293***                               -2.215***
                                                           (0.272)                                 (0.299)

          Constant                                          1.127                                    0.065
                                                           (1.844)                                  (1.965)
          N                                                 3422                                     2630
          Pseudo R2                                         0.222                                    0.139
         Notes: This table reports the estimation of the logistic regression model, where the log odds ratio of receiving
         the treatment (having a border) is modeled as linear in a number of the geographical covariates. Distance is (log)
         bilateral distance between origin and destination in km, Insularity takes value 1 if one of the regions is an island.
         Mountain Ranges is the highest difference in elevation between two regions in metres (difference between highest
         point and lowest point, in logs), River Basin takes value 1 if the region pair shares a river basin and Remoteness is
         the log of the average remoteness of the origin and the destination regions.



   We start with a sample containing the two groups that were in the same country in 1910.
Starting from this sample, we repeat the steps explained in section 3. We re-estimate the
propensity score and we trim the sample to achieve a good overlap between treated and
control units. Table 11 reports the estimation of the propensity score model for the full
sample and the trimmed sample, whereas Figure 10 shows the distribution of the propensity
score among treated and control units. We then create blocks and report the summary
statistics of the covariates and the balancing test in Tables B.6 and B.7 in the Appendix.
This procedure now generates 6 blocks.
   Table 12 reports the results of estimating Equation (11) with this subsample. We find a
negative and significant border effect for post-1910 borders, albeit smaller than the average
border effect without conditioning on historical borders. The average border effect is -1.261
(-1.221) weighting by size of block (treated). This means that the border reduces the market
share to 28.3 percent (29.5 percent) of its potential. These findings show that borders that
have been in place for less than a century have large trade reducing effects, although smaller
than those of older borders.




                                                                 39
                                           Figure 10: Histogram of propensity score
          10




                                                                                          8
          8




                                                                                          6
          6
Percent




                                                                                       Percent
                                                                                          4
          4




                                                                                          2
          2
          0




                                                                                          0
               0        .2         .4            .6             .8             1                 0        .2          .4            .6             .8   1
                              Estimated propensity score                                                         Estimated propensity score

                                 Treated              Control                                                       Treated              Control



                        A) All region pairs                                                               B) Trimmed sample
          Notes: This figure shows the distribution of the estimated propensity score, probability of having a
          border, for control units (empty bars) and for treated units (blue shaded bars). Panel A reports the
          results using the full sample while panel B reports the results using the trimmed sample (dropping
          region pairs with extreme estimated probability of having border).



                                     Table 12: Average border effect when Border in 1910=1

               Dep. Var: ln(Sn,m )              Block 1              Block 2       Block 3           Block 4      Block 5            Block 6
                                                   (1)                 (2)            (3)               (4)           (5)                (6)
               Border                         -1.439***          -1.165***         -1.129***         -1.290***   -1.169***         -1.189***
                                                (0.259)              (0.305)        (0.301)           (0.415)     (0.322)            (0.405)

               Number of borders               7.503***              7.325**       7.714**             7.239       8.364*          14.124***
                                                (2.120)              (2.765)        (3.502)           (4.762)     (4.696)            (4.240)

               Geographical covariates             Yes                Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes                Yes
               N                                  1530                1082           894               703           554                298
                   2
               R                                  .612                .505           .432              .443          .353               .418

           Notes: Standard errors clustered at the country-pair level, are in parentheses.* significant at 10%, ** significant
           at 5%, *** significant at 1%. Dependent variable is the (log) normalized market share of n in m. Border is a
           dummy for international border. Number of borders is the (log) sum of the number of borders that are faced by n
           and m.




                                                                             40
                                     5    Concluding remarks

In this paper we have built a European regional trade dataset and we have estimated the
average border effect on trade flows using a new identification framework. Our results show
that the effects of country borders on trade flows within Europe are large. Take two similar
region pairs, the first one containing regions in different countries and the second one con-
taining regions in the same country. The market share of the origin region in the destination
region for the international pair is only 17.5 percent that of the intranational pair. We refer
to this estimate as the average border effect. It seems, then, that we are still far from having
a single market in Europe. Country borders have created a national bias in preferences and
a national cost advantage that penalize international trade and foster intranational trade.
How do country borders affect trade flows? What are the welfare implications? Providing
satisfactory answers to these questions is a major research goal on its own, one which is likely
to deliver important policy implications for Europe.
    We view our contribution as part of a broader research program on the effects of country
borders within Europe. To start with, we are currently using our new dataset and the
empirical framework developed here to measure the effect of regional governments. In this
paper we have focused on the effects of country governments. Yet, regional governments also
make decisions about procurement, infrastructure, laws and regulations and so on. What is
the effect of regional borders on trade? This project will allow us to obtain a more detailed
and precise picture of the effects of different types of political borders.29
    The broader research program we envision should go beyond estimating the size of border
effects, and also try to disentangle the relative importance of the different channels through
which country borders affect trade.30 Some insight can be obtained by looking at differences
in the estimates across industries and between new and old borders provided here. But this
only scratches the surface. One would like to have precise answers to questions such as:
How much would the border effect be reduced if the European Union were able to eliminate
the large observed national bias in government procurement? How much would the border
effect be reduced if the European Union were able to build a truly European transportation
  29
     There are a few papers that have looked at the effects of regional borders using the gravity framework.
For instance Wolf (2000), Coughlin and Novy (2012) and Garmendia et al. (2012).
  30
     There are some papers that have explored a few these channels: Turrini and van Ypersele (2010) explore
the effects of judicial systems, Combes et al. (2005) and Fukao and Okubo (2004) explore the role of business
and social networks, Schulze and Wolf (2009) focus on ethno-linguistic factors, and Chen (2004) analyzes
technical barriers to trade and product-specific information costs increase the effect of borders on trade.



                                                     41
network? Answering these and related questions is only possible with a reliable empirical
strategy that addresses the endogenous assignment of borders such as the one developed in
this paper.
   The research program we have in mind should also go beyond trade flows and examine the
effects of country borders on other economic and social interactions. Country borders have
implications that go far beyond trade flows. The approach developed here could also be used
to measure the effect of borders on migration and investment flows, cultural values, travel
and tourism, cooperation in research projects, joint sports activities, and so on. It would be
useful to have a broader picture of how country borders within Europe affect economic and
social interactions among its regions.
   Carrying out this project also made it clear to us that we need a richer theory. Our results
suggest that modeling borders is crucial to understand the patterns of intranational and
international trade. We have wonderful quantitative theories of trade that realistically model
the incentives and constraints faced by consumers and firms. But these quantitative theories
rarely include a realistic description of the incentives and constraints faced by governments. If
modeled at all, governments either act mechanically or solve some unrealistic social planner
problem. How are procurement decisions made? How are infrastructures chosen? How
are laws and regulations decided and enforced? Only a realistic and detailed modeling of
the behavior of governments can shed light on the channels through which political borders
affect trade and welfare. Fortunately, there is a lot of excellent work on the political economy
of trade policy to draw upon for this purpose (See, for instance, Grossman and Helpman
(2001)).
   Much less developed is the theory of country borders. It is here where we have felt more
at sea when working on this project. Understanding the border assignment is key to develop
a sound identification strategy. And yet there does not exists a theory of borders that is
developed at the same level of sophistication, say, than the theory of international trade.
There exist some classic approaches to modeling and understanding country formation (see
Spolaore and Alesina (2003)); and some recent ones too (see Cervellati et al. (2019) and
Gancia et al. (2020)). But these theoretical frameworks can only be seen as promising
prototypes, much work is needed to develop them into a fully fledged theory capable of
guiding quantitative and empirical research.




                                               42
                                       References
Alchian, A. A. and W. R. Allen (1964). Exchange and Production; Theory in Use. Wadsworth
  Publishing Company.

Anderson, J. E. and E. Van Wincoop (2003). Gravity with gravitas: A solution to the border
 puzzle. American Economic Review 93 (1), 170­192.

Becker, S. O. and A. Ichino (2002). Estimation of average treatment effects based on propen-
  sity scores. The Stata Journal 2 (4), 358­377.

Beestermöller, M. and F. Rauch (2014). A dissection of trading capital: Cultural persis-
  tence of trade in the aftermath of the fall of the Iron Curtain. Technical report, Munich
  Discussion Paper.

Cervellati, M., S. Lazzaroni, G. Prarolo, and P. Vanin (2019). Political geography and pre-
  industrial development: A theory and evidence for Europe 1000-1850. London, CEPR.

Chen, N. (2004). Intra-national versus international trade in the European Union: Why do
 national borders matter? Journal of International Economics 63 (1), 93­118.

Chen, N. and D. Novy (2012). On the measurement of trade costs: Direct vs. indirect
 approaches to quantifying standards and technical regulations. World Trade Review 11,
 401.

Combes, P.-P., M. Lafourcade, and T. Mayer (2005). The trade-creating effects of business
  and social networks: Evidence from France. Journal of International Economics 66 (1),
  1­29.

Coughlin, C. C. and D. Novy (2012). Is the International Border Effect Larger than the
  Domestic Border Effect? Evidence from U.S. Trade. CEP discussion papers, Centre for
  Economic Performance, LSE.

Coughlin, C. C. and D. Novy (2016). Estimating border effects: The impact of spatial
  aggregation. FRB St. Louis Working Paper .

Crump, R. K., V. J. Hotz, G. W. Imbens, and O. A. Mitnik (2009). Dealing with Limited
  Overlap in Estimation of Average Treatment Effects. Biometrika 96 (1), 187­199.

Dawid, A. P. (1979). Conditional independence in statistical theory. Journal of the Royal
  Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological) 41 (1), 1­15.

Feenstra, R. C. (2002). Border effects and the gravity equation: Consistent methods for
  estimation. Scottish Journal of Political Economy 49 (5), 491­506.

Fukao, K. and T. Okubo (2004). Why has the border effect in the japanese market de-
  clined? the role of business networks in East Asia. Technical report, Graduate Institute
  of International Studies.


                                            43
Gallego, N. and C. Llano (2015). Thick and thin borders in the European Union: How
 deep internal integration is within countries, and how shallow between them. The World
 Economy 38 (12), 1850­1879.
Gancia, G., G. A. Ponzetto, and J. Ventura (2020). Globalization and political structure.
 CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP11159 .
Garmendia, A., C. Llano, A. Minondo, and F. Requena (2012). Networks and the disap-
 pearance of the intranational home bias. Economics Letters 116 (2), 178 ­ 182.
Gil-Pareja, S., R. Llorca-Vivero, J. A. Martínez-Serrano, and J. Oliver-Alonso (2005). The
  border effect in Spain. World Economy 28 (11), 1617­1631.
Grossman, G. M. and E. Helpman (2001). Special Interest Politics. MIT press.
Head, K. and T. Mayer (2009). Illusory border effects: distance mismeasurement inflates es-
  timates of home bias in trade. In In: The Gravity Model in International Trade: Advances
  and Applications. Editors: Bergeijk and Brakman. Citeseer.
Head, K. and T. Mayer (2014). Gravity equations: Workhorse, toolkit, and cookbook. In
  Handbook of International Economics, Volume 4, pp. 131­195. Elsevier.
Helpman, E., M. Melitz, and Y. Rubinstein (2008). Estimating trade flows: Trading partners
  and trading volumes. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (2), 441­487.
Herz, B. and X.-L. Varela-Irimia (2020). Border Effects in European Public Procurement.
  Journal of Economic Geography .
Hillberry, R. (1999). Explaining the `border effect': what can we learn from disaggregated
  commodity flow data. Indiana University Graduate Student Economics Working Paper
  Series .
Hillberry, R. and D. Hummels (2008). Trade responses to geographic frictions: A decompo-
  sition using micro-data. European Economic Review 52 (3), 527­550.
Hummels, D. and A. Skiba (2004). Shipping the good apples out? an empirical confirmation
 of the alchian-allen conjecture. Journal of political Economy 112 (6), 1384­1402.
Imbens, G. W. and D. B. Rubin (2015). Causal inference in Statistics, Social, and Biomedical
  Sciences. Cambridge University Press.
McCallum, J. (1995). National borders matter: Canada-US regional trade patterns. The
 American Economic Review 85 (3), 615­623.
Nitsch, V. (2000). National borders and international trade: evidence from the European
  Union. Canadian Journal of Economics/Revue canadienne d'économique 33 (4), 1091­
  1105.
Nitsch, V. and N. Wolf (2013). Tear down this wall: on the persistence of borders in trade.
  Canadian Journal of Economics/Revue canadienne d'économique 46 (1), 154­179.

                                            44
Schulze, M.-S. and N. Wolf (2009). On the origins of border effects: insights from the
  Habsburg Empire. Journal of Economic Geography 9 (1), 117­136.

Silva, J. S. and S. Tenreyro (2006). The log of gravity. The Review of Economics and
   Statistics 88 (4), 641­658.

Spolaore, E. and A. Alesina (2003). The Size of Nations. Mit Press Cambridge, MA.

Turrini, A. and T. van Ypersele (2010). Traders, courts, and the border effect puzzle. Regional
  Science and Urban Economics 40 (2-3), 81­91.

Wei, S.-J. (1996). Intra-national versus international trade: how stubborn are nations in
 global integration? Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Wolf, H. C. (2000). Intranational home bias in trade. Review of Economics and Statis-
 tics 82 (4), 555­563.




                                              45
                                A     Additional Figures

             Figure A.1: Correlation with aggregate international trade data




Notes: The figures show the correlation between exports and shipments in the ERFT survey in
kilograms in each year. The Y-axis represents (log) bilateral trade (kg) by country-pair-industry-
year using international trade data from Eurostat. The X-axis shows bilateral shipments by road
(kg) aggregated by country-pair-industry-year obtained from the ERFT survey.




                                               46
             Figure A.2: Correlation with aggregate international trade data




Notes: The figures show the correlation between exports and shipments in the ERFT survey
in kilograms in each industry. The Y-axis represents (log) bilateral trade (kg) by country-pair-
industry-year using international trade data from Eurostat. The X-axis shows bilateral shipments
by road (kg) aggregated by country-pair-industry-year obtained from the ERFT survey.




                                              47
             Figure A.3: Correlation with aggregate international trade data




Notes: The figures show the correlation between exports and shipments in the ERFT survey
in kilograms in each industry. The Y-axis represents (log) bilateral trade (kg) by country-pair-
industry-year using international trade data from Eurostat. The X-axis shows bilateral shipments
by road (kg) aggregated by country-pair-industry-year obtained from the ERFT survey.




                                              48
             Figure A.4: Correlation with aggregate international trade data




Notes: The figures show the correlation between exports and shipments in the ERFT survey in
euros in each year. The Y-axis represents (log) bilateral trade (euros) by country-pair-industry-
year using international trade data from Eurostat. The X-axis shows bilateral shipments by road
(euros) aggregated by country-pair-industry-year obtained from the ERFT survey.




                                               49
                 Figure A.5: Correlation with aggregate international trade data




Notes: The figures show the correlation between exports and shipments in the ERFT survey in euros
in each industry. The Y-axis represents (log) bilateral trade (euros) by country-pair-industry-year using
international trade data from Eurostat. The X-axis shows bilateral shipments by road (euros) aggregated
by country-pair-industry-year obtained from the ERFT survey.




                                                   50
                 Figure A.6: Correlation with aggregate international trade data




Notes: The figures show the correlation between exports and shipments in the ERFT survey in euros
in each industry. The Y-axis represents (log) bilateral trade (euros) by country-pair-industry-year using
international trade data from Eurostat. The X-axis shows bilateral shipments by road (euros) aggregated
by country-pair-industry-year obtained from the ERFT survey.




                                                   51
                                 Figure A.7: Out-of-sample Estimates




Notes: These figures shows the out-of sample check to confirm the performance of the price imputation
methodology. Each figure reports the (log) price per kg of exports of France, Germany, Spain and UK to
all the countries in our sample by industry and year. The X-axis reports the estimated (log) price per kg of
shipment in our regional trade dataset aggregated at the country-pair-industry-year level, predicted when
we drop France, Germany, Spain and UK respectively.




                                                    52
                             Figure A.8: Country-to-Country Estimates




Notes: This figure shows the correlation between the price per kg of exports in international trade data
and the imputed prices in our sample. The Y-axis reports the (log) price per kg of exports by country-pair,
industry and year. The X-axis reports the estimated (log) price per kg of shipment in our regional trade
dataset aggregated at the country-pair-industry-year level.




                                                    53
                     Figure A.9: Composition of regions in block 1




             A) Control group                               B) Treated group
Notes: This figure shows the regions that are part of the block. The shading represents the
frequency with which each region appears (as a part of a pair) in the control group (first panel)
and treated group (second panel) in the block.




                                               54
                    Figure A.10: Composition of regions in block 2




             A) Control group                               B) Treated group
Notes: This figure shows the regions that are part of the block. The shading represents the
frequency with which each region appears (as a part of a pair) in the control group (first panel)
and treated group (second panel) in the block.




                                               55
                    Figure A.11: Composition of regions in block 3




             A) Control group                               B) Treated group
Notes: This figure shows the regions that are part of the block. The shading represents the
frequency with which each region appears (as a part of a pair) in the control group (first panel)
and treated group (second panel) in the block.




                                               56
                    Figure A.12: Composition of regions in block 5




             A) Control group                               B) Treated group
Notes: This figure shows the regions that are part of the block. The shading represents the
frequency with which each region appears (as a part of a pair) in the control group (first panel)
and treated group (second panel) in the block.




                                               57
                    Figure A.13: Composition of regions in block 6




             A) Control group                               B) Treated group
Notes: This figure shows the regions that are part of the block. The shading represents the
frequency with which each region appears (as a part of a pair) in the control group (first panel)
and treated group (second panel) in the block.




                                               58
                    Figure A.14: Composition of regions in block 7




             A) Control group                               B) Treated group
Notes: This figure shows the regions that are part of the block. The shading represents the
frequency with which each region appears (as a part of a pair) in the control group (first panel)
and treated group (second panel) in the block.




                                               59
                    Figure A.15: Composition of regions in block 8




             A) Control group                               B) Treated group
Notes: This figure shows the regions that are part of the block. The shading represents the
frequency with which each region appears (as a part of a pair) in the control group (first panel)
and treated group (second panel) in the block.




                                               60
                    Figure A.16: Composition of regions in block 9




             A) Control group                               B) Treated group
Notes: This figure shows the regions that are part of the block. The shading represents the
frequency with which each region appears (as a part of a pair) in the control group (first panel)
and treated group (second panel) in the block.




                                               61
                          Figure A.17: Border effect - Industry level




                                                           1
0




                                                           0
-1




                                                           -1
-2




                                                           -2
-3




                                                           -3
     1   2      3   4     5     6    7   8        9             1   2       3      4     5     6    7     8       9
                        Block                                                          Block

             Agri         Mining         FBT                            Textiles        Wood            Coke/pet
0




                                                           0
-1




                                                           -1
-2




                                                           -2
-3




                                                           -3




     1   2     3    4     5     6    7   8        9             1   2       3      4     5     6    7     8       9
                        Block                                                          Block

             Chem       Non-metals       Metals                         Machin.          Vehicles        Others




 Notes: These figures shows the coefficient of the dummy Border estimated with specification (11)
 in each block and industry (dot). The confidence interval for the coefficient is represented by the
 vertical lines.




                                                      62
                                                       Figure A.18: Participation rates across industries

                               Industry 1                                                  Industry 3                                                  Industry 4                                                  Industry 5




                                                                                                                                                                                   .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8
.5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                            .2 .4 .6 .8 1




                                                                                                                                           1
  Participation rate




                                                              Participation rate




                                                                                                                         Participation rate




                                                                                                                                                                                    Participation rate
                                                                                                                        .7    .8     .9
                       1   2   3   4     5 6   7   8    9                          1   2   3   4     5 6   7   8   9                           1   2   3   4     5 6   7   8   9                           1   2   3   4     5 6   7   8   9
                                       Block                                                       Block                                                       Block                                                       Block

                           Control             Treated                                 Control             Treated                                 Control             Treated                                 Control             Treated



                               Industry 6                                                  Industry 7                                                  Industry 8                                                  Industry 9
                                                            0 .2 .4 .6 .8
.6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                                                                                        .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
 Participation rate




                                                             Participation rate




                                                                                                                        Participation rate




                                                                                                                                                                                     Participation rate
                                                                                                                                                                                   .4     .6    .8
                       1   2   3   4     5 6   7   8    9                          1   2   3   4     5 6   7   8   9                           1   2   3   4     5 6   7   8   9                           1   2   3   4     5 6   7   8   9
                                       Block                                                       Block                                                       Block                                                       Block

                           Control             Treated                                 Control             Treated                                 Control             Treated                                 Control             Treated



                               Industry 10                                                 Industry 11                                                 Industry 12                                                 Industry 13




                                                                                                                                                                                   .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
.6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                            .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                                                                                        .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
 Participation rate




                                                              Participation rate




                                                                                                                          Participation rate




                                                                                                                                                                                     Participation rate
                       1   2   3   4     5 6   7   8    9                          1   2   3   4     5 6   7   8   9                           1   2   3   4     5 6   7   8   9                           1   2   3   4     5 6   7   8   9
                                       Block                                                       Block                                                       Block                                                       Block

                           Control             Treated                                 Control             Treated                                 Control             Treated                                 Control             Treated




Notes: These figures shows the participation rate (share of region pairs that display positive trade)
in the control group, red circles, and in the treated group, green circles.




                                                                                           B         Additional Tables




                                                                                                                       63
                                                Table B.1: Industries in ERFT survey

     Industry   Label                                                                                                                     Sample
        1       Products of agriculture, hunting, and forestry; fish and other fishing products                                           1
        2       Coal and lignite; crude petroleum and natural gas                                                                         0
        3       Metal ores and other mining and quarrying products; peat; uranium and thorium ores                                        1
        4       Food products, beverages and tobacco                                                                                      1
        5       Textiles and textile products; leather and leather products                                                               1
        6       Wood and products of wood and cork (except furniture);pulp, paper and paper; printed matter and recorded media            1
        7       Coke and refined petroleum products                                                                                       1
        8       Chemicals, chemical products, and man-made fibers; rubber and plasticproducts; nuclear fuel                               1
        9       Other non-metallic mineral products                                                                                       1
        10      Basic metals; fabricated metal products, except machinery and equipment                                                   1
        11      Machinery and equipment n.e.c.; communication equipment; medical, precision and optical instruments; watches and clocks   1
        12      Transport equipment                                                                                                       1
        13      Furniture; other manufactured goods n.e.c.                                                                                1
        14      Secondary raw materials; municipal wastes and other wastes                                                                0




64
        15      Mail, parcels                                                                                                             0
        16      Equipment and material utilized inthe transport of goods                                                                  0
        17      Goods moved in the course of household and office removals                                                                0
        18      Grouped goods                                                                                                             0
        19      Unidentifiable goods: goods which for any reason cannot be identified and therefore cannot be assigned to groups 01-16    0
        20      Other goods n.e.c.                                                                                                        0
                   Table B.2: Sample of Regions

Country   Region    Label
  AT      AT11      Burgenland (AT)
  AT      AT12      Niederösterreich
  AT      AT13      Wien
  AT      AT21      Kärnten
  AT      AT22      Steiermark
  AT      AT31      Oberösterreich
  AT      AT32      Salzburg
  AT      AT33      Tirol
  AT      AT34      Vorarlberg
  BE      BE10      Bruxelles-Capitale/Brussels Hoofdstedelijk Gewest
  BE      BE21      Prov. Antwerpen
  BE      BE22      Prov. Limburg (BE)
  BE      BE23      Prov. Oost-Vlaanderen
  BE      BE24      Prov. Vlaams-Brabant
  BE      BE25      Prov. West-Vlaanderen
  BE      BE31      Prov. Brabant Wallon
  BE      BE32      Prov. Hainaut
  BE      BE33      Prov. Liège
  BE      BE34      Prov. Luxembourg (BE)
  BE      BE35      Prov. Namur
  BG      BG31      Severozapaden
  BG      BG32      Severen tsentralen
  BG      BG33      Severoiztochen
  BG      BG34      Yugoiztochen
  BG      BG41      Yugozapaden
  BG      BG42      Yuzhen tsentralen
  CZ      CZ01      Praha
  CZ      CZ02      Stední Cechy
  CZ      CZ03      Jihozápad
  CZ      CZ04      Severozápad
                                              Continued on next page


                                  65
            Table B.2 ­ Continued from previous page
Country   Region   Label
  CZ      CZ05     Severovýchod
  CZ      CZ06     Jihovýchod
  CZ      CZ07     Stední Morava
  CZ      CZ08     Moravskoslezsko
  DE      DE11     Stuttgart
  DE      DE12     Karlsruhe
  DE      DE13     Freiburg
  DE      DE14     Tübingen
  DE      DE21     Oberbayern
  DE      DE22     Niederbayern
  DE      DE23     Oberpfalz
  DE      DE24     Oberfranken
  DE      DE25     Mittelfranken
  DE      DE26     Unterfranken
  DE      DE27     Schwaben
  DE      DE30     Berlin
  DE      DE40     Brandenburg
  DE      DE50     Bremen
  DE      DE60     Hamburg
  DE      DE71     Darmstadt
  DE      DE72     Gießen
  DE      DE73     Kassel
  DE      DE80     Mecklenburg-Vorpommern
  DE      DE91     Braunschweig
  DE      DE92     Hannover
  DE      DE93     Lüneburg
  DE      DE94     Weser-Ems
  DE      DEA1     Düsseldorf
  DE      DEA2     Köln
  DE      DEA3     Münster
  DE      DEA4     Detmold
                                            Continued on next page


                                 66
            Table B.2 ­ Continued from previous page
Country   Region   Label
  DE      DEA5     Arnsberg
  DE      DEB1     Koblenz
  DE      DEB2     Trier
  DE      DEB3     Rheinhessen-Pfalz
  DE      DEC0     Saarland
  DE      DED2     Dresden
  DE      DED4     Chemnitz
  DE      DED5     Leipzig
  DE      DEE0     Sachsen-Anhalt
  DE      DEF0     Schleswig-Holstein
  DE      DEG0     Thüringen
  DK      DK01     Hovedstaden
  DK      DK02     Sjælland
  DK      DK03     Syddanmark
  DK      DK04     Midtjylland
  DK      DK05     Nordjylland
  EL       EL30    Attiki
  EL       EL41    Voreio Aigaio
  EL       EL42    Notio Aigaio
  EL       EL43    Kriti
  EL       EL51    Anatoliki Makedonia, Thraki
  EL       EL52    Kentriki Makedonia
  EL       EL53    Dytiki Makedonia
  EL       EL54    Thessalia
  EL       EL61    Ipeiros
  EL       EL62    Ionia Nisia
  EL       EL63    Dytiki Ellada
  EL       EL64    Sterea Ellada
  EL       EL65    Peloponnisos
  ES       ES11    Galicia
  ES       ES12    Principado de Asturias
                                            Continued on next page


                                  67
            Table B.2 ­ Continued from previous page
Country   Region   Label
  ES       ES13    Cantabria
  ES       ES21    País Vasco
  ES       ES22    Comunidad Foral de Navarra
  ES       ES23    La Rioja
  ES       ES24    Aragón
  ES       ES30    Comunidad de Madrid
  ES       ES41    Castilla y León
  ES       ES42    Castilla-La Mancha
  ES       ES43    Extremadura
  ES       ES51    Cataluña
  ES       ES52    Comunidad Valenciana
  ES       ES53    Illes Balears
  ES       ES61    Andalucía
  ES       ES62    Región de Murcia
  FI       FI19    Länsi-Suomi
  FI       FI18    Helsinki-Uusimaa+Etelä-Suomi
  FI       FI1D    Pohjois- ja Itä-Suomi
  FR      FR10     Île de France
  FR      FR21     Champagne-Ardenne
  FR      FR22     Picardie
  FR      FR23     Haute-Normandie
  FR      FR24     Centre
  FR      FR25     Basse-Normandie
  FR      FR26     Bourgogne
  FR      FR30     Nord - Pas-de-Calais
  FR      FR41     Lorraine
  FR      FR42     Alsace
  FR      FR43     Franche-Comté
  FR      FR51     Pays de la Loire
  FR      FR52     Bretagne
  FR      FR53     Poitou-Charentes
                                            Continued on next page


                                   68
            Table B.2 ­ Continued from previous page
Country   Region   Label
  FR      FR61     Aquitaine
  FR      FR62     Midi-Pyrénées
  FR      FR63     Limousin
  FR      FR71     Rhône-Alpes
  FR      FR72     Auvergne
  FR      FR81     Languedoc-Roussillon
  FR      FR82     Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur
  FR      FR83     Corse
  HR      HR03     Jadranska Hrvatska
  HR      HR04     Kontinentalna Hrvatska
  HU      HU10     Közép-Magyarország
  HU      HU21     Közép-Dunántúl
  HU      HU22     Nyugat-Dunántúl
  HU      HU23     Dél-Dunántúl
  HU      HU31     Észak-Magyarország
  HU      HU32     Észak-Alföld
  HU      HU33     Dél-Alföld
  IE       IE01    Border, Midland and Western
  IE       IE02    Southern and Eastern
  IT       ITC1    Piemonte
  IT       ITC2    Valle d'Aosta/Vallée d'Aoste
  IT       ITC3    Liguria
  IT       ITC4    Lombardia
  IT       ITF1    Abruzzo
  IT       ITF2    Molise
  IT       ITF3    Campania
  IT       ITF4    Puglia
  IT       ITF5    Basilicata
  IT       ITF6    Calabria
  IT      ITG1     Sicilia
  IT      ITG2     Sardegna
                                             Continued on next page


                                  69
            Table B.2 ­ Continued from previous page
Country   Region   Label
  IT      ITH1     Provincia Autonoma di Bolzano/Bozen
  IT      ITH2     Provincia Autonoma di Trento
  IT      ITH3     Veneto
  IT      ITH4     Friuli-Venezia Giulia
  IT      ITH5     Emilia-Romagna
  IT       ITI1    Toscana
  IT       ITI2    Umbria
  IT       ITI3    Marche
  IT       ITI4    Lazio
  NL      NL11     Groningen
  NL      NL12     Friesland (NL)
  NL      NL13     Drenthe
  NL      NL21     Overijssel
  NL      NL22     Gelderland
  NL      NL23     Flevoland
  NL      NL31     Utrecht
  NL      NL32     Noord-Holland
  NL      NL33     Zuid-Holland
  NL      NL34     Zeeland
  NL      NL41     Noord-Brabant
  NL      NL42     Limburg (NL)
  PL       PL11    Lódzkie
  PL       PL12    Mazowieckie
  PL       PL21    Malopolskie
  PL       PL22    lskie
  PL       PL31    Lubelskie
  PL       PL32    Podkarpackie
  PL       PL33    witokrzyskie
  PL       PL34    Podlaskie
  PL       PL41    Wielkopolskie
  PL       PL42    Zachodniopomorskie
                                            Continued on next page


                                 70
            Table B.2 ­ Continued from previous page
Country   Region   Label
  PL       PL43    Lubuskie
  PL       PL51    Dolnolskie
  PL       PL52    Opolskie
  PL       PL61    Kujawsko-Pomorskie
  PL       PL62    Warmisko-Mazurskie
  PL       PL63    Pomorskie
  PT      PT11     Norte
  PT      PT15     Algarve
  PT      PT16     Centro (PT)
  PT      PT17     Lisboa
  PT      PT18     Alentejo
  RO      RO11     Nord-Vest
  RO      RO12     Centru
  RO      RO21     Nord-Est
  RO      RO22     Sud-Est
  RO      RO31     Sud - Muntenia
  RO      RO32     Bucureti - Ilfov
  RO      RO41     Sud-Vest Oltenia
  RO      RO42     Vest
  SE       SE11    Stockholm
  SE       SE12    Östra Mellansverige
  SE       SE21    Småland med öarna
  SE       SE22    Sydsverige
  SE       SE23    Västsverige
  SE       SE31    Norra Mellansverige
  SE       SE32    Mellersta Norrland
  SE       SE33    Övre Norrland
  SI       SI03    Vzhodna Slovenija
  SI       SI04    Zahodna Slovenija
  SK      SK01     Bratislavský kraj
  SK      SK02     Západné Slovensko
                                            Continued on next page


                                 71
            Table B.2 ­ Continued from previous page
Country   Region   Label
  SK      SK03     Stredné Slovensko
  SK      SK04     Východné Slovensko
  UK      UKC1     Tees Valley and Durham
  UK      UKC2     Northumberland and Tyne and Wear
  UK      UKD1     Cumbria
  UK      UKD3     Greater Manchester
  UK      UKD4     Lancashire
  UK      UKD6     Cheshire
  UK      UKD7     Merseyside
  UK      UKE1     East Yorkshire and Northern Lincolnshire
  UK      UKE2     North Yorkshire
  UK      UKE3     South Yorkshire
  UK      UKE4     West Yorkshire
  UK      UKF1     Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire
  UK      UKF2     Leicestershire, Rutland and Northamptonshire
  UK      UKF3     Lincolnshire
  UK      UKG1     Herefordshire, Worcestershire and Warwickshire
  UK      UKG2     Shropshire and Staffordshire
  UK      UKG3     West Midlands
  UK      UKH1     East Anglia
  UK      UKH2     Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire
  UK      UKH3     Essex
  UK      UKI1     Inner London
  UK      UKI2     Outer London
  UK      UKJ1     Berkshire, Buckinghamshire and Oxfordshire
  UK      UKJ2     Surrey, East and West Sussex
  UK      UKJ3     Hampshire and Isle of Wight
  UK      UKJ4     Kent
  UK      UKK1     Gloucestershire, Wiltshire and Bristol/Bath area
  UK      UKK2     Dorset and Somerset
  UK      UKK3     Cornwall and Isles of Scilly
                                              Continued on next page


                                  72
            Table B.2 ­ Continued from previous page
Country   Region   Label
  UK      UKK4     Devon
  UK      UKL1     West Wales and The Valleys
  UK      UKL2     East Wales
  UK      UKM2     Eastern Scotland
  UK      UKM3     South Western Scotland
  UK      UKM5     North Eastern Scotland
  UK      UKM6     Highlands and Islands
  UK      UKN0     Northern Ireland
  CH      CH01     Lake Geneva Region
  CH      CH02     Espace Mittelland
  CH      CH03     Northwestern Switzerland
  CH      CH04     Zurich
  CH      CH05     Eastern Switzerland
  CH      CH06     Central Switzerland
  CH      CH07     Ticino
  NO      NO01     Oslo og Akershus
  NO      NO02     Hedmark og Oppland
  NO      NO03     Sør-Østlandet
  NO      NO04     Agder og Rogaland
  NO      NO05     Vestlandet
  NO      NO06     Trøndelag
  NO      NO07     Nord-Norge




                                73
                          Table B.3: Price regressions

                                DEP.VAR: Log Price            DEP.VAR: Log Price

                                           (1)                           (2)

 log(Dist)o,d                                                        0.451***
                                                                      (0.012)
 Constant                              10.550***                       0.728
                                         (1.184)                      (1.194)
 Industry-Year FE                          Yes                          Yes
 Origin Variables                          Yes                          Yes
 Destination Variables                     Yes                          Yes

 Obs.                                     48995                        48995
 R-squared                                0.525                        0.539
Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses.* significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, ***
significant at 1%. First column displays the results including only origin and destination
level variables. The second column reports the results when adding the bilateral distance
between origin and destination as a determinant of export prices.




                                            74
                                                     Table B.4: Average border effect - Complete table

 Dep. Var: ln(Sn,m )         Block 1        Block 2         Block 3        Block 4         Block 5        Block 6         Block 7        Block 8        Block 9
                               (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)             (8)            (9)
 Border                     -1.786***      -1.721***      -1.699***       -1.768***      -1.686***       -1.796***      -1.687***       -1.754***      -1.858***
                             (0.182)        (0.178)         (0.175)        (0.175)         (0.238)        (0.289)         (0.268)        (0.290)        (0.201)

 Distance                   -0.899**       -1.378***      -1.643***        -0.618*        -1.949**         -0.532        -1.105**       -1.066***        -1.118
                             (0.440)        (0.276)         (0.377)        (0.315)         (0.828)        (0.696)         (0.497)        (0.372)        (1.873)

 Insularity                   1.120         -0.861**         -0.157         -0.491       -1.777***        -0.913**      -1.596***       -1.554***        -1.024
                             (0.754)        (0.376)         (0.430)        (0.412)         (0.534)        (0.418)         (0.351)        (0.319)        (0.862)

 Mountain Ranges              0.014         -0.137*        -0.180**         -0.134         -0.322*         -0.088        -0.229**       -0.257***        -0.095
                             (0.074)        (0.071)         (0.080)        (0.082)         (0.175)        (0.102)         (0.089)        (0.097)        (0.243)

 River Basin                  0.220           0.141          0.132        0.477***          0.155        0.514***         0.413**        0.348**         0.594
                             (0.182)        (0.123)         (0.168)        (0.166)         (0.203)        (0.181)         (0.192)        (0.174)        (0.458)

 Remoteness                 2.236***       3.236***        3.339***        1.335**         3.412**          0.803         2.086**        2.167**         1.356
                             (0.625)        (0.783)         (0.595)        (0.606)         (1.557)        (1.219)         (0.889)        (0.833)        (2.833)

 Number of Borders          7.058***       6.695***        7.041***       10.779***      11.294***       11.833***       9.234***       8.091***         0.420
                             (1.756)        (1.970)         (2.034)        (1.730)         (2.064)        (2.783)         (2.792)        (3.063)        (2.944)

 Constant                  -52.432***     -53.962***      -55.214***     -70.492***      -79.496***     -74.367***      -63.052***     -56.456***        -4.131
                            (11.534)        (12.696)       (12.979)        (10.102)       (12.606)        (15.500)       (15.239)        (16.468)       (20.347)
 N                             645             813           1024            1364            968            1267           2011            2948           637
 R2                            .572           .533            .501            .47            .375           .388            .31            .285           .299

Notes: Standard errors clustered at the country-pair level, are in parentheses.* significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%. Dependent variable
is the (log) normalized market share of n in m. Border is a dummy for international border. Number of Borders is the average of the share of international
borders that are faced by n and m. Distance is (log) bilateral distance between origin and destination in kilometers, Insularity takes value 1 if one of the regions
is an island. Mountain Ranges is the highest difference in elevation between two regions in metres (difference between highest point and lowest point, in logs),
River Basin takes value 1 if the region pair shares a river basin and Remoteness is the log of the average remoteness of the origin and the destination regions.




                                                                               75
                                               Table B.5: Average border effect - No number of borders

 Dep. Var: ln(Sn,m )         Block 1        Block 2         Block 3        Block 4         Block 5        Block 6         Block 7        Block 8        Block 9
                               (1)             (2)              (3)           (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)             (8)            (9)
 Border                     -1.478***      -1.382***      -1.336***       -1.166***      -1.092***       -1.162***      -1.215***       -1.350***      -1.841***
                             (0.193)        (0.208)         (0.174)        (0.202)         (0.210)        (0.216)         (0.189)        (0.199)        (0.209)

 Distance                    -0.807*       -1.508***      -1.917***        -0.660*        -2.161**         -0.843        -1.289**       -1.190***        -1.098
                             (0.458)        (0.327)         (0.439)        (0.349)         (0.898)        (0.771)         (0.523)        (0.361)        (1.843)

 Insularity                  1.298**        -0.833**         -0.259         -0.653       -2.202***       -1.419***      -1.969***       -1.836***        -1.020
                             (0.520)        (0.379)         (0.380)        (0.417)         (0.588)        (0.490)         (0.398)        (0.303)        (0.853)

 Mountain Ranges              -0.002         -0.110          -0.137         -0.079          -0.269         -0.079        -0.211**        -0.242**        -0.090
                             (0.091)        (0.089)         (0.091)        (0.106)         (0.193)        (0.106)         (0.093)        (0.098)        (0.232)

 River Basin                 0.471**         0.300*          0.212        0.732***          0.315        0.635***         0.470**        0.409**         0.606
                             (0.219)        (0.171)         (0.212)        (0.232)         (0.257)        (0.210)         (0.198)        (0.194)        (0.431)

 Remoteness                 2.795***       3.886***        4.087***       2.213***        4.674***         2.384*        3.327***       3.228***         1.368
                             (0.735)        (1.005)         (0.797)        (0.776)         (1.691)        (1.211)         (0.913)        (0.720)        (2.838)

 Constant                  -13.122***     -16.590***      -15.672***     -10.163***      -17.628***     -10.528***      -13.645***     -13.189***        -1.784
                             (3.456)        (5.477)         (3.780)        (3.555)         (5.732)        (3.785)         (3.384)        (3.466)        (8.180)
 N                             645             813           1024            1364            968            1267           2011            2948           637
 R2                            .499           .473            .454           .384            .302           .314            .276           .262           .299

Notes: Standard errors clustered at the country-pair level, are in parentheses.* significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%. Dependent variable
is the (log) normalized market share of n in m. Border is a dummy for international border. Distance is (log) bilateral distance between origin and destination
in kilometers, Insularity takes value 1 if one of the regions is an island. Mountain Ranges is the highest difference in elevation between two regions in metres
(difference between highest point and lowest point, in logs), River Basin takes value 1 if the region pair shares a river basin and Remoteness is the log of the
average remoteness of the origin and the destination regions.




                                                                               76
     Table B.6: Summary statistics of covariates by block: Conditional on Border in 1910=0

                                        (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)
                                    mean/sd       mean/sd      mean/sd      mean/sd      mean/sd       mean/sd
 Distance                            271.968      371.468       455.596      535.897      657.689      665.057
                                       97.15       113.65       131.67        170.34       217.44       274.37
 Insularity                            0.072        0.098        0.086        0.040         0.050        0.056
                                       0.26         0.30          0.28         0.20         0.22         0.23
 Mountain Ranges                       5.532        5.873        6.114        6.157         6.344        6.552
                                       0.98         0.90          0.81         0.78         0.81         0.80
 River Basin                           0.203        0.170        0.174        0.229         0.275        0.689
                                       0.40         0.38          0.38         0.42         0.45         0.46
 Remoteness                         1067.843      1028.199     1003.654      992.166     1001.298      1036.640
                                      235.34       206.65       183.78        164.26       142.07       144.14
 Estimated propensity score            0.170        0.311        0.439        0.559         0.685        0.814
                                       0.04         0.04          0.04         0.04         0.04         0.04
 N                                      775          552          466          375           298          161

Notes: This table reports the mean and standard deviation of each geographical covariate and the propensity
score in each block. Distance is bilateral distance between origin and destination in kilometers, Insularity takes
value 1 if one of the regions is an island. Mountain Ranges is the highest difference in elevation between two
regions in metres (difference between highest point and lowest point), River Basin takes value 1 if the region pair
shares a river basin and Remoteness is the average remoteness of the origin and the destination regions.




                                                        77
          Table B.7: Balancing test of covariates by block: Conditional on Border in 1910=0

                                 (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
          Distance              0.0219     -0.0256        0.0362     -0.0197    -0.0510    -0.141
                               (0.0388)   (0.0339)        (0.0321)   (0.0382)   (0.0513)   (0.0779)

          Insularity          -0.0862     -0.114      0.000715       0.0277     0.211      0.333
                               (0.0240)   (0.0273)        (0.0263)   (0.0202)   (0.0272)   (0.0410)

          Mountain Ranges      -0.353     -0.227          -0.0558    0.162      0.701      0.692
                               (0.0910)   (0.0836)        (0.0755)   (0.0806)   (0.103)    (0.160)

          River Basin          -0.00557    0.0327         -0.0474    0.0168     0.0455     -0.0274
                               (0.0376)   (0.0351)        (0.0355)   (0.0435)   (0.0609)   (0.0982)

          Remoteness           0.0349      -0.0208        -0.00301   0.00436    0.0235     -0.104
                               (0.0188)   (0.0172)        (0.0154)   (0.0150)   (0.0170)   (0.0252)
          N                      775         552            466        375        298        161

         Notes: This table reports the difference in means between treated and control re-
         gion pairs for each geographical covariate by block (defined as control minus treated).
         * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%, standard errors in
         parenthesis. Distance is bilateral distance between origin and destination in kilome-
         ters, Insularity takes value 1 if one of the regions is an island. Mountain Ranges is
         the highest difference in elevation between two regions in metres (difference between
         highest point and lowest point), River Basin takes value 1 if the region pair shares a
         river basin and Remoteness is the average remoteness of the origin and the destination
         regions.



              C      Construction of European regional trade dataset

in this section we explain the methodology we follow to construct the matrix of regional trade
flows in Europe. First, we explain the data sets used for the price imputation procedure.
Second, we provide additional details about how we clean and use the European Road Freight
dataset (ERFT).


C.1   Regional price data


The subsample of region to country level trade data is collected individually for our subset
of four countries:


                                                     78
France The French Douane administration provides international trade data for the dif-
ferent Regions and Departements in France. The data is available quarterly for the years
2011 and 2014 at the industry level (4 digits of disaggregation of CPA4) for the different
origin/destination countries. The trade flows are collected in value and weight, both imports
and exports.31 We use a 2 digits industrial disaggregation (22 industries).


Germany The German agency of statistics, Destatis, provides Foreign trade data for the 16
German states (Bundeslander). The data is available monthly for the years 2008 to November
2016 at the industry level (1, 2 or 3 digits of aggregation) for the different origin/destination
countries. The trade flows are collected in value and weight (Tons). For this paper we use
annual data for the years 2011 to 2014, at a 2 digits level of disaggregation (30 industries).32


Spain The Spanish secretary of commerce provides Foreign trade data for the 17 Spanish
regions (Comunidades Autonomas). The data is available monthly for the years 1995 to 2015
at different industry levels for the different origin/destination countries. The trade flows are
collected in value, not weight. For this paper we use annual data for the years 2011 to 2014,
at a 2 digits level of disaggregation (22 industries).33


United Kingdom The UK Customs department provides Foreign trade data for the 12
regions in the UK. The data is available monthly for the years 2009 to 2016 at different
industry levels (several digits available) for the different origin/destination countries. The
trade flows are collected in value and weight. For this paper we use annual data for the years
2011 to 2014, at a 2 digit level of disaggregation.34

                                       Table C.1: Foreign Trade Sample

 Country          Unit                     Freqy                    Years     Industries          Unit
 Spain            Com Autonoma (17)- NUTS2 Monthly                  2011-2014 22, 99              value and   Tons
 Germany          Bundeslander (16) -NUTS1 Monthly                  2011-2014 30, 211             value and   Tons
 France           Departement (101)-NUTS3  Trimester                2011-2014 22 ,>200            value and   Tons
 UK               Region (12)-NUTS1        Quarterly                2011-2014 67                  value and   Tons


 31
    The   data   can   be   accessed at http://lekiosque.finances.gouv.fr/portail_default.asp.
 32
    The   data   can   be   accessed at https://www-genesis.destatis.de/genesis/online/data.
 33
    The   data   can   be   accessed at http://datacomex.comercio.es/principal_comex_es.aspx.
 34
    The   data   can   be   access at: Statistical department of the United Kingdom government.



                                                       79
We aggregate each dataset to a 20 industry NST 2007 classification (European classification
system for transport statistics), which is the classification used in the European Road Freight
Transport Survey. This subsample of 58 regions allows us to observe 2,688 region to country
trade flows (region-country pairs) each year.


C.2     Variables for price imputation and robustness checks


We put together an extensive database of economic and geographic characteristics at the
regional and country to use as determinants of price levels across regions. Our preferred
specification is to pool all time periods and industries in the following regression:

                              it   t  t-1   t  t-1
                          ln Pnm = n Xn   + m Zm   + dnm + it + eit
                                                                 nm ,


       it
where Pnm is the unit price of exports of industry i shipped from origin n to destination m
in year t. The price of exports is calculated as the ratio between the value of exports and
the weight of exports for each industry, origin, destination and year. Table C.2 reports the
complete list of variables that we include as controls.35 In addition, we also compute the
geodesic distance between the centroid of the origin and the destination region, and we use
it as a proxy for bilateral distance dnm .
      To test the accuracy of our predicted prices, we collect data of country to country trade
flows at the year-industry level from Eurostat dataset COMEXT. Comext is Eurostat's refer-
ence database for detailed statistics on international trade in goods. It provides information
about the value and quantity of the trade transaction, allowing us to compute the price per
kilo of exports. We download the data for the years in our sample, 2011-2017, from the
website: http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/newxtweb/.


C.3     European Road Freight Transport survey


The European Road Freight Transport survey microdata is a database collected by Eurostat
in order to understand the magnitude of the shipment of goods across Europe. The ERFT
survey covers 27 EU countries (except Malta) and EFTA countries (except Iceland). Each
member state collects statistics on the carriage of goods by road by means of any road
freight vehicle from a representative sample of road vehicles collected from the national
 35
      EuroRegional Map: https://eurogeographics.org/products-and-services/euroregionalmap/


                                                   80
               Table C.2: Explanatory Variables for Price regressions


         Label          Included               Level                          Source
log(Pop Dens)           Both       Region   (NUTS2),   year          Eurostat
log(GDP pc)             Both       Region   (NUTS2),   year          Eurostat
log(Life Exp.)          Both       Region   (NUTS2),   year          Eurostat
log(Total Emp.)         Both       Region   (NUTS2),   year          Eurostat
Manuf. Sh. of Emp.      Both       Region   (NUTS2),   year          Eurostat
Low Tech. Sh. of Emp.   Both       Region   (NUTS2),   year          Eurostat
Edu (None) Sh.          Origin     Region   (NUTS2),   year   2011   Eurostat 2011 CENSUS
Edu (ISEC3) Sh.         Origin     Region   (NUTS2),   year   2011   Eurostat 2011 CENSUS
Edu (ISEC6) Sh.         Origin     Region   (NUTS2),   year   2011   Eurostat 2011 CENSUS
Ind Agri. Sh.           Origin     Region   (NUTS2),   year   2011   Eurostat 2011 CENSUS
Ind Manu. Sh.           Origin     Region   (NUTS2),   year   2011   Eurostat 2011 CENSUS
Ind. Prof/Science Sh.   Origin     Region   (NUTS2),   year   2011   Eurostat 2011 CENSUS
Ind. Fin. Sh.           Origin     Region   (NUTS2),   year   2011   Eurostat 2011 CENSUS
Ind. Pub. Sh            Origin     Region   (NUTS2),   year   2011   Eurostat 2011 CENSUS
Birth (Other EU) Sh.    Origin     Region   (NUTS2),   year   2011   Eurostat 2011 CENSUS
Birth (Non-EU) Sh.      Origin     Region   (NUTS2),   year   2011   Eurostat 2011 CENSUS
log(Heating h)          Both       Region   (NUTS2),   year          Eurostat
log(av sun h)           Both       Region   (NUTS2)                  PVGIS 5 solar irradiation
log(max_sun h)          Both       Region   (NUTS2)                  PVGIS 5 solar irradiation
log(distRiver)          Both       Region   (NUTS2)                  EuroRegional map
log(distCoast)          Both       Region   (NUTS2)                  EuroRegional map




                                        81
vehicle registry. In case such a registry is not available, the sample will be selected either
from the registry of licensed road haulage operators or the registry of persons licensed to
operate such vehicles. In particular, Eurostat provides three interlinked datasets that contain
the micro data at the vehicle, journey and goods level.
   The Vehicle dataset (Dataset A1) records characteristics of each individual road vehi-
cle and besides identifying each respondent vehicle contains information such as the age,
axle configuration, unladen weight, total permissible weight and total kilometers performed
during the survey.
   The Journey dataset (Dataset A2) contains information about specific journeys performed
by a vehicle identified in the A1 dataset. Each journey is assigned a journey identifier and can
be linked to the corresponding vehicle in the A1 dataset that performs it. Journey related
variables include gross weight of goods transported, place of loading and unloading (reported
at a NUTS 2 level of disaggregation), actual distance travelled, tonne-km effected, degree
of loading in terms of total volume and countries crossed in transit during each journey.
Notably, survey distinguishes different journey types based on their laden/unladen status
and the number of distinct transport operations involved. As a result four main journey
types are identified: Laden-Involving one single transport operation, laden-Involving multiple
transport operations, laden-collection/distribution and unladen. Journeys that involve 5 or
more distinct locations are considered to be of collection/distribution type.
   The goods dataset (Dataset A3) each journey is broken down to represent specific ship-
ments of goods between two geographical units. Each goods' transfer between any two
geographical units is identified and linked to the specific journey it is part of. Journeys that
involve either multiple destinations for loading/unloading and/or different types of goods
are further broken down in the goods dataset (Dataset A3). Each observation in Dataset A3
represents a flow of one type of good between two specific geographical units.


Region border changes Throughout the paper we use the classification NUTS2013 for
most regions for consistency. In cases for which there was a change, a region split in more
regions, from NUTS2010 to NUTS2013 we use the aggregated NUTS2010. This is the case
for regions FI1B and FI1C (NUTS2013) in Finland, which we aggregate for all years in our
data and corresponds to FI18 (NUTS2010). For London area regions UKI3, UKI4, UKI5,
UKI6 and UKI7 (NUTS2013) we use the aggregated UKI1 (UKI3 + UKI4) and UKI2 (UKI5
+ UKI6 + UKI7) NUTS2010 regions.


                                              82
Cleaning data To create our matrix of weights of goods shipped between each region-
pair we merge the good-level dataset (A3) for the years 2011 to 2017. We drop "unladen"
journeys. We also drop "distribution" journeys, since these are journeys that involve five or
more stops in distinct locations considered to be of collection/distribution nature. These
are more likely associated with distribution or logistics than with trade. We then normalise
the region identifiers to the 2013 NUTS version, since there are some regions that change
name between 2011 and 2017. Finally, we apply the weights provided by Eurostat to each
shipment to account for under-sampling of some journeys.
   We then aggregate the value traded across all industries by each region pair by adding up
the value traded in all industries for each region-pair in each year. Finally, to construct our
region-pair level dataset we take the average of the value traded by each region pair (n,m)
across all years 2011-2017.


                              D   Additional data sources

D.1   Construction of geographical variables


  1. Distance : We construct bilateral distance by calculating the length of the curve linking
      the central point of the origin region (centroid) and the central point of the destination
      region, in kilometers. We use a curve since we take into account the curvature of earth's
      surface. We compute the centroid as the center point of the polygone of the area of
      the region, using the software ArcGIS.

  2. Insularity : Dummy variable taking value one if there is the need to cross a sea to reach
      from one region to the other, and zero otherwise.

  3. Mountain ranges : Largest altitude difference between two regions, computed as the
      difference between the highest altitude point and the lowest altitude point along the
      straight line that joins the centre the origin region (centroid) and the centre of the
      destination region. To compute this maximum difference in altitude we use a topo-
      graphic layer of Europe. We compute the straight line segment that links each possible
      region-pair (centroid to centroid). We then compute the altitude at different intervals
      along the line (computed using the cells of the altitude raster) and keep the highest
      and the lowest points. Finally, we take the difference between the highest and the
      lowest point.


                                               83
4. River basin. Dummy variable taking value 1 if both regions belong to the same river
  basin. We consider the largest rivers in Europe. A map of the areas covered by
  each river basin is shown in figure D.1. We consider the major European rivers:
  Danube, Douro/Duero, Elbe, Ebro, Glomma, Garonne, Gota Alv, Odiana/Guadiana,
  Loire, Meuse/Maas, Maritsa, Oder, Ouse, Po, Rhein, Rhone, Seine, Severn, Tejo/Tajo,
  Thames, Tiber, Trent, Weser, Vistula.

5. Remoteness. We calculate the remoteness of a region as the sum of the bilateral
  distance from that region to every other region in the sample. Then, we calculate the
  remoteness of a pair as the average remoteness of both regions.

6. Number of borders We sum the number of borders of the origin region and the number
  of border of the destination region, and we take the log of the sum. We compute the
  number of borders of the origin as the number of regions in the sample minus one (the
  border of the origin with itself) minus the number of regions in the country that the
  origin region belongs to (regions with which the origin region does not have a border).
  We do the same for the destination.




                                          84
                                 Figure D.1: River Basins in our sample




      Notes: This figure shows the different river basins that we consider, represented by different colors
      (we repeat some colors when river basins are not contiguous).




D.2     Collection of historical borders


We thank Matteo Cervellati, Sara Lazzaroni, Giovanni Prarolo and Paolo Vanin for kindly
sharing their digitised data of historical borders in Europe from their paper Cervellati et al.
(2019). We use the shapefile provided by the authors to identify borders in 1910 between
our 269 regions.




                                                       85
