                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             MOMS' TIME--MARRIED OR NOT

                                     Daniel S. Hamermesh

                                      Working Paper 28317
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28317


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2021




No financial support was received for this project. Katie Genadek, Iga Magda and David Ribar
provided very useful comments, and Len Goff gave very helpful research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Daniel S. Hamermesh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Moms' Time--Married or Not
Daniel S. Hamermesh
NBER Working Paper No. 28317
January 2021
JEL No. I31,J12,J22

                                         ABSTRACT

Using time-diary data from the U.S. and six wealthy European countries, I demonstrate that non-
partnered mothers spend slightly less time performing childcare, but much less time in other
household activities than partnered mothers. Unpartnered mothers' total work time--paid work
and household production--is slightly less than partnered women's. In the U.S. but not elsewhere
they watch more television and engage in fewer other leisure activities. These differences are
independent of any differences in age, race/ethnicity, ages and numbers of children, and
household incomes. Non-partnered mothers feel slightly more pressured for time and much less
satisfied with their lives. Analyses using the NLSY79 show that mothers whose partners left the
home in the past two years became more depressed than those whose marriages remained intact.
Coupled with evidence that husbands spend substantial time in childcare and with their children,
the results suggest that children of non-partnered mothers receive much less parental care--
perhaps 40 percent less--than other children; and most of what they receive is from mothers who
are less satisfied with their lives.


Daniel S. Hamermesh
Department of Economics
Barnard College
3009 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and IZA
and also NBER
hamermes@eco.utexas.edu
    I.       Introduction and the Problem

         Nearly one-third of American mothers with children under age eighteen in their household do not

have a partner living with them. An immense amount of research has considered how single motherhood

or divorce affects the mothers' offspring (e.g., Ermisch and Francesconi, 2001; Björklund and Sundström,

2006; Amato et al., 2015). Some studies (Corak, 2000; Lang and Zagorsky, 2000) examine exogenous

shocks to family structure (death of a parent, typically the father) and find mixed impacts on children's

outcomes as adults in response this fortunately rare cause of changes in children's household status. A

substantial amount of research has examined how mothers spend their non-market time (and how it differs

from fathers' non-market time), including Hallberg and Klevmarken (2003) and Genadek and Hill (2019);

and some have analyzed how this differs by mothers' marital status (Kimmel and Connelly, 2007). Still

other studies have analyzed the relationship between mothers' happiness and their marital status (Stack and

Eshleman, 1998; Lee and Ono, 2012; Hank and Wagner, 2013; Perini and Sironi, 2016); and one study

(Ifcher and Zarghamee, 2014) looked at trends in differences in happiness between single and partnered

mothers.

         While much research has examined pairs among the issues involving marital status, time allocation

and mothers' feelings, none has examined all three issues together. None has studied how differences in the

allocation of time by marital status alter mothers' happiness. Also, no research has considered how

mothers' use of time affects their feelings of time being scarce and how these feelings relate to the presence

or absence of a partner in the household. In this study I combine analyses of all three of these issues, doing

so chiefly using data from the United States. Because there is no reason to assume that the behavior

suggested by American findings is representative of behavior anywhere else, I also examine many of the

questions using data from six European countries: France, the United Kingdom, Italy, Germany, the

Netherlands and Spain. The goal is thus to integrate research on issues of time use, marital status, how

children are treated in households that differ by mother's marital status, and how these affect mothers'

feelings about time scarcity and their satisfaction with life.



                                                       1
          With these goals in mind, Section II describes patterns of marital status among American women

and details demographic differences among women who differ by marital status. Section III describes the

American Time Use Survey (ATUS) data, including patterns of time use among mothers who recently

married and those whose husband recently left the household. Section IV studies how and whether time use

differs among these groups, whose demographic characteristics also differ, and it examines whether this

American behavior is observed elsewhere by comparing women of differing marital status with children in

the household in time-use samples from wealthy European countries. Section V examines differences by

marital status in time spent in childcare, focusing on the different types of activities that mothers do with

their children and on how these differ by children's ages and mothers' educational attainment. In Section

VI I examine how non-married mothers differ in the people with whom they spend their time compared to

married mothers, while Section VII studies how feelings--about being pressed for time or about their life

satisfaction--differ between these two groups. Finally, because marital status may be related to women's

underlying unobservable characteristics, Section VIII uses longitudinal American data to examine how

mothers' mental health changes with changes in marital status.

    II.      The Demographics of American Mothers

          Throughout this study I divide American women into four groups: Married with spouse present;

never married; divorced; and other (which includes those who are widowed, married but whose spouse is

absent, and those who are married but separated).1 In some of the work I aggregate the last three groups--

all women who do not have a partner present--into a single group. I include only women who have at least

one child under 18 in their household, whether it is their biological child, a step-child or a foster child. I

base the initial look at the demographics of these women on the American Community Survey (ACS) 2013-

17. During these years, this survey provided a sample of about 3.6 million women with children at home,




1
 In this sample separated women account for 49 percent of this miscellaneous group, women whose spouse is absent
are 34 percent and widows are 17 percent. All the calculations using the ACS are based on the sampling weights in
the public-use data sets.


                                                       2
more than enough to note statistically significant and often economically important differences among

mothers who differ by marital status.

           Figure 1 presents the number of children under age eighteen, and the number under age five, in

each five-year age range from 25 through 54 by marital status (the four groups of women). Except among

women ages 25-29, married women with spouse present have more children in their household than other

mothers; and in all age groups they have more pre-school children. Not surprisingly the number of pre-

school children drops off with age in all the marital groups, while the total number begins dropping only

after ages 35-39.

           While married women with spouse present and children in the household account for about 68

percent of the mothers in the ACS sample, as shown at the bottom of Table 1, they account for only 44

percent of mothers ages 25-29, which rises to 75 percent at ages 45-49. In the youngest group of mothers,

non-Hispanic whites account for only 53 percent of the women, which rises steadily to 63 percent at ages

50-54. There are only small age differences in educational attainment by age, with 56 percent of mothers

ages 25-29 having at least one year of college, rising to 63 percent of mothers ages 45-49, falling back to

57 percent among mothers 50-54.

           The four groups of mothers differ greatly, however, by race/ethnicity and educational attainment.

50 percent of the nonmarried mothers are African-American or Hispanic, but only 24 percent of mothers

with spouse present are. Only 22 percent of the former group have a college degree or more, but 46 percent

of the latter group are at last college graduates. Clearly demographic characteristics differ by marital status

and by age group of mothers; and because the number and ages of children differ too, as Figure 1 shows, it

is crucial in examining mothers' time use to account for as many demographic differences as the data allow.

    III.       Time Use Among American Mothers

           The basic data used in what follows come from the ATUS 2003-18, provided by Hofferth et al.

(2018), and described in detail by Hamermesh et al. (2005). Because the ATUS is based on diaries kept by

respondents who had been included in the 8th-month outgoing rotation groups of the Current Population

Survey (CPS), we can link women's marital status in the ATUS to their marital status in their fourth month

                                                      3
in the CPS, somewhere between 14 and 17 months before the date for which they completed the ATUS

time diary.2 Linking these data allows classifying mothers into two sub-groups: Those currently married

with spouse present who were not married with spouse present in the 4th month of their appearance in the

CPS (new husband), and those currently not married with spouse present who stated that a husband was

present in their 4th-month interview (husband left).

        There are 40,952 women ages 25-54 with children under age 18 in the household in the ATUS

samples from 2003-18. Not all these women have information on their marital status at the 4th CPS month.

For those who do, we can examine the transition probabilities across the four marital statuses over the year

between the 4th and 8th CPS months. The transition matrix is shown in Table 1. The central feature is the

remarkable stability of these women's marital status over each twelve-month period. Only among women

in the Other Married category do more than ten percent change their status each year, with almost all these

changes involving getting back together with the spouse or divorcing him. Among married mothers ages

25-54 who are present in both CPS months, fewer than two percent change status from one year to the next.

        The bottom two rows of Table 1 show the representation by marital status of mothers with children

present, first in the ATUS, then in the ACS. Note that in the former survey married women with spouse

present are more heavily represented, not surprising since they must have been in the CPS for all eight

interviews. (These women's marital status and presumably location are more stable than those of women

in the other categories, so that Census enumerators are better able to track them.) This greater stability is

reflected even more strongly in the sample used here, the 27,910 women who were included in the ATUS

and for whom a 4th-month CPS interview was available (to allow construction of indicators of a husband

entering or leaving the household).3 75 percent are married with spouse present. The reductions in the other

three categories are spread roughly proportionally among them.


2
 Fourteen percent of the time diaries were completed 2 months after the woman's final CPS interview, 71 percent after
3 months, nearly 14 percent after 4 months and nearly 1 percent after 5 months.
3
 Also excluded are the 0.28 percent of women in the age range with children in the household who list their spouse's
sex as female.


                                                         4
         We know (Abraham et al., 2006) that respondents included in the ATUS are not observationally

different from those who were asked to complete a diary (were in their 8th CPS month). While we

necessarily use the reduced sample of women throughout the analysis in this study, all the estimates in the

central Table 3 of this study are nearly identical if we exclude the transition variables (new husband or

husband left) and estimate the equations over the larger sample.

         On a typical ATUS diary day the average respondent reports spending time in only five percent of

the more than 400 ATUS categories. Information at this level of disaggregation is not interpretable or easily

usable. I therefore aggregate the categories into six major divisions: Market work; home production; sleep;

other personal care; TV-watching, and other leisure activities.4 The fixed 1440 minutes per day, an attractive

feature of time diaries that constrains respondents' information about their activities, mean that there are

only five independent aggregates of time use. Later in the study I disaggregate home production, with one

of the sub-aggregates being childcare.

         Table 2 presents the means and their standard errors of time spent in various activities on a

representative day by women in each of the four marital categories.5 Sleep constitutes by far the largest

component of these women's time, with married women with spouse present sleeping roughly one hour

less per week than divorced women and three hours less than never-married women. They watch less

television per week than other women, a shortfall of four hours from never-married women, but spend more

time in other leisure activities, nearly one hour more than divorced women and two hours more than never-

married women. The four groups differ little in the time spent in other personal activities.

         One major difference among the groups is in time spent in paid work, with married women with

spouse present doing less paid work than other mothers, a difference averaging over seven hours per week



4
 The ATUS data are from the IPUMS website https://www.atusdata.org/atus/ . The time listed as being spent in "other
activities" was pro-rated across these six major activities in proportion to the amounts of time spent in each.
Educational activities were treated as other leisure in this group of women who are past the usual school-attending
age. A complete discussion of the nature of these aggregates is in Hamermesh (2019).
5
 These statistics are all based on the ATUS sampling weights. They thus represent the time spent on the average day
by the average woman of each marital status. These descriptive statistics look very similar in the larger sample that
includes women whose 4th and 8th-month CPS interviews could not be matched.

                                                         5
from divorced women. The most interesting difference is in their average time in home production. Married

mothers spend over seven hours per week more than women in the miscellaneous other-married category

in household activities, and nearly ten hours more than divorced women. All of these differences are highly

significant statistically.

       IV.       Mothers' Time Use
             The differences in the average time spent in different activities among mothers classified by marital

status are suggestive, but they fail to account for the demographic differences by marital status based on

the ACS that were discussed above. To make these adjustments I use the ATUS data to estimate:

       (1) Tij = j0 + jSSi + jN I{New Husband}i + jLI{Husband Left}i + F(Xi) , j = 1,...5,


where i is an observation; the Tj are the time-use categories. (I exclude other leisure activities from this

system, since for them each estimated k is the negative of the sum of estimates for the other five categories,

although I do present separate estimates for other leisure for completeness.) S is a vector of indicators of

marital status, and the  are parameters to be estimated.

             The X represent demographic characteristics, including vectors of indicators for each five-year age

interval 25-54, for educational attainment (high school, some college, college, masters or doctorate);

racial/ethnic identity--four groups, with white non-Hispanic excluded; metropolitan status, major Census

region, and indicators of day of the week, month, and year when the time-diary was kept. Most important,

each equation also includes the number of children under age 18 in the household, and indicators for the

presence of a child under age 1, ages 1 to 2, 3 to 5, 6 to 12 and 13 to 17.6

       A. General Estimates for the U.S.

             The estimates of the jS listed in Table 3 roughly corroborate the differences in time use by marital

status shown in Table 2.7 Divorced women are most different from married women with spouse present,


6
 Detailed geographic information, including state of residence, is also available, but including indicators for each state
would, given the relative paucity of women who changed marital status in the year preceding their ATUS diary,
eliminate much of the sampling variation.
7
    The parameters are estimated using the STATA command sureg to allow testing of cross-equation restrictions.


                                                            6
doing much more paid work and much less home production.8 Their other personal and leisure activities

are less than those of married women, their sleep and TV-watching are more. Although the estimated

coefficients are statistically significantly different in most cases across each pair within the three non-

married groups, the crucial thing to note is how similar the use of time is across these fairly broadly defined

three groups, and how different it is from that of married women with a spouse present.

          One sub-group of non-married mothers uses time differently from the others--widows. They

account for only four percent of non-married mothers ages 25-54 in the sample, but they show statistically

significant differences in the time they spend on various activities compared to other non-married mothers.

They exhibit much more home production time than others; indeed, they differ only minutely (five minutes

less per day) in this dimension from married mothers. They make up for this extra time by working and

sleeping less than the other non-married mothers. Overall, except in their leisure time widows behave more

like women with a husband present than do divorcees, separated mothers or those whose spouse is absent.9

          None of the estimated jN or jL is significantly nonzero; and the vectors are also not significantly

jointly nonzero, even at the ten-percent level of significance. The time use of women whose husband left

within the past year or who got married within the past year differs little from that of women whose marital

status had not changed recently. Implicitly, mothers' time use adjusts quite rapidly to a change in marital

status.

          Not shown in Table 3 are the estimated impacts of the vectors of indicators of the presence of

children in different age categories. Their effects are, however, exactly what would be expected given the

vast amount of existing research on women's labor supply. The negative impact on work time of children

diminishes monotonically as the children are older, becoming more negative if there are more children at

home given their age distribution. The exact opposite is true for time spent in home production (on which



8
 Similar regressions using a shorter ATUS data set, fewer controls and not accounting for changes in marital status
(Pepin et al., 2018) finds somewhat smaller differences by marital status in time spent in home production.

9
 Hamermesh et al. (2020) discuss the time use of older widows, a group whose marital status only very rarely changes,
as compared to married older women.

                                                         7
I focus later). There is essentially no impact on sleep time of having children of different ages, except that

having a child under age 1 decreases daily sleep by 15 minutes (as any new mother will attest). The same

is true for other personal activities. Mothers' TV-watching is lower if there is any child under age 13 at

home, independent of the age of that young child; the impact of children on mothers' other leisure activities

is large and negative (25 minutes per day), but only if there is a newborn or toddler at home.10

         Also not shown are the estimated impacts of different levels of educational attainment, but the

results are unsurprising. Market work increases, other things equal, with additional education, while home

production decreases. Sleep decreases monotonically with education, as shown by Biddle and Hamermesh

(1990), as does time spent watching television. Other leisure time increases slightly with extra education,

as does other personal time.

         While I have included long vectors of available covariates, unobservable measures might, if they

could be included, alter the estimated impacts of marital status on mothers' time use. To examine this

possibility, I estimate how highly correlated with the variables of interest (the three indicators of marital

status) a set of excluded variables would have to be to vitiate the inferences about the effects of marital

status on time use (thus measuring the  proposed by Oster, 2019).11 For all three indicators of marital status

the estimates of  far exceed unity, suggesting that unobservables would need to be more highly correlated

with the indicators of marital status than are the observable covariates to render the estimated impacts of

marital status statistically insignificant. That is especially true for market work, home production and other

leisure activities.

         In the ACS the household incomes of mothers ages 25-54 averaged only 63 percent of those of

married mothers with spouse present. Given the complementarity of income and time in household




 While the ATUS only obtains time diaries from one person per household, we can look at time use by men who are
10

married to women in the age range 25-54 and who have children at home. These men average 267 minutes per day in
home production, of which 82 minutes are spent in childcare.

 Given the insignificant impacts of the recent departure or addition of a husband from/to the household, I exclude this
11

calculation for those variables.


                                                          8
production, it makes sense to re-estimate the models in (1) using the 94 percent of women in the ATUS

sub-sample for whom data on family income are available. Higher household incomes do significantly raise

the amount of time spent on other personal activities and reduce the time spent watching television. Their

inclusion in the model also increases the differences between non-married respondents and mothers with

spouse present, although qualitatively the differences are unchanged. The increase in differences in work

time across the groups is spread out over the other five categories of time use, so that the changes in the

estimates in those equations are proportionately much smaller.

         In nine of sixteen years in the ATUS samples the respondents rated their overall health on a five-

point scale (excellent through poor). In the sample underlying the estimates in Table 3, 35 percent of

married mothers rate their health as only good, fair or poor (the three lowest categories), while 52 percent

of others rate it this low. Since ill-health leads otherwise identical individuals to sleep more and watch more

television (Hamermesh, 2019, Ch. 7), including a vector of indicators of self-rated health might alter our

inferences about the effect of marital status on the allocation of time. Re-specifications of the model in (1)

do show that TV-watching and sleep both increase monotonically as mother's self-rated health worsens.

These effects reduce the absolute values of the estimated jS in these equations but do not qualitatively alter

the inferences from Table 3.12

     B. Replications for Six European Countries

          As a check on the generality of responses of time use to differences in marital status, we can

estimate models like (1) using data from France, the U.K., Italy, Germany, the Netherlands and Spain,

wealthy European countries for which enough time diaries were completed in recent surveys to allow

meaningful comparisons of time use by mothers' marital status. For France I use the 2009-10 Enquête

Emploi du Temps; for the U.K. the 2014-15 United Kingdom Time Use Survey; for Italy the 2002 Indagine



12
  While the usable samples of mothers in each of the four groups by marital status are fairly large, in light of the
smaller sample sizes in the other data sets used here I re-estimated the six equations with only one indicator of marital
status, not married, thus combining the three groups of mothers without a spouse present. The estimated impacts of
this indicator are very close to being weighted averages (by their representation in the sample used in Table 3) of the
estimates shown there.

                                                           9
Multiscopo sulle Famiglie: Uso del Tempo; for Germany the Zeitverwendungserhebung, 2012-13; for the

Netherlands its 2000 and 2005 surveys, and for Spain surveys from 2008-10. Italy is an especially

interesting example, since on average Italian women engage in much more home production than women

in other rich countries (Burda et al., 2008) despite having fewer young children at home.

        Because these surveys have many fewer respondents than the ATUS, and because respondents were

not in some prior survey, we cannot distinguish newly partnered or newly non-partnered mothers from

others. Similarly, their smaller sizes make it difficult to distinguish among non-partnered mothers with

different marital statuses, so that we only compare behavior of partnered to non-partnered mothers. Also, it

is crucial to note that the methods of collecting time diaries and the categorizations of activities differ among

these six surveys and from those in the ATUS. Any estimates are thus not strictly comparable across

countries; rather, they are presented to see whether the same general patterns demonstrated by the results

in Table 3 are discernable in other rich countries.

        For all six countries I estimate models based on Equation (1) describing paid work, home

production, sleep, other personal activities, TV-watching and other leisure activities, restricting the samples

to mothers ages 25-54 with children in the household. Also included in the models are indicators of age

(each quinquennium from ages 25-54 in each country); of educational attainment; of immigrant status (for

France, Germany and the Netherlands); and indicators of day of the week, month of the year (quarter in

Germany, and not for the Netherlands), and year (except Italy). The data sets differ in their classifications

of children's ages, with the French data giving the numbers of children ages 0-2, 3-5 or 6-17; the U.K. data

providing information on the numbers of children ages 0-4, 5-10, 11-15 or 16-19; the Italian data including

numbers of children ages 0-5, 6-13 or 14-17; the German data giving the number ages 0-5, 6-12 or 13-17,

and also the number under age 10, and the Dutch and Spanish data using categories ages 0 to 4, 5 to 12 and




                                                       10
13 to 17.13 For each country its unique vector of information on ages/numbers of children is included in the

estimates.

        Because the French, British and Spanish surveys obtain two daily diaries for each respondent, the

German survey obtains three and the Dutch surveys seven, standard errors of the parameters are clustered

on the respondents in those countries; and sampling weights are used throughout. The estimates are thus

designed to be as closely comparable to those in Table 3 as allowed by the inherent differences among the

surveys, both in the covariates that are available and in how basic activities are classified.

        Table 4 provides the results of estimating these models (only the parameter estimates on the

indicator for non-partnered women) and lists the mean time spent in each activity by partnered women. In

all six countries non-partnered mothers spend less time in home production than partnered mothers, with

the differences being generally significant statistically and similar on average in size to the estimate for the

U.S. Many of the other differences are not statistically significant, and the signs of the effect of partnership

status on the other uses of time differ across the six countries. Essentially, the shortfall in home production

time of non-partnered mothers is made up by their spending more time engaged in a variety of different

activities. The main finding here is the remarkable similarity to the American results on home production.

        In Burda et al. (2013) we proposed the iso-work hypothesis--that in rich predominantly non-

Catholic countries men and women on average engage in roughly equal amounts of total work--market

work and home production. This hypothesis is supported even comparing total work by marital status.

Adding the coefficients for the adjusted impact of marital/partnership status shown in Columns (1) and (2)

of Tables 3 and 4, we see that iso-work is almost present among mothers who differ by partnership status.

Averaging across all seven countries (the U.S. and the six European Countries), married/partnered women

work in total only thirteen minutes per day (about 1-1/2 hours per week) more than otherwise identical non-




13
  The Italian data set also includes the number of "children" ages 18-24 or 25+ in the household. Relatively few
respondents report "children" at home in these categories. Because of that, and not wanting to focus on mammoni, I
do not include these indicators in the estimates.

                                                       11
married/partnered mothers with children at home, with only Italy exhibiting more total work by non-

partnered mothers.

     V.      Disaggregating the Impact of Mothers' Marital Status on Childcare

          With the largest absolute differences between non-partnered and other women being in time spent

in home production, it is worth looking at these further. In terms of policy, childcare is the most interesting

component of home production time, so for both reasons I focus on it here. I disaggregate home production

activities into childcare and non-childcare time, with the latter consisting of the broad categories of such

household activities as shopping, food preparation and clean-up, and a diverse variety of other activities,

and present results for various components of childcare time in the ATUS. The differences in non-childcare

time can be inferred by comparing the estimates in Column (2) of Table 3 to those in Column (1) of Table

5. The latter shows estimates of the determinants of total time spent in childcare, with the same covariates

that were included in the equations presented in Table 3, and it also shows the mean amount of time spent

by married mothers in childcare.

          The results in Table 3 demonstrated that married mothers spend about 40 minutes more per day in

household production than otherwise identical other mothers (same age, education, children of same age,

etc.), about 12 percent more time. But, as Column (1) of Table 5 shows, very little of this additional time

arises because they spend more time in childcare: Their additional childcare time is only six percent more

than that of otherwise identical single mothers.14 Most of the additional time that married mothers spend in

home production stems from their greater time spent in other activities, including an adjusted (for

differences in covariates) excess of 15 minutes (20 percent) in food preparation and grocery shopping.15




14
  This difference is mostly due to non-married mothers' spending more time in market work. If we account for that
fact, the difference between married and non-married mothers drops by two-thirds.
15
  The additional time that married mothers spend in childcare stems from both their greater likelihood of reporting
childcare activities on a given day (greater incidence) and the conditionally greater amount of time on these activities
(greater intensity).


                                                          12
         As noted above, husbands of mothers ages 25-54 spend 82 minutes per day in childcare activities

in their household, about 80 percent of that of married mothers. Together with the slight amount of

additional time in childcare by married women, this suggests that children of married mothers receive over

3 hours per day of care from their parents, compared to about 1-1/2 hours per day that children receive from

their single mothers.16

         The estimates of the impacts of the indicators of children's ages on childcare time are unsurprising,

with mothers spending monotonically less time in childcare as their children age. Interestingly, however,

non-married mothers' time in childcare differs little from that of other mothers with a teenager present; the

largest shortfalls arise with children ages 3 to 12. The estimates also only weakly corroborate those of

Ramey and Ramey (2010), which have been examined many times by others (e.g., Amuedo-Dorantes and

Sevilla, 2014; and Rokicki and McGovern, 2020, using longitudinal data): College-educated mothers spend

only a little more time in childcare activities than do other mothers.

         Moving to the components of childcare activities, Columns (2)-(4) of Table 5 disaggregate them

into educational activities, taking care of children's health, and others. As the estimates show, there are no

significant differences by mothers' marital status in time spent in children's education or health activities.

The results do, however, suggest that when a husband enters the home, the mother spends less time in these

activities, and when he leaves the home, she spends more time in them. Implicitly, adding (losing) a spouse

relaxes (tightens) the mother's burden in these two crucial activities. Given these results, the estimates in

Column (4) look very much like those in Column (1).

         The results on childcare compared to total home production time in the other six countries used in

this study corroborate those for the U.S. With the same specifications as in Table 4, but with childcare time

as the dependent variable, in the U.K. less childcare time accounts for some of the shortfall in time spent in




16
  It is unlikely that this deficit is mostly made up by care from other relatives: Divorced or separated men report only
7 minutes per day in childcare outside their household. The ATUS does not report whether a woman had grandchildren
for whom she cares; but women ages 45+ in the ATUS report only 10 minutes per day caring for children outside their
own household.

                                                          13
home production, and in Spain it accounts for most of it. But in France, Italy, Germany and the Netherlands

the time devoted to childcare adjusted for differences in the covariates is the same by marital status.

    VI.       Moms' Time with Whom?

          One of the major purposes of the institution of marriage is to allow individuals to spend time

together, taking advantage of both the specialization in home production that togetherness allows and the

complementarities in the utility derived from the joint consumption of leisure and other time (Becker, 1973).

Spouses do spend more time together than randomly-matched pairs of different-sex adults (Hamermesh,

2002). When one spouse (a husband) is no longer present, the non-married mother has to reallocate her time

to activities with other people who might provide some jointness in production and/or consumption of the

time, or simply spend it alone.

          The ATUS asks respondents to list who was present during each activity, although not for some

activities which account for much of the day (particularly sleep and other personal activities). The

information is collected in over twenty categories of relationship, ranging from spouse through more distant

relatives, various types of other people, co-workers standing in various relationships to the respondent and

being alone. I collapse this information into four categories: Time alone; with children living at home; with

friends; and with other people, including other (non-spouse, non-child) relatives. I do not examine the time

that married women report being with their spouse or that non-married women report as being with an

unmarried partner non-resident. Adding time spent in the four categories analyzed here, married women

with spouse present report spending 715 minutes in these four categories on a representative day, and non-

married women report 750 daily minutes.

          Figure 2 graphs the distributions of time in the four aggregated categories for each of the four

groups of mothers in the data. Unsurprisingly given the evidence in the previous section, what stands out is

the additional time that married mothers spend with their children, with the majority of the time shifted

from being with other relatives or other people.

          The upper panel of Table 6 lists estimates of the impact of being a non-married mother on choices

about with whom time is spent compared to those of married women. Included in these regressions are all

                                                     14
the covariates underlying the estimates in Tables 3 and 5, and the total amount of time that the respondent

reports spending in these four categories. The results show that married mothers spend more time with their

children, even adjusting for the numbers and ages of those children and a large variety of mothers'

demographic characteristics, corroborating the differences in reported time spent in different activities

shown in the previous section. This difference comes especially out of time reported being spent with other

people, a decrease of nearly one-third, with time alone decreasing by five percent and time with friends by

only three percent. Even if we account for how mothers use time, especially for the extra market work

engaged in by non-married mothers, most of the estimated additional time with children reported by married

mothers compared to non-married mothers remains.17

        The U.K. data allow replicating the American results (although in those data the age categories of

time with children do not quite match the children's ages, which introduces some errors into the

estimates).18 Moreover, unlike in the U.S. data, all time can be accounted for--no activities are excluded

from the accounting of "who with." Also, because the classifications differ, I aggregate time into three

categories--alone, with kids, and with non-partner others, excluding, as in the analysis of the U.S. data,

time spent with spouse or partner.

        Holding the same vectors of demographics constant as were used in the estimates presented in

Table 4, and accounting for the total time in these three categories, the bottom panel of Table 6 presents the

adjusted differences in "who with" between partnered and non-partnered mothers. The bottom row shows

partnered mothers' average time alone or with various others. As expected from differences in the amounts

of time in home production shown in Section IV, non-partnered mothers spend less time with their children

than partnered mothers, a difference stemming entirely from the greater time that they spend alone. There

is almost no difference from partnered mothers in the amount of time that they spend with others outside



17
  Estimating these equations jointly with the equations describing the amounts of time spent in each activity hardly
alters the results reported here.
18
  Children are classified as being between ages 0-4, 5-10, 11-15 and 16-19, while the identities of those with whom
the mother spends time are "child 0-7," "other person, including child 8+," and "other person outside household."

                                                        15
the household. Moreover, in percentage terms the lesser time spent with children is close to that the U.S.

data--about twenty percent compared to sixteen percent less in the U.S.

     VII.    Moms' Feelings--and their Relation to Time Use

         A. Time Stress

         We know (Hamermesh, 2019, Ch. 11) that time constraints are more binding as incomes are higher,

consistent with the notion that spending (increasingly abundant) income requires using time (which does

not increase with income). Non-married mothers' incomes are lower than those of married mothers, but so

too is their spending. It is thus unclear whether the absence of a spouse/partner makes otherwise identical

women feel more or less pressured for time.

         The ATUS offers no help with this question--feelings of time pressure are not elicited--so that we

cannot distinguish feelings of time stress among mothers who differ by marital status. The French, U.K.,

Italian, German and Dutch time-use data, however, all provide information on the degree of time stress that

respondents feel. Because the U.K. survey only asks whether the respondent felt rushed or not, we collapse

the scales in the other four data sets into indicator variables, with unity in the French data if the woman

says she feels any stress about time, in the Italian data if she is in the highest two of four categories of stress,

in the German data if she does not disagree with the feeling of being under some time pressure and in the

Dutch data if she indicates that she sometimes or often feels rushed.

         The upper panel in Table 7 reports the estimates of the impacts of not having a partner present on

a mother stating that she feels rushed for time.19 The same covariates are included that underlay the

estimates reported in Table 4. Only in Italy is there a significant difference by marital status in mothers'

feelings of being pressured for time. There is some evidence from the U.K., Germany and the Netherlands

that non-partnered mothers feel more time pressure, with the opposite effect only in France. Remembering

that numbers and ages of children are held constant, the difference cannot be due to the difference in the

ages of children by partnership status. So too, it is not due to differences in how the mothers allocate their


 All the results (not the U.K., since respondents only have two choices) are slightly more positive if we estimate the
19

equations over all choices using an ordered probit estimator.

                                                         16
time across the activities examined in Table 4: Accounting for those differences, the estimates in Table 7

for France, the U.K., Germany and the Netherlands become more positive, while the large positive effect

for Italy drops only slightly. Finally, with greater household income mothers are typically more stressed,

as the theory predicts; but the differences in time stress by marital status change very slightly.

            Taken together, the results suggest that, accounting for differences in demographic characteristics,

how time is used and household incomes, there is some evidence that non-partnered mothers are slightly

more stressed for time than those with partners. One explanation might be similar to that provided for the

excess time stress felt by women compared to men (Hamermesh and Lee, 2007): Non-partnered mothers

may be "juggling more balls"--doing more different things and bearing more different responsibilities, thus

incurring "costs" of switching between activities, than those mothers with a partner present.

            B. Life Satisfaction--"So Happy Together"20

            While the German, Dutch and Spanish data do not offer information on the respondents' feelings

of life satisfaction or on their happiness, the ATUS, French, U.K. and Italian data sets all provide this

information. We can thus compare the determinants of life satisfaction to those of time stress in three of the

six European data sets, and we can examine the former for the U.S. In the 2012 and 2013 waves of the

ATUS and in the French data respondents rated their life satisfaction on a 10 (best possible life) to 0 (worst

possible life) scale--a so-called Cantril ladder. I rescale this variable into an indicator equaling 1 if the

person gives a rating of 7 or higher. The U.K. time-use data set asked respondents to rate their life

satisfaction on a 7 to 1 scale, which I aggregate into an indicator equaling 1 if the respondent answers "6"

or "7" on this question, 0 if not. The Italian data offer respondents four choices, which I collapse by having

the two most positive responses indicating the woman is happy with her life, the two lowest indicating that

she is not.21 These choices provide indicators whose average ranges from 0.57 to 0.85.



20
     The Turtles, 1967.

 I do not consider emotions experienced while engaging in different activities, information which does exist in some
21

waves of the ATUS and which was examined in the context of childcare by Connelly and Kimmel (2015).


                                                        17
         The estimates of the impact of marital status in regressions describing this indicator of life

satisfaction are shown in the bottom panel of Table 7. For all four countries the same vectors of covariates

that have been used throughout are included. If there is no spouse/partner in the household, the mother is

significantly less satisfied with her life--by 16, 43, 23 and 16 percentage points in the U.S., France, U.K.

and Italy respectively. There is a very large difference in this measure by partnership status in all four

countries. (The effects of being non-partnered are even more significant statistically in ordered probits

describing the entire range of responses to the questions about life satisfaction.22) While feeling only slightly

more rushed for time than partnered mothers, non-partnered mothers are much less likely to be satisfied

with their lives. This difference is essentially unrelated to how they allocate their time across different

activities--the results hardly change if the mother's time allocation is included in the estimating equations.

     VIII.   Accounting for Unobservable Heterogeneity

         The analyses thus far have all been based on cross-section data. Large numbers of covariates have

been accounted for, and tests for the possibility that unobservable covariates are confounding the results

suggest that they are not. Nonetheless, unobservable heterogeneity, which may be correlated with marital

status and with the outcomes of time use, with whom time is spent, feelings of time scarcity and life

satisfaction, may be biasing the findings throughout. Sadly, there are no longitudinal time diaries that have

more than a few observations in which mothers have changed their marital status.23 We thus cannot examine

the robustness to this potential problem of the findings on differences in time use by marital status. We can,

however, examine how a mother's feelings change when her marital status changes, as sufficient

longitudinal information exists for this purpose.




22
  None of the estimated coefficients changes by more than ten percent when the women's allocation of time across
the six categories of time use is added to the equation; when her household income is added; or when indicators of her
self-reported health are added.
23
  The 1975-81 American study (Juster et al., https://www.icpsr.umich.edu/web/ICPSR/studies/9054,) interviewed a
random sample of 620 people in its 1981 wave, far too few to draw useful inferences about changing time use among
mothers whose marital status differs. A similarly small sample in the U.K. is discussed by Gershuny (2003).


                                                         18
         The National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79) has followed women (and men) ages

14-24 for 40 years, obtaining information from now biennial interviews on a large variety of issues. In 1992

and 1994 a battery of questions about the respondents' feelings was asked, eliciting responses about

problems of poor appetite, difficulty concentrating on tasks, feeling depressed, feeling that things took extra

effort, being a restless sleeper, feeling sad and feeling unable to get going in the morning. The survey

obtained answers to each question on a scale of 0, rarely/none of the time, 1 day per week; 1, some/a little

of the time, 1-2 days per week; 2, occasionally/moderate amount of the time, 3-4 days per week; and 3,

most/all of the time, 5-7 days per week. These responses were added to comprise a 22-point scale (ratings

of 0 through 21) which I summarize here as describing depression, with higher scores indicating the

respondent is more depressed.

         I restrict the sample to women who had at least one child (biological, foster or step-) in the home

in both years and who provided answers on the depression scale in both years. These restrictions yielded a

sample of 3,038 women ages 29-37 in 1994, when these mothers reported having on average 1.98 children

at home.24 Among mothers who were married when observed in 1992 seven percent reported a different

marital status in 1994, with all but a handful having divorced or separated.25 Six percent of those observed

as married in 1994 were not married in 1992. Over one-half of the sub-sample reported a depression score

averaging 4 or less in 1992; and of these nearly 3/4 had scores this low in 1994. Eighty percent of the

mothers had the same number of children in the home in both years, while four percent lost a child (for

various reasons) and sixteen percent added a child.

         Table 8 reports the results of estimating versions of the autoregression:

(2) Di94 = 0 + 1Di92 + 2MARRBOTHi + NI{New husband}i + LI{Husband left}i + NI{New child}i +

     + LI{Child left}i ,




 Throughout this analysis I use NLSY79 sampling weights from 1993, the intermediate year between the observations
24

on the depression scale.

 The two-year transition probability of seven percent exceeds that implied by the transition matrix in Table 1 (three
25

percent) partly because the NLSY79 sample used is younger than the CPS sample.

                                                         19
where D is the 22-point composite depression score, MARRBOTH is an indicator for mothers who were

married in both years, and the I are indicators of change in marital or child status. The mean depression

score in 1994 of mothers who were married in both years is listed in the bottom row.

        The first column reports the simple autoregression with an indicator for mothers who were married

in both 1992 and 1994, the second adds the indicators of changes in marital status, and the third also adds

the indicators of changes in the numbers of children present. There is unsurprisingly tremendous persistence

in the depression score. Those who remain married in both years are less depressed in 1994, given their

level of depression in 1992, than are mothers who remain unmarried in both years. The estimates in Column

(2) show that becoming married reduces depression only very slightly compared to its level in 1992.

Becoming separated, divorced or widowed greatly increases a mother's feelings of depression, raising the

score by 0.67 standard deviations of the depression scores in the entire sample. We can reject the hypothesis

that changes in marital status are unimportant in altering feelings of depression, p < 0.001.

        Given changes in marital status, the results in Column (3) demonstrate that a child entering the

household reduces mothers' depression by about a statistically significant 0.09 standard deviations. When

a child leaves the household mothers' depression score rises by 0.10 standard deviations. The indicators of

changes in the number of children in the home are jointly statistically significant (p = 0.04). The

overwhelming majority of cases with I{Child left}=1 arise when an older child leaves the home. In the very

few cases (7 of the 3,038 sample respondents) for which the number of children decreases because of a

child's death between 1992 and 1994, the child's death raises the depression index by a highly significant

1.37 standard deviations.26




26
  The tremendous skewness in D means that least-squares estimates are not appropriate for estimating (2); I use them
for simplicity of interpretation. Even a Poisson estimator is inappropriate, as the D appear to be under-dispersed
compared to a pure Poisson process. Nonetheless, re-estimating (2) using the appropriate negative binomial estimator
does not qualitatively change the inferences: Having a spouse leave the household greatly increases the mother's
feelings of depression

                                                        20
    IX.       Conclusions and Implications

          Divorce and separation of mothers from their partners is a very common occurrence in most

modern societies. How it affects the ways that mothers use their time and, in particular, the amount of

attention that their children receive, is of central interest to drawing inferences about women's well-being

and its effects on children's development. Using data from the U.S., France, the U.K., Italy, Germany,

Spain and the Netherlands, I have shown that mothers without a partner present spend less time in home

production activities, with some of the decline accounted for by lesser time in childcare. They feel slightly

more rushed for time than partnered mothers and are substantially less satisfied with their lives. Part of

these latter differences by marital status results from how the absence of a partner alters the way that

mothers spend time; but the majority arises from the partner's absence per se.

          The results suggest that children of non-partnered mothers not only receive less parental time than

others. The attention that they do obtain is from mothers who feel more stressed for time and who are less

satisfied with their lives, a concatenation of time and possible interest that may on average disadvantage

their children even more. Overall, our findings imply the need for even more attention and concern to the

difficulties facing children in single-parent households. With non-married mothers in the U.S. being

disproportionately less-educated and more likely to be from minority groups than married mothers, this

conclusion takes on special importance.

          The biggest lacuna in the analyses stems from the absence of a sufficiently large longitudinal time-

use survey to account for the way that unobservable heterogeneity may be biasing the inferences about how

changes in marital status alter the ways that mothers use time. The similarity in the results about feelings

of life satisfaction in the cross-section data used here and those from the longitudinal data about feelings of

depression suggest that heterogeneity may not be a serious problem in the findings about time use. But

without longitudinal time-use data this encouraging analogy is merely a suggestion.




                                                      21
REFERENCES

Katharine Abraham, Aaron Maitland and Suzanne Bianchi, "Non-response in the American Time Use
        Survey," Public Opinion Quarterly, 70 (2006): 676-703.

Paul Amato, Sarah Patterson and Brett Beattie, "Single-Parent Households and Children's Educational
      Achievement: A State-Level Analysis," Social Science Research, 53 (Sept. 2015): 191-202.

Catalina Amuedo-Dorantes and Almudena Sevilla, "Low-Skilled Immigration and Parenting Investments
        of College-Educated Mothers in the United States: Evidence from Time-Use Data," Journal of
        Human Resources, 49 (Summer 2014): 509-39.

Gary Becker, "A Theory of Marriage: Part I," Journal of Political Economy, 81 (July/Aug. 1973): 813-46.

Jeff Biddle and Daniel Hamermesh, "Sleep and the Allocation of Time," Journal of Political Economy, 98
        (Oct. 1990): 922-43.

Anders Björklund and Marianne Sundström, "Parental Separation and Children's Educational Attainment:
       A Siblings Analysis on Swedish Register Data," Economica, 73 (Nov. 2006): 605­24.
Michael Burda, Daniel Hamermesh and Philippe Weil, "The Distribution of Total Work in the EU and
       USA," in Tito Boeri et al., eds. Working Hours and Job Sharing in the EU and USA: Are Europeans
       Lazy? Or Americans Crazy? Oxford University Press, 2008.

------------------, ----------------------- and ----------------, "Total Work and Gender: Facts and Possible
          Explanations," Journal of Population Economics, 26 (Jan. 2013): 239-61.

Rachel Connelly and Jean Kimmel, "If You're Happy and You Know It: How Do Mothers and Fathers in
       the US Really Feel About Caring for Their Children?" Feminist Economics, 21 (Jan. 2015): 1-34.

Miles Corak, "Death and Divorce: The Long-Term Consequences of Parental Loss on Adolescents,"
       Journal of Labor Economics, 19 (July 2001): 682-715.

John Ermisch and Marco Francesconi, "Family Structure and Children's Achievements," Journal of
       Population Economics, 14 (June 2001): 249­70.

Katie Genadek and Rachelle Hill, "Parents' Work Schedules and Time Spent with Children," Community,
       Work and Family, 20 (Oct. 2017): 523-42.

Jonathan Gershuny, "Web Use and Net Nerds: A Neofunctionalist Analysis of the Impact of Information
       Technology in the Home" Social Forces, 82 (Sept. 2003): 139-66.

Daniel Hallberg and Anders Klevmarken, "Time for Children: A Study of Parent's Time Allocation,"
       Journal of Population Economics, 16 (May 2003): 205-26.

Daniel Hamermesh, "Timing, Togetherness and Time Windfalls," Journal of Population Economics, 15
       (Nov. 2002): 601-23.

-----------------------, Spending Time. New York: Oxford University Press, 2019.



                                                    22
-----------------------, Michal Myck and Monika Oczkowska "Adjusting to Loss: Widows' Time, Time Stress
          and Happiness," Unpublished paper, Barnard College, 2020.

Daniel Hamermesh and Jungmin Lee, "Stressed Out on Four Continents: Time Crunch or Yuppie Kvetch?"
        Review of Economics and Statistics, 89 (May 2007): 374-83.
Daniel Hamermesh, Harley Frazis and Jay Stewart, "Data Watch: The American Time Use Survey,"
       Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19 (Winter 2005): 221-32.
Karsten Hank and Michael Wagner, "Parenthood, Marital Status, and Well-Being in Later Life: Evidence
        from SHARE," Social Indicators Research, 114 (2013): 639­53.

Sandra Hofferth, Sarah Flood and Matthew Sobek. American Time Use Survey Data Extract Builder:
       Version 2.7 [dataset]. College Park, MD: University of Maryland and Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS,
       2018.

John Ifcher and Homa Zarghamee, "The Happiness of Single Mothers: Evidence from the General Social
        Survey," Journal of Happiness Studies, 15 (2014): 1219-38.

F. Thomas Juster, Martha Hill and Frank Stafford, Time Use Longitudinal Panel Study, 1975-1981.
      https://www.icpsr.umich.edu/web/ICPSR/studies/9054 .

Jean Kimmel and Rachel Connelly, "Mothers' Time Choices: Caregiving, Leisure, Home Production, and
       Paid Work," Journal of Human Resources, 42 (Summer 2007): 643-81.

Kevin Lang and Jay Zagorsky, "Does Growing up with a Parent Absent Really Hurt?" Journal of Human
       Resources, 36 (Spring 2001): 253-73.

Kristin Schultz Lee and Hiroshi Ono, "Marriage, Cohabitation, and Happiness: A Cross-National Analysis
        of 27 Countries," Journal of Marriage and the Family, 74 (Oct. 2012): 953-72.

Emily Oster, "Unobservable Selection and Coefficient Stability: Theory and Evidence," Journal of
      Business and Economic Statistics, 37 (April 2019): 187-204.

Joanna Pepin, Liana Sayer and Lynne Casper, "Marital Status and Mothers' Time Use: Childcare,
       Housework, Leisure, and Sleep," Demography, 55 (Feb. 2018): 107-33.

Ugo Perini and Emiliano Sironi, "Marital Status and Psychological Well-Being: A Cross Section Analysis,"
       Rivista Internazionale di Scienze Sociali, 124 (Jan.-March 2016): 41-8.

Garey Ramey and Valerie Ramey, "The Rug Rat Race," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Spring
       2010): 129-76.

Slawa Rokicki and Mark McGovern, "Heterogeneity in Early Life Investments: A Longitudinal Analysis
       of Children's Time Use," Review of Income and Wealth, 66 (Sept. 2020): 647-76.

Steven Stack and J. Ross Eshleman, "Marital Status and Happiness: A 17-Nation Study," Journal of
       Marriage and Family, 60 (May 1998): 527-36.




                                                  23
Table 1. Transition Matrix across Marital Statuses, CPS Months 4 to 8, ATUS 2003-18, Mothers
Ages 25-54 with Children in the Household, and Percent in Category (percent distributions)


                                                                       Year t


                              Married Spouse Present          Never Married     Divorced   Othera

    Year t-1b


    Married Spouse Present                  98.6                0.2              0.4         0.8
    Never Married                            4.5               93.6              0.6         1.3
    Divorced                                 3.2                1.0             94.2         1.6
    Other                                    4.3                1.6              5.8        88.3


Percent Distribution Year tc                71.2                13.7             9.2         5.9
Percent Distribution Year td                67.5                17.9            9.2          5.4


a
  Other includes married spouse absent, widowed, separated.
b
  Only mothers with information at Waves 4 and 8 of CPS.
c
  ATUS 2003-18, all present in Wave 8 of CPS.
d
  ACS2013-17.




                                                        1
Table 2. Descriptive Statistics, Time Use Categories, Mothers Ages 25-54 with Children Under 18 in
the Household, by Marital Status, Representative Day in the ATUS 2003-18 (minutes/day),
N=27,710*


                        Paid       + Home        = Total                                       TV-
                        Work       production       work            Sleep       Other         watching       Other
                                                                                personal                     leisure
 Group:

 Married,
 spouse present         209.59      342.10         551.69          509.20       117.61        102.64        158.90
  (N = 19,754)           (1.83)       (1.50)         (1.56)         (9.35)       (0.53)        (0.80)        (1.15)

 Never married          231.35      271.64         502.99          535.36       112.16        146.43        143.09
 (N = 3,168)              (4.72)     (3.51)         (4.29)          (2.70)       (1.59)        (2.76)        (2.97)

 Divorced               274.50      259.61         534.11          516.13       113.92        124.28        151.59
 (N = 3,091)              (4.90)     (3.42)        (4.26)          (2.57)        (1.39)        (2.62)       (2.99)

 Other                  238.71      280.10         518.81          529.29       114.19        130.09        147.66
 (N = 1,697)              (6.53)     (4.84)         (5.95)         (3.59)        (2.23)        (3.68)       (3.89)


*Standard errors in parentheses below means. The totals by category differ very slightly from 1440 due to rounding.




                                                         2
Table 3. Estimates of the Effects of Differences in Marital Status on Time Use, Mothers Ages 25-54
with Children Under 18 in the Household, by Marital Status, Representative Day in the ATUS
2003-18 (minutes/day), N=27,710*

                            Paid work      Home          Sleep      Other       TV-watching         Other
                                         production                personal                         leisure
 Ind. var.:

 Never married                 19.42        -31.29        9.99        -3.96         18.67           -12.83
                               (5.04)        (4.16)      (2.53)       (1.63)        (2.55)          (3.36)

 Divorced                      52.79        -46.81        6.72        -5.00          7.98           -15.70
                               (5.29)        (4.37)      (2.65)       (1.71)        (2.68)          (3.52)

 Other                         35.93       -36.83        10.67         -3.01         7.94           -14.72
                               (6.82)       (5.63)        (3.42)       (2.21)       (3.45)          (4.55)

 New husband                   6.16        -15.09          5.51        -0.93         9.23           -4.89
                               (9.77)       (8.07)        (4.90)       (3.17)       (4.95)          (6.51)

 Husband just left             1.62         -5.61        -5.06         -3.07        -5.54           17.65
                              (14.43)      (11.92)       (7.23)        (4.68)       (7.30)          (9.62)


 R2                            0.185       0.137         0.107         0.026        0.084           0.078

*Additional covariates are numbers of children, vectors of presence of children in each age category, age ranges of
mother, racial/ethnic identity, metropolitan status, region, day of week, month of year, and year, and an indicator of
immigrant status. Married women spouse present are the excluded category. Standard errors in parentheses.




                                                          3
Table 4. Estimates of the Effects of Differences in Partnered Status on Time Use, Mothers Ages 25-
54, France 2009-10, U.K. 2014-15, Italy 2002, Germany 2012-13, Netherlands 2000 and 2005, Spain
2008-10 (minutes/day)*

                                  Work          Home          Sleep      Other TV-watching Other
                                             production                  personal          leisure

 Ind. Var.:                                                      FRANCE

 Not partnered                       -4.07       -18.70        -7.46       -3.67        27.30        6.71
                                   (18.00)       (12.73)       (9.02)      (7.31)      (10.07)      (10.06)


 R2                                 0.252        0..194        0.104       0.106        0.141        0.184
 Mean among partnered              194.86       299.63        487.39      185.92       108.90      163.45

 N Diaries Partnered/Not        2,114/457
                                                                        U.K.

 Not partnered                       -6.72       -36.68       23.77            6.38     3.97         9.26
                                   (12.04)       (11.21)      (8.03)       (5.90)      (6.68)       (8.84)


 R2                                 0.176        0.155        0.114        0.057       0.129         0.080
 Mean among partnered              140.73       369.88       510.81       143.89      110.22        164.80

 N Diaries Partnered/Not        1,879/588
                                                                     ITALY

 Not partnered                      63.55       -38.66         -1.16       -1.83      -11.16        -10.75
                                    (7.09)       (6.17)       (2.59)       (2.03)      (2.09)        (3.78)


 R2                                 0.166        0.144        0.082        0.082      0.056          0.180
 Mean among partnered              119.72       453.80       485.16        83.91       73.98        223.44

 N Diaries Partnered/Not      3,187/2,758

                                                              GERMANY

 Not partnered                    28.88        -33.55       -0.92         -4.18       -6.47      16.24
                                 (10.66)       (9.18)       (5.38)        (3.40)      (5.18)     (8.15)


 R2                               0.216        0.126        0.172         0.046       0.095      0.121
 Mean among partnered            145.60        348.35      497.05        153.50       95.04      200.46

 N Diaries Partnered/Not      3,006/955




                                                 4
 Table 4, cont.
                                                                     NETHERLANDS

 Not partnered                           21.19         -15.94         1.67          6.51     -13.00         0.52
                                        (17.14)        (14.29)        (9.37)       (5.97)     (8.08)     (10.49)


 R2                                      0.134          0.113         0.122        0.012     0.067         0.115
 Mean among partnered                   141.02         426.22       502.62         89.41     82.40       198.55

 N Diaries Partnered/Not            3,909/512


                                                                         SPAIN

 Not partnered                          -13.00         -21.42         10.72         1.44      -3.04       25.30
                                        (12.52)         (9.73)        (5.06)       (2.64)     (4.82)       (6.72)

 R2                                      0.184          0.049         0.143       0.066      0.087         0.100
 Mean among partnered                   273.90        358.94        489.56        94.33      103.50      120.07

 N Diaries Partnered/Not            5,883/622


*Based on the Enquête Emploi du Temps, 2009-10, the United Kingdom Time Use Survey, 2014-15, Indagine
Multiscopo sulle Famiglie: Uso del Tempo, 2002, the Zeitverwendungserhebung, 2012-13, and the harmonized Dutch
and Spanish files. Each equation includes indicators for the number of each in each of various age intervals; for five-
year age intervals of mothers 30-34 through 50-54 (25-29 is the excluded category); educational attainment, immigrant
status (France, Germany and the Netherlands) and indicators of the day of the week, month of the year (except the
Netherlands), and year (except Italy). Partnered women are the excluded category. All estimates are based on sampling
weights, and standard errors are clustered on individuals (except Italy).




                                                          5
 Table 5. Estimates of the Impact of Marital Status on Childcare, Mothers Ages
 25-54 with Children Under 18 in Household, by Marital Status, Representative
 Day in the ATUS 2003-18 (minutes/day), N=27,710*


         Dep. Var.:          Total childcare            Child           Child           Child
                                                       Education        health          other
 Ind. Var.:

 Never married                     -4.35                 -1.24            -0.51           -2.59
                                   (2.13)                (0.67)           (0.51)          (1.92)

 Divorced                          -10.27                -1.59            -0.64           -8.04
                                   (2.23)                (0.70)           (0.53)          (2.01)

 Other                             -5.29                 -0.80             0.42           -4.91
                                   (2.88)                (0.91)           (0.69)          (2.60)

 New husband                        0.07                 -2.60             0.28           2.38
                                   (4.13)                (1.30)           (0.98)          (3.72)

 Husband just left                 -6.05                 0.25              1.84           -8.14
                                   (6.09)                (1.92)           (1.45)          (5.55)

 R2                                0.285                0.079             0.008           0.311

 Means (S.E.)
 Married women                    102.97                10.48              3.11          89.39
                                  (0.86)                (0.25)            (0.17)         (0.79)

*Estimates are from equations including all covariates used in the equations in Table 3. Standard errors in
parentheses.




                                                          6
Table 6. Effects of Marital Status on Choice of Whom Time is Spent With, Mothers Ages 25-54 with
Children in the Household, by Marital Status, Representative Day, ATUS 2003-18, U.K. 2014-15
(minutes/day)*
                                                WHO WITH
                                     Alone        With kids      Friends       Other relatives,
                                                                               other people
 Ind. var.:                                                   U.S.

 Never married                        18.64         -58.67             9.40       30.63
                                      (3.66)         (4.22)           (1.42)      (3.76)

 Divorced                             7.31          -62.84           13.70        41.83
                                      (3.84)         (4.43)           (1.49)      (3.95)

 Other                                9.77          -62.86             4.23        48.86
                                      (4.81)         (5.54)           (1.87)       (4.94)


  R2                                  0.206          0.402            0.025        0.271

 Mean married                       210.73          376.52           19.73        108.32
 spouse present
                                                       U.K.
                                     Alone          With kids With non-
                                                             partner others

 Not partnered                       131.55         -133.61            4.23
                                     (35.32)         (44.94)          (1.87)


  R2                                  0.130           0.714           0.025

 Mean partnered                      212.17          645.56          222.42

*Additional covariates in the U.S. estimates are vectors of numbers of children, presence of children in each age
category, age ranges of mother 30-34 through 50-54 (25-29 is the excluded category); racial/ethnic identity,
metropolitan status, region and immigrant status (U.S. only); day of week, month of year, and year. Also included is
the total amount of time the woman lists as time spent in these categories. Married women spouse present (partnered
women) are the excluded category in the U.S. (U.K.) estimates. Standard errors in parentheses (clustered on
individuals in the U.K. estimates).




                                                         7
Table 7. Mothers' Feelings, ATUS 2012-13, France 2009-10, U.K. 2014-15, Italy 2002, Germany
2012-13, Netherlands 2000 and 2005*
                                    U.S.*         France**       U.K.**     Italy** Germany** Netherlands
                  Dep. Var.                                               Rushed***

    Not partnered                                   -0.038        0.024       0.191       0.032       0.086
                                                     (0.040)      (0.036)    (0.014)     (0.019)     (0.076)


    R2                                               0.112        0.065       0.054       0.023       0.034

    N=                                               2,563        2,386       5,945       3,937       2,874

    Mean among partnered                             0.397        0.316       0.175       0.306       0.619

                    Dep. Var.                Upper-2/3 of Life Satisfaction***

    Not (married) partnered          -0.162          -0.430       -0.233      -0.160
                                     (0.023)         (0.125)      (0.053)     (0.014)


    R2                                0.072          0.524         0.149       0.045


    N=                                 888             227         1,122       5,945

    Mean among married
    (partnered)                      0.570            0.760        0.717       0.849

*
 Standard errors in parentheses here and in the other estimates in this table. Additional covariates are vectors of age
ranges, racial/ethnic identity, metropolitan status, region, day of week, month of year, and year, and an indicator of
immigrant status. Married women are the excluded category.
**
  Based on the Enquête Emploi du Temps, 2009-10, the United Kingdom Time Use Survey, 2014-15, Indagine
Multiscopo sulle Famiglie: Uso del Tempo, 2002, the Zeitverwendungserhebung, 2012-13 and the harmonized time-
use files for the Netherlands 2000 and 2005. Each equation includes indicators for five-year age intervals 25-54,
educational attainment, immigrant status (France, Germany and the Netherlands), and indicators of the day of the
week, month of the year (except the Netherlands), and year (except Italy). Partnered women are the excluded category.

***All estimates are based on sampling weights. Each equation includes indicators for numbers of children, presence
of children in each age category, five-year age intervals of mothers, educational attainment, immigrant status (U.S.
and France), and indicators of the month of the year. Married (partnered) women are the excluded category.




                                                          8
Table 8. Autoregressions of the Effects of Differences in Marital Status on Depression, Mothers
Ages 29-37 with Children in the Household, NLSY79. 1992 and 1994, Dep. Var. Is Score on the
22-Point Index of Depression in 1994 (N = 3,038)*

                                        (1)                (2)       (3)

    Ind. var.:


22-point index 1992                    0.442           0.427       0.425
                                      (0.025)         (0.025)     (0.024)

Not married both years                 0.774          1.004       0.953
                                       (0.196)        (0.195)     (0.196)

New husband                            --------       0.211       0.223
                                                      (0.453)     (0.451)

Husband just left                      --------       2.992      2.946
                                                      (0.572)    (0.577)

Child entered household                --------       --------   -0.417
                                                                 (0.214)

Child left household                   --------       --------   0.456
                                                                 (0.459)

R2                                    0.193            0.214     0.216


Mean score                            3.694
 mothers 1994                         (0.093)

*
    Standard errors in parentheses.




                                                  9
Figure 1. Number of Children Under 18 or Under 5, by Marital Status, ACS 2013-17.




 2.5

        2
 No. of Kids




 1.5
                                                                                                                                     Divorced
          1                                                                                                                          Married
                                                                                                                                     Never married
   0.5
                                                                                                                                     Other
               0
                   Kids<18

                             Kids<5

                                      Kids<18

                                                Kids<5

                                                         Kids<18

                                                                   Kids<5

                                                                            Kids<18

                                                                                      Kids<5

                                                                                               Kids<18

                                                                                                         Kids<5

                                                                                                                  Kids<18

                                                                                                                            Kids<5
                       2529               3034               3539               4044               4549               5054




                                                                                      10
                    Figure 2. Mothers' Time Alone or with Various Others, Married, Never Married, Divorced
                    and Other, Representative Day in the ATUS 2003-18 (minutes/day), N=27,710


              400

              350

              300

              250
Minutes/day




              200

              150

              100

               50

                0
                            Married           Never married          Divorced                Other
                                                       Marital status
                                  Alone    With kids    Friends    Other relatives, people




                                                          11
