                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    GLOBALIZATION, TRADE IMBALANCES AND LABOR MARKET ADJUSTMENT

                                       Rafael Dix-Carneiro
                                        João Paulo Pessoa
                                    Ricardo M. Reyes-Heroles
                                       Sharon Traiberman

                                       Working Paper 28315
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28315


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2021




We would like to thank seminar and conference participants for helpful feedback. Traiberman
gratefully acknowledges support by Early Career Research Grant 18-156-15 from the W.E.
Upjohn Institute for Employment Research. Pessoa gratefully acknowledges support by FAPESP
and by the R4D initiative on Employment and labour market outcomes, funded by the Swiss
National Science Foundation and the Swiss Development Cooperation. The views in this paper
are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, any other person associated with the
Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Rafael Dix-Carneiro, João Paulo Pessoa, Ricardo M. Reyes-Heroles, and Sharon
Traiberman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Globalization, Trade Imbalances and Labor Market Adjustment
Rafael Dix-Carneiro, João Paulo Pessoa, Ricardo M. Reyes-Heroles, and Sharon Traiberman
NBER Working Paper No. 28315
January 2021
JEL No. F1,F16

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the role of global trade imbalances in shaping the adjustment dynamics in response to
trade shocks. We build and estimate a general equilibrium, multi-country, multi-sector model of
trade with two key ingredients: (a) Consumption-saving decisions in each country commanded by
representative households, leading to endogenous trade imbalances; (b) labor market frictions
across and within sectors, leading to unemployment dynamics and sluggish transitions to shocks.
We use the estimated model to study the behavior of labor markets in response to globalization
shocks, including shocks to technology, trade costs, and inter-temporal preferences (savings
gluts). We find that modeling trade imbalances changes both qualitatively and quantitatively the
short- and long-run implications of globalization shocks for labor reallocation and unemployment
dynamics. In a series of empirical applications, we study the labor market effects of shocks
accrued to the global economy, their implications for the gains from trade, and we revisit the
"China Shock" through the lens of our model. We show that the US enjoys a 2.2% gain in
response to globalization shocks. These gains would have been 73% larger in the absence of the
global savings glut, but they would have been 40% smaller in a balanced-trade world.

Rafael Dix-Carneiro                            Ricardo M. Reyes-Heroles
Department of Economics                        TFS - International Finance Division
Duke University                                Federal Reserve Board
210A Social Sciences Building                  20th St. and Constitution Ave. N.W.
Durham, NC 27708                               Washington, DC 20551
and NBER                                       r.reyes.heroles@gmail.com
rafael.dix.carneiro@duke.edu
                                               Sharon Traiberman
João Paulo Pessoa                              New York University
São Paulo School of Economics                  19 West 4th Street
Rua Itapeva 474                                New York City, NY 10012
Sao Paulo                                      sharon.traiberman@gmail.com
Brazil
joao.pessoa@fgv.br




A online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28315
            "One major contrast between most economic analyses of globalization's impact and those of the
            broader public . . . is the focus, or lack thereof, on trade imbalances. The public tends to see trade
            surpluses or deficits as determining winners and losers; the general equilibrium trade models that
            underlay the 1990s' consensus gave no role to trade imbalances at all. The economists' approach is
            almost certainly right for the long run ... Yet in the long run we are all dead, and rapid changes in
            trade balances can cause serious problems of adjustment ..."

                                                          Paul Krugman, "Globalization: What Did We Miss?"1




1        Introduction

A large body of evidence shows that globalization can lead to significant labor market disruption.
For instance, Autor et al. (2013) show that American workers in regions facing steeper import
competition from China are less likely to work in manufacturing and more likely to be unem-
ployed.2 This work has generated considerable interest and research in understanding, modeling,
and quantifying the adjustment process in response to globalization shocks.3 Yet, this literature
has abstracted from modeling trade imbalances, and has been silent on how they could influence
the labor market adjustment process.
        This gap is puzzling in light of the size and persistence of trade imbalances in the last three
decades, coupled with an increased discomfort among American policy makers towards trade
deficits. Indeed, there is a pervasive concern among many policy makers and the public that
trade deficits are undesirable as they crowd out domestic production and are detrimental to jobs
and workers.4 When trade is balanced, equilibrium forces ensure that a contraction of import-
competing sectors is met with a simultaneous expansion of export-oriented sectors. On the other
hand, if globalization shocks induce countries to run trade imbalances, these shifts are no longer
synchronized, affecting the dynamics of reallocation. Hence, the behavior of trade imbalances can
influence the dynamics of job losses and gains, especially in the presence of unemployment and
labor market frictions.
        In this paper, we study how endogenizing trade imbalances influences the labor market adjust-
ment process in response to globalization. Does ignoring trade imbalances when we investigate the
labor market consequences of trade shocks matter at all? How much insight do we lose in doing so?
To address these questions, we build on existing models of globalization and labor market adjust-
ment and develop an estimable, general equilibrium, multi-country, multi-sector model with three
    1
     See Krugman (2019).
    2
     Other recent papers tying globalization shocks to labor market disruptions include Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (2017,
2019), Pierce and Schott (2016), Costa et al. (2016), Dauth et al. (2018), Utar (2018), among many others.
   3
     See Artu¸c et al. (2010), Dix-Carneiro (2014), Traiberman (2019), and Caliendo et al. (2019).
   4
     For examples of recent policy discussions, see Scott (1998), Bernanke (2005), and Navarro (2019).


                                                          2
key ingredients: (i) Consumption-saving decisions in each country are determined by the optimizing
behavior of representative households, leading to endogenous trade imbalances; (ii) Labor market
frictions across and within sectors lead to unemployment dynamics, and sluggish transitions to
shocks; and (iii) Ricardian comparative advantage forces promote trade but geographical barriers
inhibit it.
       In our model, trade imbalances arise from country-level representative households making con-
sumption and savings decisions.5 These decisions give rise to an Euler Equation that dictates
how countries smooth consumption over time in response to shocks in productivity, trade costs,
and inter-temporal preferences. Our approach relies neither on ad hoc rules for imbalances nor
on specifying the path of imbalances exogenously, which are common in the international trade
literature. Instead, our perspective builds on the workhorse model of imbalances in international
macroeconomics, providing a natural benchmark for understanding how they shape the labor mar-
ket adjustment process.6
       Turning to production and the labor market, workers in each country are organized into the
representative households. They choose in which sector to work, taking into account how their
choices affect the household's maximizing problem. Similarly, firms choose in which sector to
produce, maximizing expected discounted profits. Together, a firm and worker produce tradable
intermediate varieties that are aggregated into sector-level outputs used as inputs into production,
or for consumption. Goods markets are perfectly competitive, but international trade is subject to
trade costs. Labor markets feature two sources of frictions: (i) switching costs to moving across
sectors `
        a la Artu¸
                 c et al. (2010); and (ii) matching frictions within sectors `
                                                                             a la Mortensen and
Pissarides (1994). In particular, our framework allows for job creation and destruction to respond
to trade shocks, leading to rich unemployment dynamics and speaking to a key concern of the
public's anxiety over globalization.7
       We estimate our model using a simulated method of moments and data from the World Input
Output Database and the United States Current Population Survey. To ensure tractability of the
estimation procedure, we assume the economy is in steady state and we match data moments in
year 2000. The procedure conditions on the observed trade shares and allows us to estimate our
parameters country by country, greatly simplifying the process.
       To understand the main mechanisms in our model, we first compare its response to different
sets of shocks to the response of the same model under balanced trade--an assumption that most
of the trade literature makes.8 We find that modeling imbalances can lead to significantly larger
   5
      See Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995) for a survey of this approach to imbalances in international macroeconomics.
   6
      More recent work on global imbalances builds on the standard consumption savings model by adding financial
frictions (e.g., Caballero et al. (2008) and Mendoza et al. (2009)), or demographics (e.g., Barany et al. (2018)).
    7
      Pavcnik (2017) reviews survey data showing that only 20% of Americans believe trade creates jobs, while 50%
believe it destroys them.
    8
      Specifically, under balanced trade, we impose that aggregate expenditure equals aggregate revenues for each


                                                        3
unemployment and reallocation responses to globalization shocks. To be specific, consider a hypo-
thetical positive temporary shock to Chinese productivity. In this case, consumption smoothing
leads to opposing patterns of reallocation in both the short and long run. In the short run, China
saves by lending to the rest of the world, and running a trade surplus. To do so, China expands its
tradable sectors while other countries contract theirs, instead expanding in nontradables. In the
long run, other countries pay off their debt to China, permanently expanding their tradable sectors
above their initial steady-state levels. In contrast, in a balanced-trade world, short-run reallocation
is only dictated by changes in comparative advantage, while a temporary shock has no long-run
effects. Because it takes time for workers to find jobs, and it takes time for firms to find workers, a
magnification of reallocation induces a larger response in unemployment. Importantly, we find no
systematic relationship between the response of unemployment and the sign of trade imbalances.
    When balanced trade is imposed, long-run allocations depend only on the final level of the
shocks. On the other hand, we find that the full path of shocks matters for long-run allocations
when trade imbalances are modeled. This dependence on the full path of shocks motivates us
to conduct an empirical analysis where we extract the various technology, trade cost, and inter-
temporal preference shocks that the global economy faced between 2000 and 2014. We use the
extracted shocks to answer three counterfactual questions. First, we show that the differences in
predictions between our model relative to a world of balanced trade are quantitatively important
in response to our extracted shocks.
    In our second counterfactual exercise, we study the implications of trade imbalances and labor
market frictions for the gains from trade, typically computed using the sufficient-statistics approach
of Arkolakis et al. (2012) and extended by Costinot and Rodr´
                                                            iguez-Clare (2014). Differences in
the predicted consumption effects of trade are significant, both qualitatively and quantitatively.
We show that imbalances and labor market frictions both play important roles in explaining the
discrepancies. Relatedly, we compute the globalization gains accrued to each country between 2000
and 2014, and compare them to those obtained in a world without the global savings glut, or in a
world with balanced trade. We show that the US enjoys a 2.2% gain in response to globalization
shocks accrued to the world between 2000 and 2014. These gains would have been 73% larger
in the absence of the global savings glut, but would have been 40% smaller if we had lived in a
balanced-trade world.
    Finally, we use our model to revisit the "China shock," which consists of: (i) the rapid increase
in Chinese manufacturing productivity since 2000; (ii) changes in trade costs over the same time pe-
riod; (iii) China's large national savings rate (the "savings glut").9 Aligned with previous findings,
we corroborate that China contributed to the decline of the United States manufacturing sectors
country in every time period.
   9
     See Autor et al. (2016) and references therein for more discussion of the China shock.



                                                          4
between 2000 and 2014. However, this decline in manufacturing was quickly accompanied by job
creation in Services and Agriculture, leading to small unemployment effects. We find that shocks
to the Chinese economy had a modest effect on the US trade deficit, highlighting that the evolution
of the US trade deficit is a result of the full constellation of shocks hitting the global economy.
On the other hand, if we feed the model with all empirically-extracted shocks but neutralize the
Chinese savings glut (China's inter-temporal preference shocks), the trade deficit in the US would
have shrunk in the short run, but would have been amplified in the long run. This amplification
results in an even larger long-run contraction in manufacturing.
       Our paper speaks to a large literature that investigates the labor market consequences of glob-
alization, both empirically and quantitatively. We make two contributions to this literature by
incorporating both involuntary unemployment and trade imbalances into the state-of-the-art Ri-
cardian trade model of Caliendo and Parro (2015). Broadly speaking, quantitative trade models
based on Eaton and Kortum (2002) have only allowed for a non-employment option (i.e., voluntary
unemployment) or have focused on steady-state analyses, ignoring transitional dynamics. Caliendo
et al. (2019) is an important example of a dynamic quantitative trade model in which workers
make a labor supply decision and face mobility frictions across sectors and regions. However, their
model does not feature job losses and unemployment. On the other end, Carr`
                                                                          ere et al. (2020) and
Guner et al. (2020) incorporate search frictions and unemployment into multi-sector extensions of
Eaton and Kortum (2002), but do not study out-of-steady-state dynamics. In a recent exception,
Rodriguez-Clare et al. (2020) incorporates wage rigidity into the model of Caliendo et al. (2019)
to investigate the unemployment effects of the China Shock on local labor markets in the United
States.10
       Importantly, though, none of these papers model trade imbalances. We do so by incorporating
the workhorse model of imbalances used in the international macroeconomics literature allowing
for savings decisions by means of an international bonds market as in Reyes-Heroles (2016).11 In
that regard, our paper is closely related to Kehoe et al. (2018) who explore the implications of the
increase in the United States trade deficit for the secular decline in manufacturing labor over the
last four decades. However, this paper does not incorporate sluggish labor market adjustment nor
unemployment dynamics.12
  10
      In addition to these papers based on the Eaton and Kortum model, Helpman and Itskhoki (2010) add labor market
frictions to a two-country Melitz model, and Heid and Larch (2016) add labor market frictions to an Armington model
of trade. Co¸  sar et al. (2016) incorporate search frictions and unemployment to an estimable small open economy
Melitz model with firm dynamics, but focus on steady-state analyses. Ruggieri (2019) extends that model to study the
transition in response to trade shocks. Similarly, Helpman and Itskhoki (2015) also analyze the dynamic behavior of a
two-country Melitz model with labor market frictions. Finally, Kambourov (2009), Artu¸   c et al. (2010), Dix-Carneiro
(2014), and Traiberman (2019) also study transitional dynamics, but from the lenses of small open economy models.
   11
      A few papers have analyzed the consequences of current account rebalancing on labor reallocation and unem-
ployment by considering changes in imbalances as exogenous, e.g. Obstfeld and Rogoff (2005), Dekle et al. (2007),
and Eaton et al. (2013).
   12
      In International Macroeconomics, Kehoe and Ruhl (2009), Meza and Urrutia (2011), and Ju et al. (2014) are


                                                          5
    The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 outlines our model. Section 3 describes
the data we use and our estimation procedure. In Section 4 we present our estimates and model fit
analysis, but we also interpret the key mechanisms of the model by simulating a series of impulse
response functions. Section 5 conducts a series of empirical applications of our model. We conclude
and discuss future research in Section 6.


2     Model

Our model builds on existing workhorse models of globalization, trade imbalances and labor market
adjustment. Trade imbalances are modeled according to the inter-temporal approach of Obstfeld
and Rogoff (1995), and the trade bloc is based on Caliendo and Parro (2015). We adopt the
framework in Artu¸
                 c et al. (2010) to model labor mobility frictions across sectors and the structure
in Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) to model search frictions and job creation and destruction.
Sections 2.1 through 2.9 formalize our model showing how these different frameworks fit together.


2.1    Environment

There is no aggregate uncertainty, so that all agents have perfect foresight of aggregate variables.
There are i = 1, ..., N countries. Each country i has a constant labor force given by Li work-
ers/consumers. There are k = 1, ..., K sectors. Each sector k is characterized by a continuum set
of varieties j  [0, 1] that can be traded across countries. These varieties are then aggregated by
perfectly competitive domestic firms, in each country, into non-tradable composite sector-specific
intermediate goods according to:
                                                                                 1
                                                       1                         
                                                                    
                                        QI,t
                                         k,i   =           Qt
                                                            k,i (j ) dj              ,                        (1)
                                                   0

                                                                                                               1
where Qt
       k,i (j ) is the quantity employed of variety j in sector k and country i at time t, and  =             1-
is the elasticity of substitution across varieties within sectors. These composite sector-specific goods
are solely used as intermediate inputs for the production of a final good or for the production of
varieties. The price of one unit of the composite good of sector k in country i is given by the price
                                               I,t
index associated with (1), which we denote by Pk,i .
    A non-tradable final good is produced by perfectly competitive firms that aggregate sector-
specific composite goods QI,t
                          k,i according to:

                                                       K
                                                                      µk,i
                                            QF,t
                                             i =               QI,t
                                                                k,i          ,                                (2)
                                                       k=1

examples of the scarce work studying the interaction between the current account and labor market reallocation.


                                                           6
                         K
where µk,i > 0 and            µk,i = 1 i. The price of one unit of the final good is given by the price
                        k=1
index associated with (2), which we denote by PiF,t .


2.2    Labor Markets

Workers and single-worker firms producing varieties engage in a costly search process. Firms post
vacancies, but not all of them are filled. Workers search for a job, but not all of them are successful,
leading to involuntary unemployment. Each variety j constitutes a different labor market. More
precisely, the unemployment rate ut                                                     t
                                  k,i (j ) is variety-specific, as is the vacancy rate vk,i (j ). Both
variables are expressed as a fraction of the labor force Lt
                                                          k,i (j ), measured as the sum of workers
who are employed or unemployed and searching within sector k and variety j at time t. We impose
that mi ut           t                                                              t
         k,i (j ) , vk,i (j ) matches are formed (as a fraction of the labor force Lk,i (j )), where the
matching function mi is increasing in both arguments, concave, and homogeneous of degree 1.
   From now on, we drop the index j , but the reader should keep in mind that all labor market
variables are country-sector-variety specific. Define labor market tightness as:

                                                            t
                                                           vk,i
                                                 t
                                                 k,i              .                                   (3)
                                                           ut
                                                            k,i


The fact that mi has constant returns to scale allows us to write the probability that a vacancy
                             t ), for a decreasing function q , and the probability that an unem-
matches with a worker as qi (k,i                             i
                                        t q ( t ). We assume that workers can costlessly move
ployed worker matches with a vacancy as k,i i k,i

across varieties j within a sector, but that they face mobility costs across sectors, as we describe
in the next section.


2.3    Households

Countries are organized into representative families, each with a household head that, taking prices
as given, determines consumption, savings, and the allocation of workers across sectors maximizing
aggregate utility. We first describe the utility of individual workers, then we show how household
heads aggregate members' utilities. For ease of notation, we temporarily omit the country subscript
i and let    index individuals.
   If a worker ended period t - 1 unemployed in sector k she can either search in sector k at time
t (at no additional cost) or incur a moving cost Ckk and search in sector k at time t--so that
Ckk = 0. If a worker         is not employed at the production stage at t, she receives preference shocks
 t
 k,   , k = 1, ..., K   for each sector at time t. After unemployed workers receive these shocks, the
household head decides whether to keep each worker in the same sector and restrict him to search
                                                                                       t shocks
there at t, or to incur a mobility cost and allow him to search in another sector. The k,


                                                       7
are iid across individuals, sectors and time, and are assumed to follow a Gumbel distribution with
parameters - EM ,  where  EM is the Euler-Mascheroni constant and  its shape parameter.
This structure follows closely Artu¸
                                   c et al. (2010).
   After being allocated to search in sector k at t the unemployed worker receives unemployment
                                                    t q ( t ). We follow Mortensen and Pissarides
utility bk and matches with a firm with probability k    k
(1994) and assume that once a worker and a firm match at t, a match-specific productivity for
t + 1 production, xt+1 , is randomly drawn from a distribution Gk,i with [0, ) support. This
productivity is constant over time from then on. At this point, the household head or the firm
can break a match if keeping it active is not optimal. Finally, at the end of every period, and
following the matching process, there is an exogenous probability k of existing matches to dissolve
(excluding new ones). Successful matches that occur at time t only start to produce at t + 1, and
                                                             t+1
workers employed in sector k are then paid wages denoted by wk   xt+1 . Finally, if a worker
produces in sector k , she receives a non-pecuniary benefit of k . Figure 1 details the timing of the
model. Section 2.5 describes the bargaining process that occurs at ta and section 2.4.2 describes
the decision of firms to post vacancies at time tc .

                                         Figure 1: Timing of the Model

        Firms and workers                     Workers: consume                         Exogenous job
        bargain over wages          tb       Firms: post vacancies       td       destruction w/ prob. k

     t-1         ta    Matched Workers: Produce         tc           New matches            te             t+1
                      Unemployed: learn shocks  ,                occur and xt+1  Gk
                      choose sector where to search                    revealed


   Given this setup, the period utility for individual            at time t is,

           U t et , k t+1 , k t ,  t , ct = 1 - et                         t
                                                      -Ckt ,kt+1 + bkt+1 + k t+1
                                                                                 ,
                                                                                      + et kt + u ct ,           (4)

where k t is the sector where individual             starts period t (that sector was determined at t - 1),
k t+1 is the t + 1 sector of choice (which is decided at time t, interim period tb in Figure 1),
et is the employment status at the production stage (interim period tb ),  t = 1
                                                                               t , ...,  t
                                                                                 ,      K,                       are
idiosyncratic utility shocks received by unemployed workers at interim period tb , and ct is individual
consumption. If individual          is unemployed in sector k at t (et = 0, k t = k ), the individual can
switch sectors (from k to k t+1 ), so that mobility costs Ckt ,kt+1 , utility of unemployment bkt+1 and
      t
shock k       are incurred (during period t). On the other hand, if individual                   is employed during
        t+1
            ,
the production stage at t, et = 1, the worker enjoys the non-pecuniary benefit of working in sector
k t given by kt . Finally, individual        also enjoys the utility of consumption u ct .
   From the perspective of the household head, the allocation of workers follows a controlled
stochastic process: while the head can choose workers' sectors given knowledge of switching costs


                                                             8
                                                                                     t+1
and shocks, employment itself remains a probabilistic outcome. To this end, let et
                                                                                 k x      {0, 1}
indicate whether the household head continues on with a match at time t given a match productivity
of xt+1 in sector k . Then, the probability that worker                             is employed in sector k at time t + 1,
conditional on match productivity xt+1 and time t information k t , et is given by:

           Pr k t+1 = k, et+1 = 1|xt+1 , k t , et = I k t = k et (1 - k ) et
                                                                           k x
                                                                               t+1
                                                                                                                       (5)
                                                                  + 1 - et I k t+1 = k k
                                                                                       t   t
                                                                                         q k et
                                                                                              k x
                                                                                                  t+1
                                                                                                      .

In words, if I k t = k et = 1, then worker                         is employed in sector k at time t and the match
                                                                                         t+1
survives with probability (1 - k ) if the family planner decides to keep the match (et
                                                                                     k x     = 1).
If et = 0, that is, the worker is unemployed at t, and the planner chooses k t+1 = k , then the worker
                                                       t q  t et xt+1 . Importantly, workers'
is employed in sector k at time t + 1 with probability k   k   k
sector and employment status at t + 1, k t+1 and et+1 , are determined by actions taken at t.
   The head of the household aggregates (4) over family members and maximizes the net present
value of utility subject to her budget constraint and the controlled process on employment (5). In
addition to consumption and employment decisions, the household head has access to international
financial markets by means of buying and selling one-period riskless bonds that are available in
zero net supply around the world. One can think of international bond markets in period t as spot
markets in which a family buys a piece of paper with face value of B t+1 in exchange for a bundle of
goods with the same value, and the piece of paper represents a promise to receive goods in period
t + 1 with a value equal to Rt+1 B t+1 . International bond markets operate without frictions, so
that the nominal returns Rt+1 are equalized across countries. Finally, the household collects and
aggregates profits across all firms, t , but takes this lump-sum payment as given. The household
head chooses the path of consumption, ct , the path of sectoral choices, k t , continuation decisions,
et                  t
 k (x), and bonds, B , to solve:

                                                                                        L
                                             max             E0          ( )t t             U td   ,                   (6)
                                       {kt, ,et
                                              k (.),B ,c }
                                                     t t
                                                                   t=0              0

subject to (5) and the budget constraint:

                          L                                              L   K
                F,t           t        t+1       t       t    t
            P                 c d +B         - -R B -                                            t
                                                                                   I k t = k et wk xt   d  0.          (7)
                      0                                              0       k=1


E0 denotes expectations with respect to future idiosyncratic shocks  . The model has no aggregate
uncertainty, so that households and firms have perfect foresight of aggregate variables.  is the
discount factor, common across all countries, and t is an inter-temporal preference shifter that




                                                                    9
the household head experiences in period t.13 These shifters can differ across countries. The
budget constraint states the family can buy consumption goods or bonds for next period using
profits and wage income, net of interest payments (or collections) on past bonds. Let t be the
Lagrange multiplier on the family's budget constraint (7).14 The optimality condition with respect
to ct is u ct = t P F,t , so that individual consumption is equalized across individuals within the
household: ct = ct  . Henceforth, we will refer to ct as per capita consumption. Armed with this
observation, Online Appendix A shows that the labor supply decisions solving (6) subject to (7)
and (5) can be decentralized and written recursively for unemployed and employed workers. We
now turn to this recursive formulation.
       Let us return to indexing countries by i. Since workers are symmetric up to x and  in each
                                                            t ( t ) the value of unemployment
country, we stop indexing individual workers. We denote by Uk,i
in sector k , country i at time t conditional on shocks  t , and by Wk,i
                                                                     t (x) the value of employment

                                                                               t   +1
conditional on match-specific productivity x. If we define t
                                                           i
                                                             +1
                                                                                 i
                                                                                 t
                                                                                      ,   the sector decision policy
                                                                                   i
and the continuation rule      et
                                k   (.) must solve, conditional on shocks      t
                                                                               :
                                                                                                      
                                                                 t +b
                                                       -Ckk ,i + k   k ,i
                                                                                                      
             t                 t q t       t+1          t+1         t+1
            Uk,i ( t ) = max  +k    k ,i  i    0 max Wk ,i (x) , Uk ,i  dGk ,i (x)                    ,           (8)
                                                                                                      
                                 ,i
                          k                                                                           
                                               t q t        t +1 t +1
                                        + 1 - k ,i k ,i   i Uk ,i ,

and

                                        t+1                 t+1        t+1
          t
         Wk,i (x) = t  t
                    i wk,i (x) + k,i +  i   (1 - k,i ) max Wk,i (x) , Uk,i +  t +1   t+1
                                                                              i k,i Uk,i .                        (9)

                         t E
       In equation (8), Uk,i   t    t                            t    t                   t
                              Uk,i ( ) is the expected value of Uk,i ( ), integrated over  . The
                                                                                     t , as well as
first line in this equation corresponds to the costs of switching sectors, -Ckk ,i + k ,i
the sector-specific value of being unemployed in that sector bk i . The second line is the probability
                   t q t
of finding a match k                    multiplied by the discounted value of the match. Note that for
                     ,i k ,i
                 t+1                                                                            t+1
low values of   Wk ,i (x),   the household head dissolves the match so that the worker obtains Uk ,i .
Finally, the third line is the discounted value of being unemployed next period if the worker fails
to successfully match.
                       t (x) is the wage paid by a firm with match productivity x. Note that it is
    In equation (9), wk,i
  13
     As will become clear later, inter-temporal preference shocks are going to be important for our model to match
the time-series behavior of final expenditures across countries in the data. The use of these shifters is common in
the international macroeconomics literature. See Stockman and Tesar (1995) or Bai and R´     ios-Rull (2015). However,
as discussed in the introduction, the fact that these shifters lead to wedges in Euler equations implies that they can
also be viewed as generated by frictions underlying asset markets that directly affect households' aggregate saving
decisions.
  14
     In an abuse of terminology we will continue to refer to t as the Lagrange multiplier. However, the correct
shadow price associated with period's t budget constraint is given by  t t t .



                                                         10
multiplied by the household head's Lagrange multiplier on the budget constraint t i . To decentralize
the household's problem, individual workers must take into account the effect of their labor supply
decisions on the whole family's utility. The second term is the non-pecuniary benefit of working
in sector k in country i. The next terms are the continuation values: with probability (1 - k,i )
the match does not exogenously dissolve and the worker continues the match; with probability k,i
the match exogenously breaks and the worker receives the value of unemployment in k . Since 
is Gumbel distributed, the policy rule for unemployed workers can be solved analytically, so that
transition rates between t and t + 1 can be written as:
                                                                                                                           1/i
                                                               -Ckk ,i + bk ,i +                                           
                 exp  t         t       t+1          t+1          t+1                    t+1 t+1 
                                                      ,i (x) - Uk ,i , 0 dGk ,i (x) +  i
                    k   ,i q (k ,i ) i         max Wk                                       Uk ,i
                                             0
 st,t+1
  kk ,i   =                                                                                          1/i . (10)
             K                                       -Ckk ,i + bk ,i +                               
                 exp    t         t        t+1          t+1          t+1                    t+1 t+1 
                                                          ,i (x) - Uk ,i , 0 dGk ,i (x) +  i
            k =1      k     ,i q (k ,i ) i       max Wk                                        Uk ,i
                                               0




2.4       Firms

2.4.1      Incumbents

Firms produce by combining the labor of one single worker with composite intermediate inputs
purchased from all sectors. All firms producing variety j in sector k and country i have access to
                     t (j ) and are paid pt (j ) for each unit of production. A firm producing
common productivity zk,i                  k,i
variety j in sector k with match-specific productivity x and employing composite intermediate
                   K
inputs M t,i              obtains revenue:
                    =1

                                                                                K                    (1-k,i )
                                t                                                          
                              Yk,i (j, x)   =   pt         t
                                                 k,i (j ) zk,i (j ) x
                                                                      k,i
                                                                                     M t,i k    ,i
                                                                                                                ,                 (11)
                                                                                =1

                                                K
where k,i  (0, 1), k          ,i   > 0, and          k   ,i   =1
                                                =1
   Firms are price takers in product and intermediate-input markets and decide on the usage of
          K
 M t,i          solving:
           =1


                                                                           K                   (1-k,i )       K
                                                                                      
                 t
                Sk,i (j, x)   = max       pt         t
                                           k,i (j ) zk,i (j ) x
                                                                k,i
                                                                                M t,i k   ,i
                                                                                                          -         P I,t t
                                                                                                                      ,i M ,i ,   (12)
                               {M t,i }                                    =1                                 =1

       t (j, x) denotes the revenue (net of intermediate input payments) generated by the match
where Sk,i
between a firm and a worker with productivity x producing variety j . One can show that:

                                                        t             t
                                                       Sk,i (j, x) = wk,i (j ) x,                                                 (13)

                                                                      11
where                                                               k,i -1
                                                    1-k,i                                             1
                       t                                     M,t    k,i
                      wk,i (j )    k,i (1 - k,i )    k,i
                                                            Pk,i                pt         t
                                                                                 k,i (j ) zk,i (j )
                                                                                                      k,i
                                                                                                            ,                  (14)
                                                                            k
                                                                   P I,t
                                                            K                   ,i
                                                  M,t                ,i
                                           and   Pk,i                                                                          (15)
                                                                   k   ,i
                                                            =1

                                                                                             K
                                                                                                            k   ,i
is the price of one unit of the intermediate input composite                 imt
                                                                               k,i                 M t,i             in sector k and
                                                                                             =1
country i. We assume that following entry, switching across varieties within sector is costless for
                                                              t (j ) = w t (j ) and pt (j )z t (j ) =
firms. Hence, no arbitrage across varieties will ensure that wk,i       k,i          k,i    k,i
pt        t                           t        t    t
 k,i (j )zk,i (j ) j, j . Therefore, wk,i and pk,i zk,i do not depend on the specific variety. This implies
symmetry across varieties, allowing us to drop the index j identifying individual varieties.15 Given
the expression of the surplus (13), we will henceforth refer to                        t
                                                                                      wk,i       as "sectoral surpluses". As
will become clearer in Section 2.7 these sectoral surpluses will play the same role as wages do in
Caliendo and Parro (2015).
                                                             t (x), as:
       We can write the value function for incumbent firms, Jk,i

                    t                                           t+1      t+1
                   Jk,i (x) = t  t        t
                              i wk,i x - wk,i (x) + (1 - k,i )  i   max Jk,i (x) , 0 .                                         (16)

The first term is the firm's current profit, and the second is the firm's continuation value of the
match.16 If Jk,i
             t (x) < 0 the firm does not produce and exits.



2.4.2      New Entrants

Potential entrants can match with a worker by posting vacancies in k (and variety j ). We assume
that posting a vacancy costs k,i units of the final good, and so amounts to total cost k,i PiF,t .
                                                                                            t (x) is
Vacancies are posted at the interim period tc as illustrated in Figure 1. As argued above, Jk,i
not variety specific, which means the variety distinction can also be ignored for new entrants. If a
firm successfully matches with a worker at t, production starts at t + 1. If we denote the expected
                              t , then:
value of an open vacancy by Vk,i
                                                                                                                     
                                                        t                     t+1
                                F,t
                                                     qi k,i      0 max       Jk,i (s) , 0 dGk,i (s)
                  t
                Vk,i = -t
                        i k,i Pi    +  t
                                       i
                                         +1 
                                                                                           t+1
                                                                                                                     .         (17)
                                                         + 1          t
                                                                 - qi k,i            max Vk,i  ,0
  15
    Remember that we assume that workers face no mobility frictions across varieties within sectors.
  16
    Firm profits are multiplied by the multiplier on the family's budget constraint in order to keep the units, utils,
                                                                                      t
consistent between the firm's and worker's problem. However, if one divides Jk,i        (x) by t  i , then from the Euler
Equation we derive below, it is clear that this formulation is equivalent to a risk neutral firm discounting profits using
the nominal interest rate Rt+1 .




                                                            12
The first term on the right hand side is the cost of posting vacancies, which is converted to utility
units by the Lagrange multiplier t
                                 i . The second term says that in the next period entrants match
                    t                                                 t+1
with probability qi k,i         and obtain the expected value of max Jk,i ,0                  starting in the next
period. If they do not match, they can post another vacancy. To close the model, we impose free
                t  0 k, i, t.17
entry so that Vk,i


2.5       Wages

The surplus of a match between a worker and a firm is defined as the utility generated by the
                                                                                      t = 0), the
match in excess of the parties' outside options. Imposing the free entry condition (Vk,i
                                                            t . Hence, the surplus of the match
outside option to the firm is 0, while to the worker it is Uk,i
             t (x)  J t (x) + W t (x) - U t . We assume that firms and workers engage in
is given by Sk,i     k,i       k,i       k,i
Nash bargaining over the surplus, with the workers' bargaining weight given by k,i . This leads to
 t (x) =  S t (x), which combined with equations (9) and (16) imply that S t , W t , and J t
Jk,i     k,i k,i                                                          k,i   k,i       k,i
are increasing functions of x, implying that matches only remain active at t if x > xt          t
                                                                                     k,i where xk,i
solves:
                                t
                               Sk,i xt      t    t      t    t      t
                                     k,i = Jk,i xk,i = Wk,i xk,i - Uk,i = 0.                                       (18)

       The wage equation resulting from Nash bargaing is:

                                                                    t -  t+1 U t+1 - 
                                                                   Uk,i  i    k,i     k,i
                         t                  t
                        wk,i (x)   =   k,i wk,i x   + (1 - k,i )                              ,                    (19)
                                                                             t
                                                                             i


for x  xt
        k,i . This is similar to the standard wage equation in search models: the worker's wage is
a weighted average of the surplus, and a function of their outside option. The only new term is the
non-pecuniary benefit, which is subtracted from the outside option. By integrating wages across
all individuals in the economy, one can solve for the family's total wage income.


2.6       Labor Market Dynamics

Since workers can switch sectors between periods ta and tc , the sector-specific unemployment rates
actually differ at these two points in time within the same period. To this end, we first define
                                                                -1                      t-1
the beginning of period sector-specific unemployment rate as ut
                                                              k,i , and labor force as Lk,i . After
workers switch sectors, (measured before matching at td ), we define ut
                                                                      k,i to be the share of sector-k
  17
    In the equilibria we consider in this paper, we verify that this condition holds with equality, both in steady state
and along transition paths.




                                                            13
workers searching for a job. It is given by:

                                                  K
                                                            1 t-1 t,t+1
                                                        Lt-
                                                          ,i u ,i s k,i
                                                  =1
                                       ut
                                        k,i =                             ,                      (20)
                                                           Lt
                                                            k,i


where st,t +1
        k,i denotes the transition rate from unemployment in sector to search in sector k between
t and t + 1--see equation (10). Lt
                                 k,i is the number of workers in sector k at t (more precisely at tc )
and is equal to:
                                                1 t-1 t,t+1
                      Lt      t-1
                       k,i = Lk,i +         Lt-                t-1 t-1
                                              ,i u ,i s k,i - Lk,i uk,i 1 - st,t +1
                                                                             kk,i ,              (21)
                                       =k
                                                                              Outflow
                                               Inflow

where the second term in the right hand side is the flow of workers into sector k and the third term
is the flow of workers out of sector k .
   Only firms with x  xt +1
                       k,i produce at t + 1. Therefore, the number of jobs created in sector k
is given by:
                              t
                            JCk,i = Lt    t   t      t
                                     k,i uk,i k,i qi k,i          1 - Gk,i xt +1
                                                                            k,i         ,        (22)

and the number of jobs destroyed is given by:

                                               t+1 t               -1        -1
        t
      JDk,i  k,i + (1 - k,i ) Pr xtk,i  x < xk,i |xk,i  x       Lt
                                                                 k,i  1 - utk,i
                                                                     
                                    Gk,i xt  +1
                                            k,i   - G k,i x t
                                                            k,i
                                                                     
                                                                          -1           -1
            = k,i + (1 - k,i ) max                               , 0  Lt k,i    1 - ut
                                                                                     k,i  ,      (23)
                                                      t
                                          1 - Gk,i xk,i              


                    t+1 t
where Pr xt
          k,i  x < xk,i |xk,i  x is the share of active firms above the productivity threshold
at t but below at t + 1 (endogenous exit). Consequently, the rate of unemployment at the end of
period t, after job creation and job destruction, is given by:

                                             Lt    t       t       t
                                              k,i uk,i - JCk,i + JDk,i
                                    ut
                                     k,i =                                     .                 (24)
                                                           Lt
                                                            k,i


   Equations (20)-(24) describe the evolution of labor market stocks over time. In any given period,
these stocks are bound by the labor market clearing condition:

                                                 K
                                                      Lt
                                                       k,i = Li .                                (25)
                                                k=1




                                                         14
2.7      International Trade

Our model of international trade closely follows Caliendo and Parro (2015). Varieties are traded
across countries. Under the assumptions of perfect competition and iceberg trade costs, the cost of
variety j from sector k produced in o can be purchased in country i at a price pt         t
                                                                                k,o (j ) dk,oi , where
the first term is the price of variety j in country o and the second term is the iceberg trade cost of
shipping from country o to country i. From (14) we can write:

                                                                            ct
                                                                             k,i
                                                      pt
                                                       k,i (j )       =     t (j )   ,                             (26)
                                                                           zk,i

for each variety j and where

                                                       t         k,i          M,t         1-k,i
                                                      wk,i                   Pk,i
                                      ct
                                       k,i                                                        .                (27)
                                                      k,i                  1 - k,i

Recall that due to the no-arbitrage condition we impose across varieties, ct
                                                                           k,i is equalized within
                                                                  t (j ).
sectors, so that price variation across varieties is dictated by zk,i
                                                                                          t (j )
      We assume that in any country i, sector k and period t, the productivity component zk,i
is independently drawn from a Frechet distribution with scale parameter At
                                                                         k,i --which is country,
sector, and time specific--and shape parameter, , which is time invariant.18 Consumers buy
the lowest cost variety across countries, treating the same variety from different origins as perfect
substitutes. Under these assumptions, it can be shown that the resulting price index for the
composite sector-specific intermediate good (1) is given by:
                                                                                          -1/
                                                                N
                                       I,t                                  At
                                                                             k,o
                                      Pk,i = k,i                                                  ,                (28)
                                                                                          
                                                                                         
                                                                o=1    ct    t
                                                                        k,o dk,oi


where k,i is a constant. In turn, the price of the final good (2) is given by:

                                                                 K          I,t    µk,i
                                                                           Pk,i
                                                 PiF,t   =                                .                        (29)
                                                                           µk,i
                                                                k=1

                                             N        At
      If we define the object t
                              k,i                 t
                                                       k,o
                                                         t       
                                                                                                                t
                                                                      then consumers in country i spend a share k,oi of
                                         o=1 (ck,o dk,oi )
 18                                        t                        -
      The CDF for the Frechet is given by Fk,i (z ) = exp -At
                                                            k,i × z   .




                                                                      15
their sector-k expenditures on varieties from country o given by:

                                                                                                  -
                                                    t
                                                   Ek,oi           At    t    t
                                                                    k,o ck,o dk,oi
                                         t
                                         k,oi        t         =                                      ,                             (30)
                                                    Ek,i                        t
                                                                                k,i

       t =       N    t                                                                        t
where Ek,i       o=1 Ek,oi    is the total expenditure of country i on sector k varieties and Ek,oi is the
total expenditure of country i on sector k varieties produced by country o. Market clearing requires
                     t coming from the production of varieties in sector k and country o must be
that total revenue Yk,o
equal to sales to all countries i = 1, ..., N , and so:

                                                     N                      N
                                             t                 t                 t     t
                                           Yk,o =             Ek,oi =            k,oi Ek,i .                                        (31)
                                                     i=1                   i=1

                                                                         F,t t
Let Cit  Li ct                                                     C
             i denote total consumption of the final good. Define Eit  Pi Ci as total expenditure
                         V,t
on final goods, and let Ek,i be the total expenditure of sector k in country i on vacancy posting
                     t as:
costs. We can write Ek,i

                                                              K                  K
                                      C,t
                          t
                         Ek,i = µk,i Ei   + µk,i                   E V,t
                                                                      ,i +            (1 -  ,i )                 t
                                                                                                           k,i Y ,i .               (32)
                                                              =1                 =1


The right hand side represents total expenditure on sector k goods used in final consumption, va-
cancy posting costs, and as intermediate inputs, respectively. In turn, let Iit denote total disposable
income in country i, which is given by the portion of revenue that is not devoted to intermediate
                                                                                              K
good payments minus vacancy posting costs, that is, Iit =                                              ,i Y t,i - E V,t
                                                                                                                     ,i . Net exports are
                                                                                              =1
                            C,t
then given by N Xit  Iit - Ei   , and we can rewrite (32) as:

                                            K                                        K
                        t                                t
                       Ek,i   = µk,i              ,i Y   ,i   -   N Xit     +             (1 -  ,i )               t
                                                                                                             k,i Y ,i .             (33)
                                            =1                                       =1


   Finally, labor market clearing dictates that total revenues coming from the production of
varieties in sector k and country i is given by:

                                   t
                                  wk,i                                  
                                            -1        -1                                  s
                         t
                       Yk,i   =          Lt
                                          k,i  1 - ut
                                                    k,i                                                   dGk,i (s) .               (34)
                                  k,i                                xt
                                                                      k,i   1 - Gk,i xt
                                                                                      k,i


2.8    Trade Imbalances

Note that equations (31), (33) and (34) can be solved for any given values of N Xit , such that
       t
  i N Xi   = 0. However, these are not necessarily consistent with the household's optimal dynamic



                                                                   16
behavior. To this end, we turn to the determination of net exports N Xit                                 in equilibrium. The
solution to the household head's problem (6) must satisfy the following Euler equation:

                                                        F,t
                                              u (ct
                                                  i )/Pi
                                                   F,t+1
                                                                   =  t +1 t+1
                                                                      i R      ,                                           (35)
                                         u (ct +1
                                             i )/Pi

and financial and goods markets in each country are linked according to:

                                      N Xit = Iit - PiF,t Cit = Bi
                                                                 t+1
                                                                     - R t Bi
                                                                            t
                                                                              .                                            (36)

Finally, to close this part of the model, we impose that bonds are in zero net supply,                                 t
                                                                                                                    i Bi   = 0,
                                                        0 . If the model is initially in steady state,
and that the initial distribution of bonds is given by Bi
it is easy to verify that R0 = 1
                               .
       Having described the dynamic problem of the household, we can now discuss long-term trade
imbalances in our model. To do so, consider beginning from an initial steady state. Suppose that
at time t = 1, the economy unexpectedly experiences a series of shocks that end in finite time, and
that a new steady state is reached at time T .19 In this case, we arrive at the following equation for
the final steady-state value of deficits:20

                                                       T -1          T -1       T -1
                                      1-
                          N XiT = -              0
                                                Bi ×          R +                      R    N Xit    .                     (37)
                                       
                                                        =1            t=1        =t+1


This equation shows that the behavior of long run imbalances is determined by initial wealth
             0 and the short-run behavior of net exports N X t . This second piece is key in our
allocations Bi                                              i
model: if a country runs a series of trade deficits (surpluses) in the short run, even if they begin
with a zero bond position, they may run trade surpluses (deficits) in perpetuity.


2.9       Equilibrium

An equilibrium in this model is a set of initial steady-state allocations {L0      0      0
                                                                            k,i , xk,i , Bi , }, a fi-
nal steady-state allocations {L              
                               k,i , xk,i , Bi , } and sequences of policy functions for workers/firms
{st        t      t                                             t      t      t
  kk ,i , xk,i , wk,i (x)}, value functions for workers/firms {Uk,i , Wk,i , Jk,i }, labor market tightnesses
 t }, bond decisions by the households
{k,i                                                    t , bond returns                Rt , allocations {Lt      t      t
                                                       Bi                                                  k,i , uk,i , ck,i },
profits and household consumption {t    t
                                   i , Ci }, trade shares
                                                                                 t
                                                                                 k,io                        t }, and
                                                                                      , sectoral surpluses {wk,i
                    I,t    F,t
price indices      Pk,i , Pk,i   such that:

   1. Worker and firms' value functions solve (8), (9), and (16).
  19
   In our model, because of labor market dynamics, the final steady state is only reached in the limit, but the
approximation that the final steady state is reached in finite time is exactly the one used in computation.
                                                                                -1
  20                                                                 T
       We also invoke a transversality condition that limT           s=1   Rs         T
                                                                                     Bi  0 i.


                                                              17
                                                                    t = 0 k, i, t.
    2. The free entry condition holds in each country and sector: Vk,i

    3. The wage equation solves the Nash bargaining problem and is given by (19).

    4. Allocations and unemployment rates evolve according to (20), (21), (24).

    5. Consumption and bonds decisions solve the household's dynamic consumption-savings prob-
      lem (6) subject to (5) and (7).

    6. Price indices are given by equations (28) and (29).

    7. Goods markets clear: equations (30)-(32) are met.
                              K
    8. Labor markets clear:         Lt
                                     k,i = Li .
                              k=1

                              N
    9. Bonds market clears:          t = 0.
                                    Bi
                              i=1

 10. The initial and final steady-state equilibria satisfy equations (A.15)-(A.36) in Online Ap-
      pendix B.


3     Data and Estimation

Our main source of cross-country data is the World Input Output Database (WIOD), which com-
piles data from individual National Accounts combined with bilateral international trade data.
These data cover 56 sectors and 44 countries, including a Rest of the World aggregate, between
2000 and 2014. We divide the economy into six sectors and six countries. We consider a world
comprised by the United States, China, Europe, Asia/Oceania, the Americas and the Rest of the
World aggregate constructed by the WIOD. Each country's economic activity consists of six sectors:
Agriculture; Low-, Mid- and High-Tech Manufacturing; Low- and High-Tech Services. Tables I and
II detail these divisions. We solve our model at the quarterly frequency.
    The WIOD dataset allow us to generate various moments that we use in our procedure (detailed
below) to estimate a subset of the parameters: (a) employment shares across sectors and countries;
(b) average wages across sectors and countries; (c) trade shares; (d) net exports. Other moments
used in the estimation procedure are obtained from ILOSTAT and the United States Current
Population Survey (CPS). From ILOSTAT, we extract country-specific unemployment rates. From
the CPS, we compute yearly transition rates between sectors in the United States, as well as the
dispersion of wages. Table III summarizes the statistics targeted in the estimation.
    Table IV summarizes the parameters we need to numerically solve the model. We split them
into three categories: (i) parameters that are fixed at values previously reported in the literature


                                                  18
                                Table I: Country Definitions

                           1   USA
                           2   China
                           3   Europe
                           4   Asia/Oceania
                           5   Americas
                           6   Rest of the World (ROW)
                         Notes: Asia/Oceania = {Australia, Japan, South
                         Korea, Taiwan}, Americas = {Brazil, Canada,
                         Mexico}, Rest of the World ={Indonesia, India,
                         Russia, Turkey, Rest of the World}




                                 Table II: Sector Definitions

1   Agriculture/Mining         Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing; Mining and quarrying
2   Low-Tech Manufacturing     Wood products; Paper, printing and publishing;
                               Coke and refined petroleum; Basic and fabricated metals;
                               Other manufacturing
3   Mid-Tech Manufacturing     Food, beverage and tobacco; Textiles;
                               Leather and footwear; Rubber and plastics; Non-metallic
                               mineral products
4   High-Tech Manufacturing    Chemical products; Machinery;
                               Electrical and optical equipment; Transport equipment
5   Low Tech Services          Utilities; Construction; Wholesale and retail trade;
                               Transportation; Accommodation and food service activities;
                               Activities of households as employers
6   Hi Tech Services           Publishing; Media; Telecommunications; Financial, real estate
                               and business services; Government, education, health




               Table III: Summary of Statistics Used in the MSM Procedure

            Statistic                                                       Source
            Employment allocations across sectors and countries             WIOD
            Average wages across sectors and countries                      WIOD
            Trade shares across country pairs and sectors                   WIOD
            Net exports across countries                                    WIOD
            Unemployment rates across countries                           ILOSTAT
            Coefficient of variation of log-wages in the United States       CPS
            Yearly transition rates between sectors and from and to
            unemployment for the United States                              CPS




                                              19
because they are difficult to identify given the available data (Panel A); (ii) parameters that can be
determined without having to solve the model (Panel B); and (iii) parameters that are estimated
by the method of simulated moments, where we target the moments shown in Table III.21
       As discussed in Artu¸
                           c et al. (2010), we are not able to separately identify i --the dispersion
of  shocks--and mobility costs Ck           ,i   without time variation in wages and transition rates across
sectors. For this reason, we follow Artu¸
                                        c et al. (2010) and impose i , to be equal to 1.63 and common
across countries.22 We then estimate mobility costs following the method of simulated moments
procedure we describe below. Given that we solve our model at the quarterly frequency, we impose
the discount factor to be  = 0.9924, leading to an annual discount factor of 0.97--the same value as
in Artu¸
       c et al. (2010). Flinn (2006) discusses the difficulty in identifying the parameters of matching
functions without relying on data on vacancies. We parameterize the matching function according
                                                    1/i
     sar et al. (2016): qi () = 1 + i
to Co¸                                                    and impose their estimate i = 1.84 to be common
across    countries.23   Flinn (2006) also highlights the difficulty in estimating the bargaining power
parameters without firm-level data. As a result, we follow standard practice in the search literature
and set k,i = 0.5 (Mortensen and Pissarides, 1999). The Frechet scale parameter  = 4 comes from
Simonovska and Waugh (2014).24 Finally, we assume individuals have log utility over consumption,
u(c) = log(c). As described in Panel B, the WIOD dataset allows us to directly extract various
parameters of the model such as country-specific final expenditure shares µk,i , labor expenditure
shares k,i and input-output matrices k ,i ; this follows from the Cobb-Douglas assumptions we
imposed in the production functions and on how final consumption is aggregated.
       We estimate the parameters described in Panel C using the method of simulated moments. Let
 = (1 , ..., N ) be the vector of these country-specific parameters. Our estimation procedure
assumes that the economy is in steady state in 2000 and conditions on the observed 2000 trade
       Data and net exports N X Data --so these moments are perfectly matched. Online Appendix
shares k,oi                    i
B summarizes the equations that must be satisfied in a steady-state equilibrium. For a given
                                                            Data and N X Data , to generate:
guess of , we use our equilibrium equations, conditional on k,oi        i
(a) unemployment rates across countries; (b) employment allocations and average wages across
sectors and countries; (c) yearly transition rates between sectors and from and to unemployment
in the United States; and (d) cross-sectional wage dispersion in the United States. The estimation
procedure searches for a vector of parameters  that minimizes the distance between the model
  21
     To be precise, we do not target trade shares and net exports, we impose them in the estimation, so that they are
matched exactly.
  22
     Estimates of i in the literature range from 0.7 in Denmark (Traiberman, 2019) to 2.1 in Brazil (Dix-Carneiro,
2014). The value of 1.63 in Artu¸  c et al. (2010) is well within these bounds, making it a conservative choice. In
addition, Traiberman (2019) estimates i = 1.9 in Denmark when the method in Artu¸     c et al. (2010) is applied, which
disregards worker heterogeneity and human capital accumulation.
  23
     One convenient property of this functional form is that it always leads to qi () and qi () to be bounded by 0
and 1.
  24
     Caliendo and Parro (2015) find a similar value for  when it is imposed to be equal across sectors: 4.55.



                                                           20
                                     Table IV: Summary of Parameters

                               Panel A. Fixed According to the Literature
  Parameter      Value      Description                          Source
                 0.9924     Discount factor                      Artu¸c et al. (2010)
  i               1.63      Dispersion of  shocks                Artu¸c et al. (2010)
  i               1.84      Matching Function                    Co¸sar et al. (2016)
  k,i              0.5      Worker Bargaining Power              Mortensen and Pissarides (1999)
                    4       Frechet Scale Parameter              Simonovska and Waugh (2014)
                                Panel B. Estimated Outside of the Model
  Parameter                 Description                          Source
  µk,i                      Final Expenditure Shares             WIOD
  k,i                       Labor Expenditure Shares             WIOD
  k ,i                      Input-Output Matrix                  WIOD
                          Panel C. Estimated by Method of Simulated Moments
  Parameter                 Description
  k,i                       Vacancy Costs
  k,i                       Exogenous Exit
   2
  k,i                       Distribution of Match-Specific Prod.
  k,i                       Sector-specific Utility
  Ckk                       Mobility Costs
  bk,i                      Unemployment Utility
 Note: Artu¸c et al. (2010) use an annual discount factor of  = 0.97. Since we work at the quarterly frequency,
                 1
 we use  = 0.97 4 . The distribution of match-specific productivities is imposed to follow a log-normal distribution
                   2
 Gk,i  log N (0, k,i ).




generated moments and those we measure in the data.
   We impose a few restrictions on the parameters estimated by the simulated method of moments.
First, the identification of mobility costs Ck      ,i   relies on data on both wages and yearly inter-sectoral
transition rates. Although these data can be found in household surveys across a few of the countries
we consider, we opted to identify these parameters using transition rates for the United States
only. Therefore, we impose mobility costs to be common across countries. Also for identification
purposes, we need to impose Ckk = 0 for all k . Second, we impose the distribution of match-specific
                                                                                 2 . We restrict
productivities Gk,i to follow a log-normal distribution with mean 0 and variance k,i
2 to be the same across sectors and countries, and identify it by targeting the cross-sectional
k,i
coefficient of variation of log-wages in the CPS. Third, we impose that the exogenous exit rates k,i
are decomposed into a country component i and a sector component k (that is, k,i = i + k ).
The sector-specific component k is identified from US transitions from sector-specific employment
to unemployment. The country-specific components are then adjusted to better match the country-
specific unemployment rates. Fourth, the utility of unemployment bk,i is imposed to be country


                                                           21
specific (that is bk,i = bi ). This parameter will be important for the model to be able to match
levels of wages across countries. Finally, sector- and country-specific utility terms k,i help the
model simultaneously fit sector-specific wages and employment shares. To achieve identification,
we need to impose k0 ,i = 0 for some sector k0 (we picked k0 = Agriculture).
       A convenient aspect of our approach is that, by conditioning on the observed 2000 trade shares
and trade imbalances, and normalizing total world revenues                 k   i Yk,i   = 1, we can solve for
sector-country revenues {Yk,i } that are independent of . Specifically, equations (31), (33), and
the normalization lead to a system of equations in {Yk,i }, which can be solved before starting the
estimation procedure. Consequently, the sector- and country-specific labor demand side of the
model is fixed throughout the estimation procedure, allowing the labor supply side in each country
to be solved in isolation. To see this, notice that equation (34) contains revenues on the left hand
side, and the right hand side only depends on country-specific sectoral variables and parameters.
Therefore, in steady state, observed trade flows and trade imbalances are sufficient statistics for
international linkages. This property allows us to estimate the model country by country, greatly
simplifying the estimation procedure.25 Indeed, if all parameters were country specific and we had
the same set of data for each country, estimation could be conducted in parallel for each country.
As a final point, a convenient aspect of conducting the estimation conditional on the observed trade
shares is that we do not have to estimate the technology parameters Ak,i and trade costs dk,oi . We
develop algorithms to perform counterfactual responses to shocks to technology parameters and
trade costs relying on the exact hat algebra approach in Dekle et al. (2007), Dekle et al. (2008) and
Caliendo and Parro (2015).
       Although the model could be flexibly estimated country by country if we had data on yearly
transitions across sectors for all countries, we impose Ck               2 to be constant across countries
                                                                     and k,i
                                                                ,i

and identified off the United States' CPS transition rates and wage dispersion data. Therefore, we
                                                                                        2 and  .
proceed in two steps. First, we estimate the model for the United States, back out Ck , k     k

In a second step, we estimate the rest of the parameters in parallel, country by country, conditional
on the values of Ck , k , and k that are estimated in the first step.
       At this point, it is worthwhile mentioning that our estimation approach, which does not estimate
Ak,i and trade costs dk,oi , cannot recover k,i . Instead, we are able to recover the value of k,i 
k,i PiF
wk,i      in the 2000 steady-state equilibrium. Our counterfactual algorithms then allow k,i to
respond to shocks, using exact hat algebra. It is also important to clarify that identifying k,i is
difficult in practice. Even though the objective function is not flat with respect to k,i , it tends to
be relatively flat for a wide range of values. For that reason, we follow Hagedorn and Manovskii
(2008) and impose that the cost of posting one vacancy k,i PiF equals 0.58 × wk,i , where wk,i is the
  25
    The method of simulated moments objective function is highly non-linear and non-convex, so that global opti-
mization routines, such as Simulated Annealing, must be applied. Breaking a large parameter vector into smaller
subsets of parameters that can be estimated separately greatly simplifies the estimation procedure.


                                                      22
average wage in sector k and in country i. Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008) base their calibration on
a combination of the labor and capital costs of posting vacancies in a single-sector search model.26
While their model and ours differ on several dimensions--e.g., we have multiple sectors and match
heterogeneity--there are two reasons we turn to their calculation. First, Hagedorn and Manovskii
combine micro and macro data from multiple sources, mapping their numbers to observable costs
of recruitment, capital purchasing, and other costs; second, their calibration of vacancy posting
costs does not rely on other parameters of the model, just observable data (e.g., the capital share
of income and the unemployment rate), so that their estimate is not contaminated by the fact
that our other parameters are not always estimated to be the same as Hagedorn and Manovskii's.
We impose this constraint by adding the deviations between (k,i × wk,i ) /wk,i = k,i × PiF /wk,i
and 0.58 in our method of simulated moments objective function. The full estimation algorithm is
described in Online Appendix C.1.


4     Estimation Results and Mechanisms

4.1    Estimates and Model Fit

The estimated parameters can be found in the Online Appendix C.7, in Tables A.1 through A.8.
We first discuss the parameters that are obtained outside of the model. The Online Data Appendix
details how these are computed with data from the WIOD. Table A.1 displays the final expenditure
shares µk,i . We can separate the countries in this table in two groups with similar expenditure
shares: (1) United States, Europe, Asia, and Americas; and (2) China and Rest of the World. The
biggest difference between these two countries is that China and the Rest of the World spend a
much larger share of their disposable income on Agricultural goods and significantly lower share
on High-Tech Services.
    Table A.2 displays the share of revenues devoted to labor payments. This share varies mostly
within countries and across sectors and ranges between 0.24 (in High-Tech Manufacturing in China)
and 0.68 (in High-Tech Services in Rest of the World). Finally, Table A.3 displays the average across
countries of the input-output matrices. As is well known, the diagonal elements tend to be larger
than the off-diagonal elements.
    Our mobility costs are displayed in Table A.4. Artu¸
                                                       c et al. (2010) express their mobility costs
estimates as multiples of average wages. In contrast, in our model, workers compute their value
functions and make decisions based on i × wk,i , and not just based on sector-specific average
wages. Therefore, to make our estimates comparable to those in Artu¸
                                                                   c et al. (2010), we express
  26
     As the authors point out, in the steady state of a single sector search model, capital is equivalent to interpreting
vacancies as capital and reinterpreting the productivity process. In this sense, a vacancy is a metaphor for the whole
cost of hiring a worker--the flow cost of capital, HR efforts, etc.. We adopt a similar view in our paper, without
modeling each piece.


                                                           23
                                                        Figure 2: Model Fit

                   (a) Employment Shares                                                         (b) Unemployment Rates




                                                                                     .08
         .6




                                                                                     .06
         .4
     Model




                                                                                 Model
                                                                                     .04
         .2




                                       US               China                                                            US          China
                                       Europe           Asia/Oceania                                                     Europe      Asia/Oceania
                                       Americas         RoW                                                              Americas    RoW




                                                                                     .02
         0




               0           .2               .4                         .6                  .02         .04                     .06              .08
                                Data                                                                              Data

                     (c) Average Wages                                                             (d) Transition Rates
         .2




                                                                                    .5
                                                                                    .4
         .15




                                                                                    .3
     Model




                                                                                 Model
         .1




                                                                                    .2
         .05




                                                                                    .1




                                       US               China
                                       Europe           Asia/Oceania
                                       Americas         RoW
         0




                                                                                    0




               0     .05         .1               .15                  .2                  0      .1         .2           .3         .4             .5
                                Data                                                                              Data




mobility costs as multiples of U S × wU S , where wU S is the average wage in the US (in the data).
We obtain that our estimated mobility costs across sectors (as a fraction of U S × wU S ) range
from virtually zero to a maximum of 3.1. These numbers are of the same order of magnitude, but
lower than what Artu¸
                    c et al. (2010) estimate (in their preferred specification, mobility costs are
6 times average wages). We believe that two ingredients of our model absent from theirs, search
frictions and sector-specific utility terms k,i , account for our lower estimates of mobility costs.
Indeed, Artu¸
            c and McLaren (2015) extends ACM to allow for  terms and also find lower moving
frictions. Finally, Table A.7 shows that the values of unemployment bi tend to be negative across
all countries. As the search literature has shown, a negative value of unemployment is necessary
to generate the magnitudes of wage dispersion typically found in the data (e.g., Hornstein et al.,
2011; Meghir et al., 2015).
   Figure 2 shows the model fit for the various moments we target: (a) employment shares across
sectors and countries; (b) unemployment rates across sectors and countries; (c) average wages across
sectors and countries; and (d) inter-sectoral transition rates in the United States. As a general rule,

                                                                            24
the model matches the targeted moments well.


4.2    Impulse Response Functions

Endogenizing trade imbalances as optimal inter-temporal consumption decisions implies that the
dynamics of the shocks hitting the economy are key for the evolution of imbalances. Hence, in
order to understand the rich mechanisms at play in our model, we study the model's behavior in
response to three sets of shocks. First, we subject the model to a tenfold increase in Ak,China , the
productivity location parameter in China, uniform across sectors k and lasting for five years before
turning back to its original level--the magnitude of this shock is in line with the size of actual
changes in Chinese productivity that we recover in section 5.1. Next, we feed the model with a
tenfold permanent increase in Ak,China that happens once and for all at t = 1. Finally, we simulate
a slow-moving and linear increase in Ak,China that reaches a tenfold increase in 15 years. It remains
at that level from there on. These shocks are illustrated in Figure 3. The economy is initially in
steady state, so that the shocks are unanticipated at t = 0, but their paths are fully anticipated at
t = 1. To highlight the quantitative and qualitative importance of modeling trade imbalances, we
study the behavior of the complete model with bonds as well as the behavior of a model without
bonds, where trade is balanced in every period--that is N Xit = 0 i, t.27
    We start with the temporary shock depicted in Figure 3a. The evolution of net exports in
Figure 4 aligns with what we would have expected from standard macroeconomic models with
inter-temporal decisions. The temporary boost in productivity, and therefore income, induces
China to save in the short run by running a large trade surplus. As productivity reverts back to its
initial level, China sustains a permanent trade deficit of 21% of GDP, as it consumes the return on
its savings. On the other hand, the remaining countries borrow from China, running trade deficits
in the short run. As the productivity increase in China vanishes, all countries start to sustain
permanent trade surpluses, repaying their debts to China.
    While these aggregate patterns are standard, this productivity shock has varied impacts on
the more disaggregated economy. Specifically, the rise in productivity induces substantial labor
reallocation across sectors. We summarize reallocation patterns relying on the following measure:

                                                                               -1
                                                   1
                                                        t   J
                                                                 Ls
                                                                  i,k       Ls
                                                                             i,k
                                Reallocationt
                                            i    =                      -      -1   ,                      (38)
                                                   2             Ls
                                                                  i         Ls
                                                                             i
                                                       s=1 k=1


which accumulates yearly changes in sectoral employment shares over time.
    Figure 5a plots the evolution of the reallocation index (38) across countries. When we consider
  27
     To make these two cases comparable, we study the complete model responses (with trade imbalances) imposing
that trade is balanced in the initial steady state. See Online Appendix C.3 for details on how we implement this
procedure using exact hat algebra techniques.



                                                       25
            Figure 3: Shocks to Chinese Productivity Ak,China ­ Uniform Across Sectors
                    (a) Temporary                                          (b) Once-And-For-All




                   (c) Slow Moving




our complete model with bonds, there is an immediate and steep rise in reallocation in all countries
following China's productivity jump. After productivity returns to its initial level, reallocation
continues for several years before reaching its final steady-state level. Even though we consider a
uniform productivity shock across sectors, we observe substantial labor reallocation within China
and within other countries.28 The reason that uniform productivity changes can have large impacts
on labor reallocation is trade across countries, which adds asymmetries to how sectors respond to
the same productivity shock. Our model features two sources of asymmetries. First, heterogeneity
in trade costs implies that the tradability of goods differs across countries and sectors. As explained
by Dornbusch et al. (1977), transfers (here, net exports) across countries alter the terms of trade
and therefore the allocation of economic activity within each country. Second, countries differ in
their final consumption bundles which implies that the global distribution of final consumption
expenditure matters for the allocation of workers across sectors. Relatedly, heterogeneity in input-
output linkages across countries also generate changes in countries' terms of trade and global
expenditure patterns.
  28
     Note that in a closed economy without mobility costs and search frictions, we would have seen no reallocation
effects given homothetic preferences and our production structure as relative prices would not change. However, the
presence of heterogeneous mobility costs across sectors could lead to some reallocation effects as the option value
of search would change differentially across sectors. However, based on Shimer (2005) we expect this effect to be
quantitatively small.




                                                        26
Figure 4: Net Exports Over GDP in Response to Temporary Productivity Growth in China (Figure
3a)




   The increase in reallocation is directly tied to an increase in unemployment in all countries,
as shown in Figure 5b. This highlights a key mechanism in our model: even positive labor de-
mand shocks can increase unemployment through asymmetric shifts in labor demand. Once again,
there are two reasons this can occur. First, contracting sectors will destroy low productivity jobs,
dislocating workers who must switch sectors. Second, it takes time for workers who switch into
expanding sectors to find new jobs. Relatedly, that there is no systematic relationship between the
response of unemployment and the sign of trade imbalances.
   The reason why modeling imbalances generates more reallocation is due to the richer patterns
of reallocation that emerge, shown in Figures 5c (for the full model) and 5d (for balanced trade).
When we consider the complete model with bonds, rising imports in the US following Chinese
productivity growth do not need to be immediately met with rising exports. Instead, the US
imports goods in the short run and reallocates labor to service sectors, which are less tradable.
This pattern follows from homothetic preferences, and so demand for services increases when total
consumption in the US rises--as this demand cannot be easily met with imports. However, if we
impose balanced trade in every period, exports from the US must immediately rise to offset the
increase in imports. In doing so, labor reallocates to the sector in which it has highest comparative
advantage (high relative productivity coupled with lower trade costs), which is also the sector in
which China has higher relative demand: Agriculture. Reallocation when trade is balanced is
driven by trade costs and comparative advantage, which do not change much in response to the
temporary productivity growth in China.

                                                 27
Figure 5: Labor Market Dynamics in Response to Temporary Productivity Growth in China (3a)
            (a) Reallocation Index                          (b) Unemployment




       (c) Labor Allocations - Full Model          (d) Labor Allocations - Balanced Trade




                                            28
       Turning to the long run, savings and borrowing behavior leads to permanent changes in final
steady-state bond positions across countries. These permanent shifts in the long-run allocation
of wealth carry implications for steady-state labor allocations and unemployment. The sources of
long-run reallocation are similar to those operating in the short run, except that the effects of the
temporary shock on the distribution of bonds positions (and therefore wealth) across countries is
permanent. Specifically, the US runs a large deficit in the short run, which must be paid off in
the form of long-run trade surpluses. To repay its debt with China, it shifts labor back to its
goods sectors which can easily ship their production internationally. In the long run, the goods
sectors in the US expand relative to the initial steady state, whereas its service sectors slightly
contract. These long-run effects in response to a temporary shock are in sharp contrast with those
in the model with balanced trade, which predicts that long-run allocations are unchanged relative
to initial ones.
       We next turn to the analysis of the once-and-for-all shock in Chinese productivity depicted in
Figure 3b. Figure 6 highlights that the effect of this shock on net exports across countries is of much
smaller magnitude. Indeed, when an economy is subject to a permanent shock the importance of
savings to smooth consumption is of second order. If labor were perfectly mobile across sectors,
economies would instantaneously reallocate labor and achieve their unconstrained optimal levels of
expenditure. Because labor is not perfectly mobile, we do observe imbalances arising, but these are
modest. It is therefore not surprising that, in the event of once-and-for-all permanent shocks, the
behavior of the model with imbalances is similar to one without imbalances.29
  29
    However, it is worth pointing out that this prediction of the model could be different for a shock that is not
uniform across sectors, or for permanent shocks to trade costs (Reyes-Heroles, 2016; Alessandria and Choi, 2019).




                                                       29
Figure 6: Net Exports Over GDP in Response to Once-and-for-all Productivity Growth in China
(Figure 3b)




   Finally, we study the behavior of our model when we feed it with a slow increase in Chinese
productivity, as is illustrated in Figure 3c. Figure 7 shows that, in this case, China heavily borrows
in the short run in anticipation of its large increase in long-run productivity. All other countries
lend to China by running large surpluses for over ten years. As with the temporary shock, trade
imbalances greatly magnify the extent to which reallocation and unemployment respond relative to
the trade balance benchmark. Figures 8a and 8b show that the short-run labor market dynamics
are very different across the two models. With trade imbalances, Figure 8c shows that the US
reallocates resources away from its service sectors and towards its goods sectors so that their
output can be shipped to China. However, in the long run, China needs to repay its debt and
so ships goods back to the US. This leads to a long-run contraction of manufacturing in the US
and an expansion of the remaining sectors. Compare this behavior with the monotonic decline in
manufacturing in the US if trade is imposed to be balanced in Figure 8d. The magnitude of the
manufacturing contraction is also much more limited under trade balance.
   The main conclusion of this section is that trade imbalances can significantly amplify the real-
location and unemployment responses to temporary shocks. They can also lead to very different
patterns of inter-sectoral reallocation in the short and long run. However, the quantitative relevance
of endogenizing imbalances depends on the nature of the shock, as illustrated by our once-and-for-all
permanent shock example. This fact can be appreciated by comparing the results for the tempo-
rary and slow moving shocks. An additional important result worth pointing out from our previous
analysis is that the magnitude of reallocation and unemployment responses is independent of the

                                                 30
sign of the trade imbalance. Finally, our simulations highlight that, with trade imbalances, the full
path of shocks matter for the behavior of imbalances over time, but also for the determinantion
of their long-run consequences. Given the importance of the path of shocks for trade imbalances
and the adjustment process, we now turn to the analysis of the labor market consequences of the
shocks the global economy actually experienced between 2000 and 2014.

Figure 7: Net Exports Over GDP in Response to Slow Productivity Growth in China (Figure 3c)




5    Counterfactuals

Section 4.2 showed that the exact path of shocks shape the magnitude and evolution of trade
imbalances over time, directly influencing long-run outcomes through changes in the long-run global
distribution of bond holdings. For this reason, we conduct an empirical exercise in which we extract
the various shocks the global economy has actually experienced between 2000 and 2014. Armed
with these shocks, we conduct a common exercise in the international trade literature: how do
labor markets behave over time in response to the constellation of globalization shocks (i.e., shocks
to productivity and trade costs)? In this exercise, we compare the labor markets responses that
we obtain with our model of trade imbalances to the responses that we obtain imposing balanced
trade. Having established the quantitative importance of trade imbalances for both the adjustment
process and long-run allocations, we compare the consumption gains in response to changes in trade
costs in our model to those obtained in standard models of trade, as summarized by the sufficient
statistic approach developped by Arkolakis et al. (2012). Next, we compute the globalization gains
accrued to each country between 2000 and 2014, and compare them to those obtained in a world

                                                 31
Figure 8: Labor Market Dynamics in Response to Slow Productivity Growth in China (Figure 3c)
             (a) Reallocation Index                          (b) Unemployment




        (c) Labor Allocations - Full Model          (d) Labor Allocations - Balanced Trade




                                             32
without the global savings glut, or in a world with balanced trade (i.e., no bonds). Finally, given the
recent interest on the "China shock" on the US labor market, we use our extracted shocks to study
the effects of shocks to the Chinese economy on the behavior of unemployment and manufacturing
employment in the US. We also investigate the contribution of the "China shock" for the US trade
deficit and for the trade surplus in China.


5.1      Extracting Shocks from the Data

This section obtains the time series for three sets of shocks in the global economy between December
of 2000 and December of 2014: changes in trade costs                          dt
                                                                               k,oi , inter-temporal preference shocks

 t                          t
 i and productivity shocks Ak,i . We measure changes in trade costs and productivity relative
                                                                    dt                   At
to December of 2000 (which we label t = 0): dt
                                             k,oi =
                                                                     k,oi
                                                                    d0
                                                                          ,   At
                                                                               k,i =
                                                                                          k,i
                                                                                         A0
                                                                                              .   On the other hand, shocks
                                                                     k,oi                 k,i
                                                                                                   t +1
to inter-temporal preferences are relative to the previous period: t
                                                                   i
                                                                     +1
                                                                                                   i
                                                                                                   t
                                                                                                        .30
                                                                                                     i
                                                                 t                              I,t
       We use WIOD data to construct time series of trade shares k,oi , sectoral price indices Pk,i
                             C,t
and final good expenditures Ei   between December of 2000 and December of 2014. Armed with
these data, we can exploit the gravity structure of the trade block of the model, as in Head and Ries
(2001) and Eaton et al. (2016), to recover the changes in bilateral trade costs combining equations
equations (28) and (30):
                                                         I,t     t          1/
                                                        Pk,i     k,oo
                                            dt
                                             k,oi   =    I,t     t                   .                                 (39)
                                                        Pk,o     k,oi

In turn, we rely on the Euler equation (35) and normalize t
                                                          U S = 1 t, as in Reyes-Heroles (2016),
to recover the inter-temporal preference shocks:

                                             C,t+1  C,t
                                            Ei     EU
                                  t
                                  i
                                    +1
                                       =      C,t
                                                      S
                                                   C,t+1
                                                                 for t = 1, ..., T - 1,                                (40)
                                             Ei   EU S

where T is the last period for which we have data, which refers to December of 2014. Note that we
still need to determine T
                        i
                          +1
                             , but we will need to use the structure of the model to do so, as this
                                                                                       C,
value will depend on the model-implied steady-state value for final good expenditures Ei  .
       Finally, we recover the productivity shocks At
                                                    k,i               using:

                                                          t
                                                          k,ii                
                                             At
                                              k,i =              
                                                                     ct
                                                                      k,i        .                                     (41)
                                                          I,t
                                                         Pk,i

  30
     We impose At        T        t       T
                  k,i = Ak,i and dk,oi = dk,oi for all t > T , where T is the last period for which we have data (T = 14
                                                                                                                 T +1
and refers to December 2014). We also impose and t      i = 1 for all t > T +1--as explained below, the value of i    =1
                                                                                               C,
is set to gauge the model-implied steady-state value for final consumption expenditures Ei .




                                                           33
Given that ct               t
            k,i depends on wk,i , which has no data counterpart, we need to use the full structure
of the model to recover the sequence of productivity shocks. Online Appendix C.6 details the
algorithm to recover the shocks           At
                                           k,i       as well as     T
                                                                    i
                                                                      +1
                                                                                using the full structure of the model.
To be able to recover the full set of shocks the economy experienced between 2000 and 2014, we
assume the economy faces no additional shocks after 2015. That is, the values for                       At
                                                                                                         k,i ,    dt
                                                                                                                   k,oi
and t
    i are imposed to be constant from 2015 onwards.
                                                    31

       Figure 9a shows an increase in productivity all over the world. In particular, China has ex-
perienced large increases in productivity, especially in manufacturing sectors.32 Other emerging
economies--which comprise the bulk of the Americas and the Rest of the World aggregate--also
experienced impressive productivity growth, while growth was more muted for advanced economies.
       Turning to trade costs, we first construct a summary statistic to capture this large object. We
focus on the average import cost for each country-sector pair, weighted by their initial steady state
import shares:
                                                                0
                                                                k,oi
                                               t
                                              dk,i   =             0      dt
                                                                           k,oi .                                   (42)
                                                               1 - k,ii
                                                         o=i

Figure 9b plots this index for each country and sector. In general, import trade costs are declining
for the United States and Asia, and approximately flat in Europe (with some heterogeneity across
sectors). Perhaps surprisingly, starting after the 2008 financial crisis and concurrent collapse in
trade, initially falling import trade costs in China begin to revert and are actually larger by the
end of the sample. This estimate of changes in trade costs reflects the fall in the share of trade in
output, as documented in Bems et al. (2013). The sources for these increasing frictions are myriad,
and include policy changes in countries like China, as well as changes in supply chain management,
and other reasons. That said, our measures of frictions are a standard, straightforward, measure
of the implied barriers to trade.
       Finally, we turn to our measure of shocks to inter-temporal preferences, which are presented in
Figure 10. The shocks in the US are normalized to 1 in every period. In Europe and Asia (except
China), the discount factor shocks fluctuate around 1, suggesting little persistent deviations in
consumption behavior from what would be expected with a simple consumption smoothing model.
On the other hand, China, the Americas, and the aggregated remaining countries (Rest of the
World) exhibit persistent shocks to their inter-temporal preferences, suggesting increased patience
over the period we consider. These persistent deviations are often referred to as the "global savings
  31
    We also assume the economy is in steady state in 2000 and fully anticipates the full set of current and future
shocks in 2001.
  32
     While we plot changes in the productivity location parameters At       k,i , this is not directly comparable to pro-
ductivity in the classic sense of a Solow Residual. In order to make sense of the magnitudes, note that TFP growth,
                   I,t
defined as ct                                  t    t
             k,i /Pk,i , can be expressed as (Ak,i /k,ii )
                                                           1/
                                                              . Therefore, using our recovered values for At k,i , data on
changes in trade shares, and imposing  = 4, the magnitude for actual annualized TFP growth in China ranges from
3 to 5% per year, depending on the sector--which is in line with growth accounting estimates discussed in Zhu (2012).


                                                               34
      Figure 9: Extracted Globalization Shocks
              (a) Productivity Shocks At
                                       k,i




                                  t
(b) Trade-Weighted Import Costs dk,i (See Equation (42))




                          35
glut."33 It is important to recognize that there are rich dynamics to consumption in the real world,
reflecting preferences, frictions, and other factors. We are agnostic on the exact theory, instead
summarizing the effect of these channels with the t
                                                  i shocks. This is useful because it allows
us to ask counterfactual questions about the dynamics of globalization shocks without the global
savings glut, without having to specify what policy or change in deep parameters to achieve this--a
useful benchmark to compare against the usual assumption in trade of no consumption smoothing
whatsoever.

                       Figure 10: Extracted Inter-Temporal Preference Shocks t
                                                                             i




       To extract the shocks the global economy experienced between 2000 and 2014, we have solely
relied on data on trade shares, sectoral prices, and aggregate final expenditures across countries. We
have not used information on labor allocations or trade imbalances. It is therefore natural to ask how
the model-implied behavior of labor allocations and trade imbalances compare to those in the data.
A note of caution before we proceed with this comparison: given our perfect foresight assumption,
once we feed the shocks into the model, responses at impact are large as agents (suddenly) fully
anticipate the path of future shocks. That said, Figure 11 compares labor allocations in the United
States in our model (Panel a) to labor allocations in the data (Panel b). Our model replicates
the decline of manufacturing as a whole, the expansion of services, and the decline and rebound
of agriculture. The magnitudes in our model are compressed, but we believe this is explained by
  33
   The large trade surplus that China has been running since the early 2000s is a puzzle for models in which the
main driving forces are productivity shocks. For instance, as argued by Song et al. (2011), financial frictions within
China are key drivers of the Chinese savings glut. Our inter-temporal preference shocks constitute a reduced-form
way to allow the model to match the time series behavior of Chinese aggregate expenditures and the rest of the world.


                                                         36
pre-existing trends driving the decline of manufacturing as well as the fact that we impose that the
inter-temporal shocks t
                      i revert to 1 after 2014. The latter observation is important as individuals
in the model anticipate the end of the savings glut years before the end of our sample period,
leading to some rebalancing happening before 2014. This observation is also important to explain
the strong rebound of Low-Tech Manufacturing, for which we do not find support in the data. To
verify the plausibility of this explanation, we simulated the same shocks we extracted with one
difference: we keep the t
                        i shocks fixed at their 2012 to 2014 averages for 15 more years (that is,
until 2029). Indeed, not only the magnitude of the downsize of manufacturing that we obtain is
larger than what is depicted in Figure 11a, but also Low-Tech steadily contracts until 2014.

                 Figure 11: Comparing Labor Allocations in the Model and Data
                    (a) Model                                            (b) Data




   Figure 12 compares the model-implied trade imbalances in the US and China to those in the
data. The model is able to capture the large surplus in China as well as the persistent deficit in
the US. However, the model misses the behavior of Chinese imbalances in the beginning of the
period. This happens as China anticipates its massive shocks that are coming (both large increases
in productivity and shocks to inter-temporal preferences), which leads to large unemployment in
the short run. In turn, this implies an initial production shortage and trade deficits.


5.2   Global Technology and Trade Shocks

Our first counterfactual exercise focuses on the general equilibrium effects of changes in productivity
and trade costs since 2000, with no shocks to inter-temporal preferences. In particular, we focus
on the consequences of our extracted series of    At
                                                   i   and   dt
                                                              k,oi   above. Our goal is to isolate the
quantitative significance of globalization on labor market outcomes in a setting where workers
smooth their consumption over time. As we will show, the shocks we recover from the data
have significant impacts on global imbalances, which has implications for adjustment dynamics,
unemployment, wages, and, ultimately, consumption.
   Before discussing results, it is helpful to contrast our approach with standard practice. There

                                                  37
                       Figure 12: Comparing Net Exports in the Model and Data
                        (a) Model                                                    (b) Data




are two typical approaches to dealing with imbalances in the quantitative trade literature. The
first approach involves fixing imbalances in the data, or assuming balanced trade period by period.
This method has been employed in both static models (e.g., Eaton and Kortum (2002) and Dekle
et al. (2007)) and dynamic models (e.g., Dix-Carneiro (2014) and Traiberman (2019)). The use
of this method in dynamic models is a particularly strong assumption, since it implicitly imposes
that workers and governments have no access to borrowing or savings mechanisms. The second
approach, involves assigning ownership shares of capital or fixed factors to agents at an initial
point, and fixing these shares over time and in counterfactuals. Although this procedure does not
follow from optimizing behavior, this method has been used in Caliendo et al. (2019), allowing for
imbalances to change as returns to fixed factors change. If returns to capital increase while those to
labor decline, this implies that workers have access to some social insurance. Nevertheless, agents
are prevented from buying or selling shares in response to the shocks they face.34
    To be able to compare the implications of the globalization shocks in our model of trade im-
balances relative to a model without imbalances, we start both models from a steady steady with
trade balance--that is N Xit = 0 i at t = 0, see Online Appendix C.3 for details on our procedure,
which is based on exact hat algebra. Figure 13 shows that the globalization shocks we feed into
the model can lead to substantial imbalances in the short run. These predictions range from a
trade deficit in China of up to 65% of GDP to a trade surplus in Asia close to 20%. The US runs
a short-run surplus amounting to close to 10% of GDP. As expected from previous literature, if
we purge the model of the inter-temporal preference shocks, we see China running a large trade
deficit in the short run. This is not surprising in light of our discussion in section 4.2 as Chinese
productivity strongly and steadily increases between 2000 and 2014, more than in other countries.
  34
     These approximations may be reasonable in a situation where imbalances are small along the transition path from
one equilibrium to the next. This would be the case, for example, if the primary force for changes in imbalances were
shocks to aggregate consumption, and orthogonal to trade shocks (i.e., if imbalances were driven by t i ). Nevertheless,
these are imperfect if the path and magnitude of trade shocks lead to large changes in consumption and savings,
which we show is the case below.


                                                          38
      Figure 13: Net Exports Over GDP in Response to Global Technology and Trade Shocks




   We learned in our analysis of section 4.2 that trade imbalances can amplify the amount of
reallocation in the economy relative to a model where trade is balanced. Our empirical exercise
corroborates this finding, as we illustrate in Figure 14a. The behavior of unemployment is also quite
different, and driven by a larger amount of reallocation. Figures 13 and 14b also show that the
responses of unemployment are not systematically related to the sign of imbalances. Importantly,
Figures 14c and 14d highlight the importance of modeling trade imbalances in understanding the
adjustment process in response to globalization shocks. A model that imposes trade balance often
predicts opposing patterns of short-run reallocation. For example, our model with imbalances
predicts that the globalization shocks would lead to an expansion of all manufacturing sectors in
the US in the short run, but a contraction in the long run. On the other hand, trade balance would
lead to a monotonic decline of High-Tech Manufacturing and a long-run expansion of Low-Tech
Manufacturing. Other countries also display drastically different patterns of adjustment in both
the short and long runs.


5.3    Trade Costs and Imbalances

The previous section established that empirically-extracted shocks can lead to significant trade
imbalances, and that accounting for these imbalances can substantially alter the adjustment process
relative to a balanced-trade world. This section studies the implications of both trade imbalances
and labor market frictions for the consumption gains from trade, and for how these compare with
the widely used sufficient-statistics approach based on Arkolakis et al. (2012), henceforth ACR. Our
model nests the Ricardian model considered in ACR, but violates two of their key assumptions: (i)


                                                 39
Figure 14: Labor Market Dynamics in Response to Global Technology and Trade Shocks
        (a) Reallocation Index                          (b) Unemployment




   (c) Labor Allocations - Full Model          (d) Labor Allocations - Balanced Trade




                                        40
no labor market frictions; and (ii) no trade imbalances.
   Concretely, we consider the changes in trade costs between 2000 and 2014 we obtain in Section
5.1, purging the model of shocks to inter-temporal preferences and to productivity. In this case,
the implied gains from trade following Costinot and Rodr´
                                                        iguez-Clare (2014), who extend the ACR
formula to allow for input-output linkages, is given by:

                                                       K K
                                                                  -µ       jk,i /
                                 WiACR, Static   =               k,iij,i            ,             (43)
                                                       j =1k=1


where all of the changes are between final and initial steady states and jk,i is the j, k th element
of the Leontief Inverse of the input-output matrix in country i. We obtain k,ii solving our full
model. To perform the comparison between consumption gains in our model and those using the
ACR formula, we first focus on the change in steady-state consumption given by our framework.
Given the static nature of the ACR model, we believe this is a more direct comparison between our
predictions for the gains from trade.
   Figure 15a displays the comparison between the long-run ACR gains in consumption (blue bars)
and the long-run gains we obtain in our model (red bars). Overall, these gains are quite different.
The ACR formula predicts that the US endures a 0.6% loss in response to the changes in trade
costs the global economy experiences, whereas our model predicts that the US experiences a gain of
0.9%. Our conclusions differ starkly in China, where the ACR formula predicts a gain of almost 3%,
but our model predicts a long-run loss of 0.7%. These numbers differ because of both labor market
frictions and long-run trade imbalances that arise in our model. The latter figures depend on the
full path of shocks fed into the model, and not just the initial and final levels of trade costs--as do
the ACR gains. Figure 16 shows the long-run trade imbalances that arise in our model. They are
particularly important in China, Asia, and the Rest of the World.
   Given the dynamic nature of our model, we define the dynamic consumption gains from trade
as the ratio between the level of constant consumption that would yield the same net present
value consumption that unfolds along the transition path and the initial steady-state consumption.
Mathematically:
                                                 
                          Wi  exp (1 -  )               t log(Cit ) - log(CiSS0 ) .               (44)
                                                 t=0

Similarly, we can also calculate "ACR Dynamic" gains from trade, by taking the net present value
of the static gains calculated by (43) in every period. More precisely:
                                                                                             
                                                                 K K
                      WiACR, Dynamic = (1 -  )           t                  t
                                                                           (k,ii )-µj,i jk,i /    (45)
                                                  t=0        j =1k=1




                                                       41
      t
where k,ii is the change in trade shares between periods 0 and t, computed using our full model.

               Figure 15: Shocks in Trade Costs and the Consumption Gains from Trade
            (a) Long-Run Gains from Trade                                   (b) Dynamic Gains from Trade




Notes: In Panel (a), the blue bars, "ACR," refer to the consumption gains computed using equation (43); the red bars, "Full
Model," refer to the change in steady-state consumption given by our full model with trade imbalances. In Panel (b), the blue
bars, "ACR," refer to the present value of gains calculated by using equation (45); the red bars, "Full Model," refer to the
                                                                                                                       t
present value of gains over the transition in the full model with trade imbalances, using equation (44). In all cases, k,ii is
                                                            t
obtained by simulating our full model initialized with N Xi = 0i at t = 0



    Figure 15b compares the consumption gains predicted by the "dynamic ACR" formula (45)
to the dynamic gains computed according our model (44). Although predictions are now similar
for China and Europe, they are quite different for the remaining countries. For example, Asia
enjoys a consumption gain of almost 2.5% according to the dynamic ACR formula, whereas our
model predicts an essentially zero gain. Also noteworthy, the Rest of the World gains by almost
2% according to our model, but by less than 0.5% according to the dynamic ACR formula. In
a series of exercises available upon request, we investigate the separate role of trade imbalances
and labor market frictions behind the discrepancies between the predictions of the ACR formula
and those of our model. To that end, we simulate our model under balanced-trade and still find
significant differences between the gains predicted by our model and those by the ACR formula.
We conclude that both trade imbalances and labor market frictions are important contributors to
the divergences we document.


5.4     Globalization Gains

The previous section compared how the consumption gains in our model compare with those from
the ACR formula in response to shocks in trade costs alone. We now ask by how much countries
benefitted from all globalization shocks during the period we consider, which include shocks to trade
costs, technology and inter-temporal preferences. To that aim, we adopt the following procedure.
For each country at a time, we neutralized the shocks it experienced between 2000 and 2014, while

                                                             42
      Figure 16: Steady-Sate Changes in Net Exports in Response to Shocks in Trade Costs




feeding the model with the path of shocks faced by the remaining countries. For example, to assess
the effects of globalization on US consumption, we set all US shocks to 1, but we keep shocks to
remaining countries at the values we recovered in Section 5.1. Table V displays the results. The
first column shows that all countries benefitted from globalization. China benefitted the most,
with consumption gains reaching 6.6%. The Americas and Asia/Oceania gained the least: 0.03%.
The magnitude of gains can be significantly affected if we impose trade balance: the second column
shows that gains in the US are reduced from 2.2% to 1.3%. Finally, we investigate the effect of inter-
temporal shocks in the third and fourth columns (with and without trade imbalances, respectively).
If we shut down the global savings glut, welfare in the US is significantly higher, reaching 3.8%.
We conclude observing that even though our results are consistent with the belief that the global
savings glut was detrimental to the US, balancing trade would lead to an even worse situation.


5.5    The China Shock

As a final application of our model, we investigate the role of China on the adjustment of the labor
market in the US. This topic has attracted much academic interest since the work of Autor et al.
(2013) and Pierce and Schott (2016). We compare the behavior of our model when we feed it with
all of the shocks we recovered in Section 5.1 (which we label as the Benchmark counterfactual) to
the behavior of the model when (a) shocks to China are set to be equal to the average of shocks
experienced by the remaining countries; and when (b) we neutralize China's savings glut by setting
t
China = 1 for all t.
                    35 In these simulations, trade imbalances in the initial steady state are set at

N Xit=0 = N XiData , that is, the level of trade imbalances in the data in 2000.
  35
     Shocks to inter-temporal preferences and their interaction with standard shocks in productivities and trade costs
differentiate these counterfactual experiments from Caliendo et al. (2019) and Ad~ao et al. (2020).


                                                         43
                       Table V: Globalization Consumption Gains Over 2000-2014

                                                                         Complete Model         Balanced Trade
   Country                  Complete Model         Balanced Trade
                                                                           ti = 1 i, t            ti = 1 i, t
   United States                   1.022                 1.013                1.038                  1.013
   China                           1.066                 1.067                1.056                  1.067
   Europe                          1.015                 1.015                1.025                  1.016
   Asia/Oceania                    1.003                 1.021                0.997                  1.021
   Americas                        1.003                 1.006                1.002                  1.006
   Rest of the World               1.052                 1.045                1.037                  1.045
   Notes: Each row displays Wi (see equation (44)) in response to extracted shocks to all other countries when own
  country shocks are neutralized. Third and fourth columns impose t     i = 1 i, t, neutralizing all inter-temporal
  preference shocks. To make the Complete Model exercises comparable with the Balanced Trade ones, we initialize
                                t
  the Complete Model with N Xi    = 0 for t = 0.



    We first analyze the situation where shocks to China between 2000 and 2014 are imposed to be
equal to the average of shocks across all of the remaining countries.36 The objective is to understand
the behavior of the global economy in a counterfactual world where Chinese fundamentals evolved
like those of an average country. The red dashed line in Figure 17a shows that China runs a much
more modest trade surplus over time compared to the Benchmark illustrated by the blue solid line.
Interestingly, Figure 17b shows that the behavior of the US trade deficit is barely affected if shocks
to China are set to other countries' averages. This result suggests that the evolution of the US
trade deficit between 2000 and 2014 was not greatly influenced by the extraordinary shocks China
experienced over this period. Instead, the evolution of the trade deficit in the US was primarily
dictated by the full constellation of shocks that the global economy experienced over the 2000's.
This result highlights an important advantage of our multi-country model relative to two-country
models, where changes in the trade balance in one country are mirrored in the other.
    Figure 18 describes the impact of the China shock on sectoral reallocation in the US. The red
dashed line shows that if shocks to China had behaved in an ordinary way between 2000 and 2014,
the contraction in Mid- and High-Tech Manufacturing would have been less pronounced. The effect
of the China shock on employment in Low-Tech Manufacturing is not as visible, but the dashed
red line is consistently above the solid blue line, showing that shocks to the Chinese economy led
to mild contractions in employment in the sector (or prevented stronger growth in the long run).
In contrast, employment in Agriculture and Services (particularly Low-Tech Services) moved in
opposite directions, quickly absorbing workers displaced from Manufacturing. Figure 19a shows
that the behavior of unemployment with the China shock (solid blue line) or without it (dashed
   36
      Shocks to trade costs from country i to China are set to be equal to a weighted average of shocks between country
i and all other countries--weights are given by country sizes Li . Shocks to trade costs from China to country i are
set to be equal to the weighted average of shocks between all remaining countries and country i.



                                                          44
                                  Figure 17: The China Shock: Net Exports

             (a) NX / GDP in the China                                        (b) NX / GDP in the US




  Notes: "All Shocks": model is fed with all shocks recovered in section 5.1. "China Receives World Avg. Shocks": model
  is fed with all shocks recovered in section 5.1, with the exception of China. For China, productivity and inter-temporal
  productivity shocks between 2000 and 2014 are imposed to be equal to the average of these shocks across all the
  remaining countries. Shocks to trade costs from country i to China are set to be equal to a weighted average of shocks
  between country i and all other countries--weights are given by country sizes Li . Shocks to trade costs from China to
  country i are set to be equal to the weighted average of shocks between all remaining countries and country i. "All
  Shocks but China = 1": model is fed with all shocks recovered in section 5.1 but China's savings glut by setting
  t China = 1 for all t. t = 0 corresponds to year 2000. t = 14 corresponds to 2014, the last year of data we employed to
  extract the shocks.




red line) is very similar. Indeed, in either case, the unemployment rate reaches a maximum of
3.14%.
   It is important to highlight that the small response of US unemployment in Figure 19a is not a
mechanical feature of our model. Indeed, Figures 5b, 8b and 14b show substantial changes in the
unemployment rate in the US and other countries in response to other shocks we simulate. Further
insights can be obtained if we study the behavior of sectoral unemployment. Consider the "All
Shocks" counterfactual, where we feed the model with all the shocks we extracted in Section 5.1.
Figure 19b shows that the response of sectoral unemployment rates is considerably larger than the
aggregate response. Specifically, aggregate unemployment ranges from 3.06% to 3.14% in response
to the extracted shocks. At the sectoral level, unemployment within the manufacturing sectors
repond more strongly and range between 3.65% and 4.35% and unemployment within agriculture
varies between 2.6% and 3.4%. However, unemployment within the service sectors are essentially
unresponsive to the shocks. Therefore, given that 86% of workers are initially in services, the effect
of these shocks on US unemployment is muted. On the other hand, aggregate unemployment ranges
from 6.5% to 12.5% in Europe and from 3.5% and 14% in China, showing that the model is capable
of producing substantial unemployment responses to global shocks.
   It is also instructive to compare the behavior of the model when it is subjected to all the global
shocks we extracted in Section 5.1 (the Benchmark) to its behavior when we subject it with the

                                                            45
                         Figure 18: The China Shock: Labor Allocations in the US




Notes: "All Shocks": model is fed with all shocks recovered in section 5.1. "China Receives World Avg. Shocks": model is fed
with all shocks recovered in section 5.1, with the exception of China. For China, productivity and inter-temporal productivity
shocks between 2000 and 2014 are imposed to be equal to the average of these shocks across all the remaining countries.
Shocks to trade costs from country i to China are set to be equal to a weighted average of shocks between country i and all
other countries--weights are given by country sizes Li . Shocks to trade costs from China to country i are set to be equal to
the weighted average of shocks between all remaining countries and country i. "All Shocks but China = 1": model is fed
with all shocks recovered in section 5.1 but China's savings glut by setting tChina = 1 for all t. t = 0 corresponds to year
2000. t = 14 corresponds to 2014, the last year of data we employed to extract the shocks.



same shocks but remove China's saving glut (that is, we set t
                                                            China = 1 for all t). The yellow
dotted line in Figure 17a shows that, in the absence of China's savings glut, China would have run
a massive trade deficit in the short run, reaching 75% of GDP.37 These large short-run deficits are
then accompanied by large permanent trade surpluses in the long run, surpassing 10% of GDP.
The evolution of the dotted yellow line is unsurprising in light of our our discussion in Section 4.2,
and, more specifically, given Figure 7. In anticipation of a much higher level of productivity in the
future (see Figure 9a), China borrows greatly in the short run to smooth consumption over time.
  37
    In our model, in the absence of shocks to inter-temporal preferences, countries perfectly smooth consumption
expenditure over time. This fact gives rise to a surge in imbalances that is not in line with what we observe in
the data. There is ample evidence that the world is far from perfect consumption smoothing or risk sharing as
documented and analyzed in Heathcote and Perri (2014).



                                                             46
                           Figure 19: The China Shock: Unemployment in the US
             (a) Aggregate Unemployment                                      (b) Sectoral Unemployment




Notes: Panel (a) -- "All Shocks": model is fed with all shocks recovered in section 5.1. "China Receives World Avg. Shocks":
model is fed with all shocks recovered in section 5.1, with the exception of China. For China, productivity and inter-temporal
productivity shocks between 2000 and 2014 are imposed to be equal to the average of these shocks across all the remaining
countries. Shocks in trade costs from country i to China are set to be equal to the simple average of shocks between country i
and all other countries. Shocks to trade costs from country i to China are set to be equal to a weighted average of shocks
between country i and all other countries--weights are given by country sizes Li . Shocks to trade costs from China to country
i are set to be equal to the weighted average of shocks between all remaining countries and country i. "All Shocks but
China = 1": model is fed with all shocks recovered in section 5.1 but China's savings glut by setting t  China = 1 for all t.
t = 0 corresponds to year 2000. t = 14 corresponds to 2014, the last year of data we employed to extract the shocks. Panel (b)
-- Behavior of sectoral unemployment rates in response to "All Shocks".



This debt must be repaid in the form of large surpluses in the long run. This result illustrates the
quantitatively important role of shocks to inter-temporal preferences t
                                                                      China not only in offsetting
these large short-run trade deficits, but also in turning them into surpluses.38
    Neutralizing the Chinese savings glut also has important effects on the dynamics of the US trade
deficit. The yellow dotted line in Figure 17b shows that the US trade deficit would be significantly
smaller in the short run. However, the trade deficit would stabilize at a larger value in the long
run (5% of GDP) as China runs a permanent large trade surplus. This result highlights that, even
in the absence of the China's savings glut, consumption smoothing motives in the global economy
would lead to a large trade surplus in China in the long run (north of 10% of GDP) as the trade
deficit in the US deteriorates to 5% of GDP.
    The dotted yellow and solid blue lines in Figure 18 show interesting consequences of China's
savings glut on the size of the manufacturing sector in the US. The Chinese savings glut was
responsible for large declines in US manufacturing in the short run. This behavior is consistent
across all three manufacturing sectors. However, absent the Chinese savings glut, manufacturing
employment in the US would be substantially lower in the long run as China runs a permanently
large trade surplus, and the US runs a permanently large trade deficit.39
  38
     If we abstract from intertemporal preference shocks in China, our result is in line with the "allocation puzzle" in
open economy macroeconomics which states that aggregate net capital inflows tend to be negatively correlated with
productivity growth across developing countries (Gourinchas and Rey, 2014). In line with this puzzle, our intertem-
poral preference shifters could be interpreted as arising from the public sector's expenditure decisions (Gourinchas
and Jeanne, 2013; Aguiar and Amador, 2011; Alfaro et al., 2008).
  39
     These results are in line with the findings of Kehoe et al. (2018) on the effects of the savings glut on structural


                                                             47
    We now turn to the welfare consequences of the China shock. Specifically, we use equation (44)
to compute the welfare effects of the shocks we recover in Section 5.1 (Benchmark), relative to the
counterfactuals where (a) shocks to China are set to be equal to the average shocks experienced by
                                             (a)
the remaining countries: WiBenchmark /Wi ; and where (b) we neutralize China's savings glut by
                                                   (b)
setting t
        China = 1 for all t: Wi
                               Benchmark /W
                                            i . By doing so, we are capturing the effect of China's
shocks relative to a situation where the Chinese fundamentals behaved similarly to the average
global economy (excluding China), and relative to a situation where China did not experience a
savings glut.

                    Table VI: Global Consumption Gains of the China Shock
                    (2000-2014)

                                                                            (a)
                                              Panel A. WiBenchmark /Wi
                      Country                 Complete Model Balanced Trade
                      US                           1.001             1.012
                      Europe                       1.001             1.003
                      Asia                         1.004             0.994
                      Americas                     1.001             1.001
                      Rest of the World            1.005             1.031

                                                                            (b)
                                              Panel B. WiBenchmark /Wi
                      Country                 Complete Model Balanced Trade
                      US                           0.997             1.000
                      Europe                       0.998             1.000
                      Asia                         0.998             1.000
                      Americas                     1.003             1.000
                      Rest of the World            1.010             1.000
                     Notes:     Changes in welfare obtained using equation (44).
                    WiBenchmark refers to all shocks extracted in Section 5.1 fed into the
                               (a)
                    model. Wi refers to these same shocks, but China's shocks at set to
                                                                    (b)
                    the average of shocks in remaining countries. Wi refers to all shocks
                    extracted in Section 5.1 fed into the model, but t  China = 1 for all
                    t. To make the Complete Model exercises comparable with the Bal-
                                                                                     t
                    anced Trade ones, we initialize the Complete Model with N Xi       =0
                    for t = 0.



    Panel A of Table VI shows the effect of the China shock relative to a situation where China
experienced shocks set to the average of the remaining countries. The first column displays the
consumption effects of the China shock in our complete model with trade imbalances. The second
column shows the consumption effects if we impose trade balance period by period. First, note
that all countries benefitted from the extraordinary shocks accrued to China. However, these
consumption effects were all very small. Interestingly, the welfare effects of the China shock in the
change in the US.


                                                         48
US and the Rest of the World would be significantly higher if trade balanced every period. Panel
B shows the effect of the Chinese savings glut. Our model predicts that the US, Europe, and Asia
were negatively affected by the large shocks to inter-temporal preferences in China, but that these
effects were, again, very mild. The exception is the Rest of the World, that actually benefits from
the Chinese savings glut. The Chinese savings glut would have had virtually no consumption effects
around the world under balanced trade.


6    Conclusion

There is a widespread concern among policy makers that, as globalization brings disruption to the
labor market, growing trade deficits can accentuate job losses and the decline of manufacturing.
Given how persistent these concerns have been in the past four decades, it is surprising that trade
economists typically abstract from trade imbalances when they study the labor market consequences
of globalization shocks. This paper fills this gap by extending the workhorse model of trade (Eaton
and Kortum, 2002, and Caliendo and Parro, 2015) to allow for inter-sectoral mobility costs (as in
Artu¸
    c et al., 2010), search frictions (as in Mortensen and Pissarides, 1999), and trade imbalances (as
in Reyes-Heroles, 2016). In short, we extend the state-of-the-art model of trade with the workhorse
models for mobility frictions, unemployment and trade imbalances. We estimate the model using
data from the WIOD, ILOSTAT, and the US CPS. Our estimation method conditions on trade
shares and net exports and can be performed country by country. Even though the parameter
space is large, the country by country estimation allows us to break a large optimization problem
into smaller ones.
    After analyzing impulse response functions to hypothetical shocks, we find that: (i) incorporat-
ing trade imbalances has the potential to significantly magnify the effect of globalization shocks on
inter-sectoral reallocation and unemployment; (ii) reallocation paths can be substantially different
if we allow for trade imbalances compared to balanced trade--specifically, sectors that expand in
the short run with trade imbalances can instead contract with balanced trade; (iii) the behavior of
trade imbalances and of the labor market depends on the whole path of shocks; (iv) the response
of unemployment to globalization shocks is not related to sign of imbalances. In particular, tem-
porary shocks can have important persistent long-run effects in our model, but none if we impose
balanced trade. This motivates us to empirically extract the path of shocks the global economy
actually experienced between 2000 and 2014 using standard methods from the international trade
and macro literatures.
    We conduct a standard exercise in the international trade literature and subject the model
to the empirically-extracted global technology and trade cost shocks. Aligned with our impulse
response function analyses, we find that allowing for trade imbalances have a first order effect on


                                                 49
the behavior of labor markets around the world. Next, we investigate how the gains from trade in
our model compare with those obtained using the influential sufficient-statistics approach pioneered
by Arkolakis et al. (2012). We find that both trade imbalances and labor market frictions can lead
to substantial discrepancies between the gains from trade in our model relative to those in the
literature on quantitative models of trade, which is summarized in Costinot and Rodr´
                                                                                    iguez-Clare
(2014). Not only there are differences in the magnitude of the gains, but also on their signs.
Relatedly, we assess, for each country, the gains from globalization between 2000 and 2014. Our
model predicts that the US has enjoyed a gain of 2.2% in response to globalization shocks over
this period. Our estimates suggest that these gains would have been 73% larger in the absence of
the global savings glut. However, in a world where balanced trade is imposed, the US would have
experienced 40% smaller gains.
   We also use our model to investigate the impact of the "China Shock" on the US trade deficit
and labor market. Consonant with previous literature, we find that shocks to the Chinese economy
contributed to the decline of manufacturing in the US, especially Mid-Tech and High-Tech Man-
ufacturing. However, other sectors of the economy quickly absorbed workers from these sectors,
leading to small effects on unemployment. We also find that shocks to the Chinese economy had
only a modest effect on the evolution of the US trade deficit, highlighting that the evolution of the
US trade deficit was mostly driven by the full constellation of shocks the global economy experi-
enced. Interestingly, if China had not experienced its savings glut, the US trade deficit would have
been smaller in the short run, but larger in the long run.
   Our work shows that carefully modeling imbalances can have quantitatively important implica-
tions for the adjustment process in response to globalization shocks and opens important questions
for future work. Given the importance of imbalances for the reallocation process, a natural question
to address next is to quantitatively characterize how trade imbalances shape the inequality effects
of trade. Our model can be extended to allow heterogeneous workers, so this is a natural next step.
In addition, we also hope to be able to add endogenous capital accumulation decisions and capital-
skill complementarity, generating rich mechanisms linking globalization to the skill premium as in
Reyes-Heroles et al. (2020). Finally, an interesting extension of our framework would allow workers
to make borrowing and savings decisions at the individual level, which will aggregate into global
imbalances. Even though this is a hard problem, especially regarding estimation, we believe that
our method of simulated moments that can be performed country by country (conditional on trade
shares and imbalances) can be applied to this situation.




                                                 50
References
Ad~
  ao, Rodrigo, Costas Arkolakis, and Federico Esposito, "General Equilibrium Effects in
 Space: Theory and Measurement," Technical Report 2020.

Aguiar, Mark and Manuel Amador, " Growth in the Shadow of Expropriation *," The Quar-
 terly Journal of Economics, 06 2011, 126 (2), 651­697.

Alessandria, George A and Horag Choi, "The dynamics of the US trade balance and real
 exchange rate: The J curve and trade costs?," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic
 Research 2019.

Alfaro, Laura, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Vadym Volosovych, "Why Doesn't Capital
 Flow from Rich to Poor Countries? An Empirical Investigation," The Review of Economics and
 Statistics, 2008, 90 (2), 347­368.

Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, and Andr´    es Rodr´  iguez-Clare, "New trade models,
 same old gains?," American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (1), 94­130.

Artu¸
    c, Erhan and John McLaren, "Trade policy and wage inequality: A structural analysis
 with occupational and sectoral mobility," Journal of International Economics, 2015, 97 (2),
 278­294.

Artu¸
    c, Erhan, Shubham Chaudhuri, and John McLaren, "Trade Shocks and Labor Ad-
 justment: A Structural Empirical Approach," American Economic Review, June 2010, 100 (3),
 1008­45.

Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson, "The China Syndrome: Local
 Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States," American Economic Review,
 October 2013, 103 (6), 2121­68.

  , , and , "The China Shock: Learning from Labor-Market Adjustment to Large Changes in
  Trade," Annual Review of Economics, 2016, 8 (1), 205­240.

Bai, Yan and Jos´
                e-V´
                   ictor R´
                          ios-Rull, "Demand Shocks and Open Economy Puzzles," American
 Economic Review, May 2015, 105 (5), 644­49.

Barany, Zsofia, Nicholas Coeurdacier, and St´
                                            ephane Guibaud, "Capital Flows in an Aging
 World," 2018.

Bems, Rudolfs, Robert C. Johnson, and Kei-Mu Yi, "The Great Trade Collapse," Annual
 Review of Economics, 2013, 5 (1), 375­400.

Bernanke, Benjamin S., "The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit," Speech
 presented at the Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economists, Richmond, VA, March
 10 2005.

Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, "An Equilibrium
 Model of "Global Imbalances" and Low Interest Rates," American Economic Review, March 2008,
 98 (1), 358­93.

Caliendo, Lorenzo and Fernando Parro, "Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of
 NAFTA," Review of Economic Studies, 2015, 82 (1), 1­44.
  , Maximiliano Dvorkin, and Fernando Parro, "Trade and Labor Market Dynamics: General
  Equilibrium Analysis of the China Trade Shock," Econometrica, 2019, 87 (3), 741­835.

Carr`
    ere, C´
          eline, Anja Grujovic, and Fr´ ed´
                                          eric Robert-Nicoud, "Trade and Frictional Un-
 employment in the Global Economy," Journal of the European Economic Association, 01 2020.
 jvz074.

Co¸
  sar, A. Kerem, Nezih Guner, and James Tybout, "Firm Dynamics, Job Turnover, and
 Wage Distributions in an Open Economy," American Economic Review, March 2016, 106 (3),
 625­63.

Costa, Francisco, Jason Garred, and Jo~    ao Paulo Pessoa, "Winners and losers from a
 commodities-for-manufactures trade boom," Journal of International Economics, 2016, 102, 50
 ­ 69.

Costinot, Arnaud and Andr´    es Rodr´ iguez-Clare, "Trade Theory with Numbers: Quantifying
 the Consequences of Globalization," in "Handbook of International Economics," Vol. 4, Elsevier,
 2014, pp. 197­261.

Dauth, Wolfgang, Sebastian Findeisen, and Jens Suedekum, "Adjusting to Globalization
 in Germany," IZA DP No. 11299, IZA 2018.

Dekle, Robert, Jonathan Eaton, and Samuel Kortum, "Unbalanced Trade," American
 Economic Review, May 2007, 97 (2), 351­355.

  ,    , and , "Global rebalancing with gravity: Measuring the burden of adjustment," IMF
  Staff Papers, 2008, 55 (3), 511­540.

Dix-Carneiro, Rafael, "Trade Liberalization and Labor Market Dynamics," Econometrica, 2014,
 82 (3), 825­885.

   and Brian K. Kovak, "Trade Liberalization and Regional Dynamics," American Economic
  Review, October 2017, 107 (10), 2908­46.

   and , "Margins of labor market adjustment to trade," Journal of International Economics,
  2019, 117, 125 ­ 142.

Dornbusch, R., S. Fischer, and P. A. Samuelson, "Comparative Advantage, Trade, and
 Payments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods," The American Economic Review,
 1977, 67 (5), 823­839.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, "Technology, Geography, and Trade," Econometrica,
 2002, 70 (5), 1741­1779.

  , , and Brent Neiman, "On Deficits and Unemployment," Revue ´
                                                              economique, 2013, 64 (3),
  405­420.

  , , , and John Romalis, "Trade and the Global Recession," American Economic Review,
  November 2016, 106 (11), 3401­38.

Flinn, Christopher J., "Minimum Wage Effects on Labor Market Outcomes under Search,
  Matching, and Endogenous Contact Rates," Econometrica, 2006, 74 (4), 1013­1062.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and H´     el`
                                        ene Rey, "Chapter 10 - External Adjustment, Global
 Imbalances, Valuation Effects," in Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth Rogoff, eds.,
 Handbook of International Economics, Vol. 4 of Handbook of International Economics, Elsevier,
 2014, pp. 585 ­ 645.

   and Olivier Jeanne, "Capital Flows to Developing Countries: The Allocation Puzzle," The
  Review of Economic Studies, 02 2013, 80 (4), 1484­1515.

Guner, Nezih, Alessandro Ruggieri, and James Tybout, "Training, Offshoring, and the Job
 Ladder," Technical Report, Pennsylvania State University 2020.

Hagedorn, Marcus and Iourii Manovskii, "The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemploy-
 ment and Vacancies Revisited," American Economic Review, September 2008, 98 (4), 1692­1706.

Head, Keith and John Ries, "Increasing Returns versus National Product Differentiation as
 an Explanation for the Pattern of U.S.-Canada Trade," American Economic Review, September
 2001, 91 (4), 858­876.

Heathcote, Jonathan and Fabrizio Perri, "Chapter 9 - Assessing International Efficiency," in
 Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth Rogoff, eds., Handbook of International Eco-
 nomics, Vol. 4 of Handbook of International Economics, Elsevier, 2014, pp. 523 ­ 584.

Heid, Benedikt and Mario Larch, "Gravity with unemployment," Journal of International
 Economics, 2016, 101, 70 ­ 85.

Helpman, Elhanan and Oleg Itskhoki, "Labour Market Rigidities, Trade and Unemployment,"
 The Review of Economic Studies, 07 2010, 77 (3), 1100­1137.

   and , "Trade Liberalization and Labor Market Dynamics with Heterogeneous Firms," Tech-
  nical Report 2015.

Hornstein, Andreas, Per Krusell, and Giovanni L. Violante, "Frictional Wage Dispersion
 in Search Models: A Quantitative Assessment," American Economic Review, December 2011,
 101 (7), 2873­98.

Ju, Jiandong, Kang Shi, and Shang-Jin Wei, "On the connections between intra-temporal
  and intertemporal trades," Journal of International Economics, 2014, 92, S36 ­ S51. 36th Annual
  NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics.

Kambourov, Gueorgui, "Labour Market Regulations and the Sectoral Reallocation of Workers:
 The Case of Trade Reforms," The Review of Economic Studies, 10 2009, 76 (4), 1321­1358.

Kehoe, Timothy J and Kim J Ruhl, "Sudden stops, sectoral reallocations, and the real ex-
 change rate," Journal of Development Economics, 2009, 89 (2), 235­249.

Kehoe, Timothy J., Kim J. Ruhl, and Joseph B. Steinberg, "Global Imbalances and
 Structural Change in the United States," Journal of Political Economy, 2018, 126 (2), 761­796.

Krugman, Paul, "Globalization: What Did We Miss?," in Luis Catao and Maury Obstfeld, eds.,
 Meeting Globalization's Challenges, Princeton University Press, 2019, pp. 113­120.

Meghir, Costas, Renata Narita, and Jean-Marc Robin, "Wages and Informality in Devel-
 oping Countries," American Economic Review, April 2015, 105 (4), 1509­46.
Mendoza, Enrique G., Vincenzo Quadrini, and Jos´       e-V´
                                                          ictor R´ios-Rull, "Financial Inte-
 gration, Financial Development, and Global Imbalances," Journal of Political Economy, 2009,
 117 (3), 371­416.

Meza, Felipe and Carlos Urrutia, "Financial liberalization, structural change, and real ex-
 change rate appreciations," Journal of International Economics, 2011, 85 (2), 317­328.

Mortensen, Dale T. and Christopher A. Pissarides, "Job Creation and Job Destruction in
 the Theory of Unemployment," The Review of Economic Studies, 07 1994, 61 (3), 397­415.

  and , "Unemployment Responses to 'Skill-Biased' Technology Shocks: The Role of Labour
  Market Policy," The Economic Journal, 1999, 109 (455), 242­265.

Navarro, Peter, "A Tariff Issue on Which Free and Fair Traders Can Agree," Wall Street Journal,
 May 2019.

Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, "The Intertemporal Approach to the Current Ac-
 count," Handbook of International Economics, 1995, 3, 1731­99.

   and , "Global current account imbalances and exchange rate adjustments," Brookings papers
  on economic activity, 2005, 2005 (1), 67­146.

Pavcnik, Nina, "The Impact of Trade on Inequality in Developing Countries," Working Paper
 23878, National Bureau of Economic Research September 2017.

Pierce, Justin R. and Peter K. Schott, "The Surprisingly Swift Decline of US Manufacturing
  Employment," American Economic Review, July 2016, 106 (7), 1632­62.

Reyes-Heroles, Ricardo, "The Role of Trade Costs in the Surge of Trade Imbalances," Technical
 Report 2016.

  , Sharon Traiberman, and Eva Van Leemput, "Emerging Markets and the New Geography
  of Trade: The Effects of Rising Trade Barriers," IMF Economic Review, 2020, 68, 456­508.

Rodriguez-Clare, Andres, Mauricio Ulate, and Juan Pablo Vasquez, "New Keynesian
 Trade: Understanding the Employment and Welfare Effects of Sectoral Shocks," Technical Re-
 port, University of California at Berkeley 2020.

Ruggieri, Alesandro, "Trade and labour market institutions: A tale of two liberalizations,"
 Research Paper 2019/15, University of Nottingham 2019.

Scott, Robert E., "Causes of the Trade Deficit and Its Implications for the U.S. Economy:
  Hearing Before the Committee on Finance, US Senate," 105th Congress. Testimony of Robert
  E. Scott 1998.

Shimer, Robert, "The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Vacancies," Ameri-
  can Economic Review, March 2005, 95 (1), 25­49.

Simonovska, Ina and Michael E Waugh, "The elasticity of trade: Estimates and evidence,"
  Journal of International Economics, 2014, 92 (1), 34­50.

Song, Zheng, Kjetil Storesletten, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, "Growing Like China," American
  Economic Review, February 2011, 101 (1), 196­233.
Stockman, Alan C. and Linda L. Tesar, "Tastes and Technology in a Two-Country Model of
  the Business Cycle: Explaining International Comovements," The American Economic Review,
  1995, 85 (1), 168­185.

Traiberman, Sharon, "Occupations and Import Competition: Evidence from Denmark," Amer-
  ican Economic Review, December 2019, 109 (12), 4260­4301.

Utar, Hale, "Workers beneath the Floodgates: Low-Wage Import Competition and Workers'
 Adjustment," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2018, 100 (4), 631­647.

Zhu, Xiaodong, "Understanding China's Growth: Past, Present, and Future," Journal of Eco-
 nomic Perspectives, November 2012, 26 (4), 103­24.
