                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  HEALTH KNOWLEDGE AND NON-PHARMACEUTICAL INTERVENTIONS DURING
                 THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC IN AFRICA

                                     Anne E. Fitzpatrick
                                        Sabrin A. Beg
                                      Laura C. Derksen
                                         Anne Karing
                                       Jason T. Kerwin
                                       Adrienne Lucas
                                    Natalia Ordaz Reynoso
                                        Munir Squires

                                     Working Paper 28316
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28316


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2021




We gratefully acknowledge generous funding from the Joseph P. Healey Research Grant and the
Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL). For excellent research management and assistance we thank
Henry Atimone, Charlotte Burlingame, and Heather Wong. We thank the entire field team in each
country for their efforts in completing these surveys. We thank Marcella Alsan, Emily Beam,
Alan de Brauw, Janet Currie, David Molitor, and Laura Wherry for helpful comments. All errors
are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Anne E. Fitzpatrick, Sabrin A. Beg, Laura C. Derksen, Anne Karing, Jason T. Kerwin,
Adrienne Lucas, Natalia Ordaz Reynoso, and Munir Squires. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Health Knowledge and Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions During the COVID-19 Pandemic
in Africa
Anne E. Fitzpatrick, Sabrin A. Beg, Laura C. Derksen, Anne Karing, Jason T. Kerwin, Adrienne
Lucas, Natalia Ordaz Reynoso, and Munir Squires
NBER Working Paper No. 28316
January 2021
JEL No. I12,I15,I18,O12

                                         ABSTRACT

Providing health information is a non-pharmaceutical intervention designed to reduce disease
transmission and infection risk by encouraging behavior change. But does knowledge change
behavior? We test whether coronavirus health knowledge promotes protective risk mitigation
behaviors early in the COVID-19 pandemic across four African countries (Ghana, Malawi, Sierra
Leone, and Tanzania). Despite reputations for weak health sectors and low average levels of
education, health knowledge of the symptoms and transmission mechanisms was high in all
countries in the two months after the virus entered the country. Higher knowledge is associated
with increased protective measures that would likely lower disease risk with one exception­
knowledge is inversely correlated with social distancing. Respondents largely adhered to mask
mandates and lockdowns, but continued coming into contact with others at small, informal
gatherings, gatherings not affected by mandates. Knowledge alone appears unlikely to reduce all
risky activities, especially gatherings within other people's homes. Even early in the pandemic
income loss or stress were commonly reported. Our results suggest that early and consistent
government provision of health information, likely reduced the severity of the pandemic in Africa
but was not a panacea.


Anne E. Fitzpatrick                              Anne Karing
University of Massachusetts-Boston               Princeton University
100 Morrissey Blvd.                              Department of Economics
Boston, MA 02125                                 530 Evans Hall #3880
anne.fitzpatrick@umb.edu                         Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
                                                 United States
Sabrin A. Beg                                    akaring@princeton.edu
University of Delaware
418 Purnell Hall                                 Jason T. Kerwin
Newark, DE 19716                                 Department of Applied Economics
sabrin.beg@gmail.com                             University of Minnesota
                                                 1994 Buford Ave.
Laura C. Derksen                                 316C Ruttan Hall
University of Toronto                            Falcon Heights, MN 55108
105 St. George Street                            jkerwin@umn.edu
Toronto, Ontario
M5S 3E6 Canada
laura.derksen@utoronto.ca
Adrienne Lucas
Lerner College of Business and Economics
University of Delaware
419 Purnell Hall
Newark, DE 19716
and NBER
alucas@udel.edu

Natalia Ordaz Reynoso
Department of Applied Economics
University of Minnesota
nordazreynoso@gmail.com

Munir Squires
UBC Economics
6000 Iona Drive
Vancouver, BC, Canada, V6T 1L4
munir.squires@ubc.ca




                                           2
1     Introduction

As the coronavirus pandemic emerged, policy makers were concerned that the health impacts
of the pandemic may be disproportionately borne by lower income countries because of their
weak health sectors and their populations' inability to socially isolate (United Nations 2020)
. This concern was particularly acute in Africa where despite younger populations, many
residents have co-morbidities that would result in more severe symptoms, pushing weak
health infrastructures past their limits (Lone and Ahmad 2020). Absent a vaccine, countries
relied on information campaigns to encourage individual non-pharmaceutical interventions
(NPIs)­social distancing, hand washing, and mask wearing­ and imposing community NPIs­
closures of schools, businesses, and/or houses of worship. These NPIs do not rely on the
sophistication or capacity of the health sector but instead depend on voluntary behavior
change. Whether NPIs can be successful in lower income countries is an empirical question­
do people understand and trust the information, adhere to mandates, and have the capacity
and ability to change their risky behaviors?
    We analyze the level of health knowledge and whether health knowledge increased the
adoption of NPIs such as mask-wearing and social distancing using detailed survey data from
four African countries collected early in the pandemic, early April through mid-June, less
than 2 months after the virus was first reported in each country. Our countries represent
varied geography­West, East, and Southeastern­and income­lower-middle and low income.
We asked people in Ghana, Malawi, Sierra Leone, and Tanzania about their knowledge of
coronavirus symptoms and transmission mechanisms, their and their household's experience
with social distancing, and how their households were aected by the pandemic. With
unified measures across four countries, we compare the knowledge, risk mitigation practices,
and consequences of the pandemic (including associated lockdowns).
    We have four main findings. 1) We find high levels of knowledge that are associated with
increased take-up of risk mitigation measures­the the average respondent correctly reported
3 symptoms, 2 transmission mechanisms, and almost no incorrect symptoms or transmission


                                               3
mechanisms and undertook 2.3 "eective" protective measures.1 2) Early government action,
including messaging, mask mandates, and lockdowns led to meaningful behavior change­we
found about a 50 percentage point gap in mask use between the mask mandate (Ghana and
Sierra Leone) and non-mask mandate countries (Malawi and Tanzania) with a similar gap
in the likelihood of coming into close contact with another person at a house of worship
between countries that mandated their closure (Ghana and Sierra Leone) and those that
did not (Malawi and Tanzania). 3) Knowledge was not su cient for adoption of social
distancing, behavior that is likely the most eective at reducing disease transmission. The
average respondent patronized 3.1 dierent places in the last week where they were in close
physical contact with people outside of their household, often in places satisfying basic needs,
i.e. transportation, markets, and shared toilet facilities. However, non-essential contacts
were also common--46 percent of respondents on average reported visiting another person's
home in the previous week. 4) Across all countries this pandemic and the policies enacted
in response, had severe impacts relatively early­54 percent of respondents reported income
loss as a result of the pandemic and 49 percent reported increased stress.
      Our paper contributes to three related literatures. First we contribute to the growing
literature on how to manage and mitigate the eects of pandemics through NPIs. We
show that information is an eective NPI as it increases protective health behaviors and
encourages behavior that mitigates risk similar to the existing literature on information
regarding sexual partners (Dupas 2011), unsafe water (Madajewicz et al. 2007), hygiene
(Jalan and Somanathan 2008; Cairncross et al. 2005 ), and in particular can be useful during
this pandemic (Haushofer and Metcalf 2020). In particular, we find a correlation between
health knowledge and hand washing, mask-wearing, and other risk mitigation measures.
However, the eectiveness of information can depend upon other factors, including the costs
of following the information (Kremer et al. 2007), household bargaining power (Dupas 2011),
a respondent's beliefs regarding their eventual likelihood of contracting the disease (Kerwin
  1
    Eective protective measures are wearing a mask, washing hands, using hand sanitizer, and reducing
social contacts (Cowling and Aiello 2020).



                                                 4
2020 ), their life expectancy (Oster 2012), or who issues the directives (Kao et al. 2020).
In lower income countries with relatively expensive risk coping strategies, individuals may
not be able to reduce their risk to desired levels despite their level of knowledge. Consistent
with that intuition, we show that health knowledge is positively correlated with the number
of times in the past week an individual was in close contact with those outside of their
household (i.e., knowledge is negatively correlated with social distancing).
   Second, our results contribute to a broader understanding of the combined eects of
a pandemic and related lockdowns. Early in the pandemic the direct health eects of the
disease were a focus, and we show that only 4 percent of households were directly infected by
the virus, while, about half reported income loss with a similar amount reporting increased
stress. Notably, the stress consequences were not concentrated among those who had lost
income, but rather appear to be a more general phenomenon. Parents, in particular, report
additional stress, a potentially worrisome situation in a context where rates of child abuse
are high (Meinck et al. 2016; Badoe 2017).
   Third, our results contribute to the literature on the dierential experience of the pan-
demic across countries. We are the first to use harmonized microdata across lower income
countries on behavior change in response to the pandemic. The majority of the existing
literature consists of descriptive statistics and does not discuss correlates of NPI use, nor
seeks to explain the role of policy in contributing to dierential NPI use across countries.
While existing literature has focused on the role of demographics (Goldberg and Reed 2020;
Castex et al. 2020a; Castex et al. 2020b), government policies (Rannan-Eliya et al. 2021), or
political economy (Chiplunker and Das 2020; Alsan et al. 2020 ), less work has used micro-
data on what role, if any, individual risk mitigation practices play at explaining COVID-19
prevalence worldwide (Rannan-Eliya et al. 2021). In the US, Alsan et al. (2020) showed the
relationship between sociodemographic characteristics and reported knowledge and behavior
in the US. We show that individual knowledge increases mitigation measures, but does not
curtail all risky behaviors, across four countries. We show that mandates help individuals



                                              5
adopt risk mitigation strategies. Together, both of these findings suggest that both individ-
ual risk mitigation strategies and high rates of compliance with mandated, community NPIs
may also contribute to the relatively low rates of COVID-19 cases in Africa as compared
to richer countries. Despite the lack of a direct health eect, we also add to the growing
evidence that the social and economic consequences of the pandemic were severe, with pro-
jections of continued negative eects for some time to come (Erokhin and Gao 2020; Amare
et al. 2020; Jain et al. 2020; Mahmud and Riley 2020; Josephson et al. 2020).
   Finally, we contribute to the literature on the elements of a successful public health
campaign. Vaccinations have been successful at reducing the burden of disease and increasing
life expectancy, in part because once an individual achieves immunity through vaccination no
additional action is necessary by them (Karing 2020). In contrast, attempts to reduce malaria
transmission through regular bed net use and reduce HIV/AIDS transmission with adherence
to pharmaceutical regimes and eliminating risky behaviors have been more complicated
(e.g. Lucas 2010, Lucas and Wilson 2018). Our contradiction between knowledge and
some forms of action are similar to the understanding that developed during the behavior
change-communication messaging campaigns during the HIV epidemics in the early 2000s
(Lo et al. 2016 ). While abstinence-only education was ineective at reducing transmission,
encouraging a suite of other risk mitigation strategies such as using condoms was more
eective, particularly for high risk groups (Okafor et al. 2017). However, continued use of
condoms was di cult to individuals to maintain when faced with typical levels of risk (Foss
et al. 2007). In the same way, individuals adopted risk mitigation measures in response to
the coronavirus threat, but were unable to voluntarily adhere to extreme measures such as
reducing all extraneous contacts. While early in the pandemic our results indicate households
were engaging in relatively lower-cost protective measures, we caution that such protective
measures may wane as individuals find ongoing eorts burdensome as they wait for a vaccine.
We show that despite the important role of information as a non-pharmaceutical intervention,
even knowledgable households perform constrained optimization that might not allow them



                                             6
to fully realize the benefits of risk-mitigation.



2     Background

2.1    Country Details

We selected four African countries that represent a wide dispersion of geography, population
size, and income. Both Ghana and Sierra Leone are in West Africa, while Malawi is in
the southeast and Tanzania is in East Africa. Tanzania has a population of 59 million,
Ghana 30 million, Malawi 21 million, and Sierra Leone 7 million people. Based on gross
domestic product per capita in 2019, purchasing power parity adjusted international dollars,
Ghana was the richest ($5637) and Malawi the poorest ($1104) with Tanzania ($2771) and
Sierra Leone ($1790) between the two, making Ghana and Tanzania lower-middle income and
Sierra Leone and Malawi low-income (World Bank 2020). Countries also varied substantially
in their hospital bed capacity, reflective of their weak health infrastructures. In the most
recent year data were available, for every 10,000 population, Ghana had 9, Malawi had 13,
Tanzania had 7, and Sierra Leone had 4 hospital beds (WHO 2020). For comparison, the
United States had 28.7 beds per 10,000 population. Finally, countries vary substantially in
their educational attainment and literacy rate. Among those over 15, the literacy rate is
relatively high in Ghana and Tanzania (79 and 78 percent, respectively). Literacy is lower
in Malawi (62 percent) and Sierra Leone (43 percent).


2.2    Continent-Wide Responses

Health ministers across Africa acted early in response to the pandemic. Approximately one
month after the January 22, 2020 consensus that COVID-19 transmitted between humans
and in recognition of the potential impact of the pandemic, African health ministers es-
tablished a coronavirus task force to create a continent-wide strategy (Osseni 2020). This




                                                7
action was earlier than strategies and plans announced by richer countries.2 On March
11, the WHO declared the coronavirus a pandemic, and on June 5 the WHO updated its
guidance on mask-wearing.
      Governments, international bodies, and nonprofits enacted public health messaging cam-
paigns, often in local languages, across the continent starting in early March. In addition
to any programs by specific countries, UNICEF began large-scale public health messaging
campaigns to improve awareness about the coronavirus. To combat misinformation, start-
ing in April the WHO partnered with Twitter, Facebook, Tencent and TikTok to ensure
the content on their platforms was accurate, set up websites to disseminate accurate infor-
mation in local languages, and engaged Google to allow for targeted search of coronavirus
information in local languages. In addition to private sector mobilization, the World Bank
also issued $14 billion in grants to aected countries, with an intention to deploy up to an
additional $16 billion over the next year and half to help countries cope with containing the
public health threat. Other major NGOs, including Catholic Relief Services, Living Water
International, Sightsavers, the Red Cross, Save the Children, repurposed their campaigns
from other diseases and ailments to focus on the coronavirus, including messaging targeted
to increasing awareness and induce risk mitigation measures, such as hand washing. Individ-
ual philanthropists also contributed to the disaster preparedness. Chinese billionaire Jack
Ma, for example, shipped a cargo flight containing 6 million medical items in late March to
be distributed across the continent.


2.3      Country Experiences with the Pandemic

In addition to information campaigns, many African countries took a more active approach
to instigating behavior change through public service announcements, and community-level
  2
   The United States suspended some travel from China on January 31 and from Europe March 11, sus-
pended visa services March 18, and closed the Canadian and Mexican borders to non-essential travel on
March 23. Although the European response varied by country, the EU began repatriating citizens from
China on February 1, set up a response team on March 2, and announced a coordinated response March 13.
The WHO special envoy advised countries to act quickly and decisively on March 30.



                                                  8
NPIs such as lockdowns and mask mandates. Rates of NPIs are notably higher in Africa
than on other continents (Zheng et al., 2020). Table 1, Panel A summarizes the experience
of each country in our sample with the pandemic.

                                   [Table 1 about here]

   Ghana's first diagnosed case was in March 12, and on March 16, the government closed
churches, schools, and instituted an expansive lockdown that was partially lifted May 20.
A nationwide mask mandate was instituted April 24. By July, Ghana released a miniseries
called "Corona Life" to promote hygiene and sanitation, instituted enhanced public sanita-
tion programs at markets, and began a testing and tracing program (Africa Studies 2020).
Schools are scheduled to reopen January 2021. As of November 2 , there had been 48,200
cases and 316 deaths.
   Malawi's first case was reported on April 2. The goverment began an extensive infor-
mation campaign, including going door-to-door providing health information (Masina 2020).
The government proposed a complete lockdown to start on April 18, but the high court
of Malawi blocked the lockdown in the absence of income protections and no lockdown oc-
curred. The government enacted a mask mandate on August 7. As of November 2, 2020,
Malawi reported 5,933 cases and 183 deaths.
   Sierra Leone's first case of the coronavirus was documented March 30. The lockdowns in
Sierra Leone were brief, but almost total: two separate 3-day total lockdowns in which all
non-essential businesses, schools, and churches were closed and travel was restricted. The
government also instituted a mask mandate on April 24. By summer, the government (in co-
ordiantion with the UNDP) had mobilized to provide lessons and trainings, including weekly
videos on social media and community campaigns in local langauges (UNDP 2020;GRID3
2020). As of November 2, Sierra Leone reported 2,366 cases and 74 deaths.
   Tanzania reported its first case on March 16, closing schools and banning mass gatherings
the next day. While there has been no nationwide mask mandate, several areas within
the country, including Dar es Salaam mandated masks on April 18. In contrast to the

                                              9
other countries, the govenment prohibited media from reporting on the pandemic, prompting
outrage from Reporters without Borders and other civil liberties groups. After reporting 509
cases and 21 deaths on May 8, on May 9 the government stopped reported coronavirus-related
statistics, declared that their country was free from the virus.
    Our analysis uses individual survey data to show the commonalities and dierences among
these countries in their resulting experiences with the pandemic. Together, our results pro-
vide additional insight into the observation that the health impacts of the coronavirus pan-
demic have not been as devastating as feared, and that most of the decreases in years of lost
life are concentrated in richer countries (Marois et al. 2020).



3     Data

Our data span four countries and three months. We collected our data through phone-based
surveys that occurred from April 10 to June 19, with variation by country. Panel B of Table
1 provides the exact dates of each survey, along with additional details of data collection.
To reach many respondents in a short period of time, we used existing sample frames from
studies with previously collected phone numbers. As a result we had high response rates
(averaging over 62 percent) and were able to field the surveys early in the pandemic, but
our data are not nationally representative. Data from Ghana were collected from teachers,
head teachers (i.e. school principals), and circuit supervisors (school supervisors who oversee
clusters of eight geographically proximate schools) as part of a follow-up for a school-based
dierentiated instruction intervention from Beg et al. (2020). Respondents from Malawi are
men who frequent bars in the Zomba district and were part of an HIV study by Derksen et
al. (2020) . Respondents in Sierra Leone were residents of Freetown who participated in a
pilot of an intervention designed to improve safety on public transportation (Karing 2020).
Respondents in Tanzania were microenterprise owners participating in a study on the eects
of kinship taxation (Squires 2020). Data were collected starting just over 3 weeks after the
first case in Sierra Leone and Tanzania and 8 weeks after the first case in both Ghana and

                                              10
Malawi.
       Respondents in each country were asked the same questions about their coronavirus
knowledge and related behaviors and the eects the pandemic and related government ac-
tions on their households. Respondents volunteered their responses and were not prompted
about each individual symptom, mechanism, or location.3 Following public health guidance
early in the pandemic, we consider hand-washing, social distancing, using hand sanitizer,
wearing a mask, not sharing food, and not shaking hands as eective preventative measures.
We highlight the role of masks in our discussion out of growing evidence of the high eective-
ness of masks at reducing transmission and death (Eikenberry 2020; Gandhi et al., 2020; Lyu
and Wehby 2020; Murray 2020). The correct transmission mechanisms are airborne, touch-
ing others, touching contaminated surfaces, and asymptomatic transmission. The correct
symptoms were coughing, fever, fatigue, di culty breathing, loss of taste or smell, headache,
and sore throat (although results are not sensitive to the inclusion of less commonly reported
symptoms, such as sneezing.
       We additionally collected demographic details from these respondents. Because edu-
cational systems are not uniform across countries, we created three educational categories
across transition points common to all countries­no schooling, some schooling but less than
secondary school completion, and secondary school completion or more. Table 2 contains
summary statistics of the sample demographics. While the sample characteristics vary by
country, our overall sample is about 34 years old, 75 percent male, almost all have at least
one child in their household.
   3
     Appendix A contains the exact questions. Questions were open-ended and interviewers used pre-coded
options to record responses but did not prompt respondents. Therefore, our results can be considered
an underestimate of true knowledge and risk mitigation practices, and primarily reflect the salience of an
individual symptom, risk mitigation mechanism, or way that they had been aected. In Tanzania, for the
first 149 responses, individuals were asked in sequence about whether they had been to a particular location
in the past 6 days. However, due to concerns of placing too high a burden on respondent time, the question
was switched to open-ended instead of prompted for the rest of that country and the other countries. We
include a control for the mode of question administration, and corelations between knowledge and contacts
results are robust to excluding those early results (not shown). In Sierra Leone, the question about how
respondents were aected by the coronavirus was inadvertently omitted. However, other questions about
respondent well-being were asked, and so we harmonize responses for those topics . Results are robust to
excluding Sierra Leone.



                                                    11
                                        [Table 2 about here]



4     Empirical Strategy

We first present evidence on the average levels of knowledge and preventative measures taken
across countries. We then test the relationship between demographics and knowledge and
behavior by estimating


                                                   0
                                     Yic =  +          Xic +   c   + "ic                                          (1)

    where Yic is knowledge or behavior Y for respondent i in country c, Xic are individual
level demographic covariates, and        c   are country fixed eects.4 Our outcomes of interest
are the number of correct symptoms, the number of correct transmission mechanisms, the
number of eective protective measures taken, and the number of contacts. The coe cients
on the individual demographics,         , tell us the relationships net of country-level dierences
while the country fixed eects elucidate the dierences between countries net of demographic
dierences in the sample.
    To test whether health knowledge is correlated with risk mitigation health behaviors we
estimate the following equation:


                                                                               0
                Yic =  +    1 Symptomsic     +   2 T ransmissionic         +       Xic +    c   + "ic             (2)

    where Y is a protective health behavior undertaken by respondent i in country c, Symptoms
and T ransmission are the number of correct symptoms and transmission mechanisms the
respondent reported, Xic are the individual level demographic covariates considered above,
and   c   are country fixed eects. In this specification our focus is on               1   and     2 --the   relation-
ships between knowledge and behavior, net of demographic characteristics.5 Our outcomes
   4
     Whether respondents were given choices or responded freely changed during the survey in Tanzania. We
control for this change in all specifications.
   5
     In the appendix, in lieu of country fixed eects, we provide estimates with enumerator fixed eects in


                                                   12
of interest are the number of eective protective measures taken and the number of contacts.



5     Results

5.1    Average Levels of Knowledge, Actions, and Pandemic Eects

Table 3, contain the averages both within each country (columns 1 to 4) and across countries
(column 5) for the knowledge and behavior questions, with column 6 providing the p-value
associated with joint equality across all samples.

                                       [Table 3 about here]

    Almost everyone (99 percent) had at least some correct transmission knowledge with the
average person listing 2 (of 4). Interestingly, despite all the dierences between the countries
and the samples, we fail to reject that the number of correct transmission mechanisms listed
is the same across countries. We also find very high symptom knowledge (Panel B)­only 2
percent of respondents could list no correct symptoms, with the average person naming 3
symptoms. In our data, with voluntary response, 55 percent of respondents report 3 or more
correct symptoms, with a maximum of 8. By comparison, Alsan et al. (2020) found that 87
percent of respondents could correctly identify the top three symptoms of coronavirus out
of a list. Geldsetzer (2020) also finds high rates of knowledge (80-85 percent) in the US and
UK using voluntary response, although the number of symptoms given is not reported. As
with transmission knowledge, we fail to reject equality across countries.
    The protective measure means appear in Panel C. Despite people knowing statistically
indistinguishable numbers of transmission mechanisms across countries, respondents' actions
vary by country. Perhaps most surprising was that in Malawi almost 13 percent of the sample
was taking no protective measures. This relatively high average in Malawi may reflect the
sampling frame--men who frequent bars may be less health conscious or disproportionately
likely to take risks. In the other countries, almost all respondents were taking at least one
case enumerator coronavirus knowledge aects recorded responses (Ordaz Reynoso and Kerwin 2020 ).


                                                13
protective measure. In the two countries without mask mandates (Malawi and Tanzania),
fewer than 30 percent of respondents reported wearing a mask, while over three-quarters
of respondents reported wearing a mask in the two countries with mask mandates (Ghana
and Sierra Leone). Over 80 percent of respondents in each country, statistically equivalent
across countries, oered hand washing as one protective measure they were taking. Appendix
Figure B1 graphically depicts the portion of people in each country who claimed to be taking
each measure.
   Despite over 50 percent of respondents in each country knowing that reducing exposure
to others is a way to protect against infection, over 70 percent of respondents reported having
contact within two meters of someone outside of their household in the last week, averaging 3
such places where that contact occurred. Further, slightly more than halfof respondents with
children reported that their children had close contacts with others outside their household
in the last week. Across all four countries, the most common place that people had contacts
with others was the market (Appendix Figure B2 presents a bar chart of the most commonly
mentioned contact locations by country). For Ghana, Sierra Leone, and Tanzania the next
places of contact in descending order were other houses, public transportation, and work. In
contrast, work was reported almost as frequently as the market in Malawi. This average may
also reflect the sampling frame in Malawi--men patronizing bars may be disproportionately
likely to still be employed and are also in urban areas.
   The full responses appear in Appendix Table B1, disaggregated by whether contacts oc-
curred at "informal" (i.e., smaller gatherings or contacts that are incidental to the activity­
markets, another person's house, transportation, communal wash facilities, or takeout din-
ing) or "formal" (i.e., organized events or larger gatherings where contact is assumed­work,
worship, dine-in restaurant, weddings or other celebrations or festivals, or other large meet-
ings) activities. Informal activities are less likely to be aected by government lockdowns
and would therefore be primarily aected by voluntary behavior change.
   The relative magnitude of contacts at formal vs. informal activities could be partially



                                              14
driven by government policies in eect at the time of data collection that closed businesses
and resulted in canceled formal gathering opportunities. Informal gatherings are still very
commonly reported in all countries, suggesting that mandates would not reduce this sort of
risky behavior. Instead, the bulk of social contacts in all countries occur where mandates
would likely not be enforced or not be binding. However, our data suggest that lockdowns
are eective at reducing large gatherings, such as at houses of worship or restaurants. For
example, enforced mandates of closures of houses of worship resulted in virtually no contacts
                                                      6
at those locations for Ghana and Sierra Leone.            Rates of informal contacts may be high
because many of the locations of informal contact lack readily available substitutes in the
developing country context. For example, in richer countries people can rely on grocery
delivery or refrigerator storage to limit market trips, uncommon features in lower income
countries. Home visits were also frequent­on average 48 percent of respondents across all
countries visited in another person's home. While such visits have fewer points of contact,
the secondary transmission rate within an enclosed home can be as high as 35 percent (Liu
et al. 2020). Our data suggest that mandates potentially reduced large gatherings (aside
from markets), and substantially reduced the number of contacts, but that close encounters
with others are still commonly reported.
      In Table 4, we show that respondents vary substantially in their experiences with the
coronavirus and associated lockdowns. Although very few individuals were aected directly
in terms of health of themselves or a loved one, mental health and economic impacts of the
lockdown were commonly reported.

                                       [Table 4 about here]

      Stress was the most common eect of the pandemic in Ghana, and in the top three
of all reported eects in the other two countries. An online poll similarly found increases
in reported stress during the lockdown period in Ghana (Asiamah et al 2020). Reduction
  6
    In Tanzania, houses of worship remained open. In Malawi, gatherings of more than 100 people were
outlawed, including at households of worship. By contrast, in Sierra Leone and Ghana houses of worship
were ordered closed.


                                                 15
of income was the most common eect of the pandemic in Malawi, and was also frequently
mentioned in the other countries. The high amount of income loss is particularly noteworthy
in Malawi because it did not have a government-mandated lockdown. Having children home
from school was another frequently mentioned eect of the pandemic. In Appendix Table
B2, we show that the impact on stress is separable from the impact on income. In other
words, stress is a commonly felt by-product of the pandemic and is not only felt among those
that have lost income, or only in countries that had a lockdown.


5.2    Correlates of Knowledge and Behavior

In this sub-section we combine the data from all four countries to consider the correlation
between sociodemographic characteristics and knowledge and behavior as well as country-
specific dierences, estimates of Equation 1 with a separate outcome each time. The results
appear in Table 5. Net of country fixed eects, knowledge of correct symptoms (column
1) is statistically positively correlated with age and increases with educational attainment
(relative to no education). Knowledge of correct transmission mechanisms (column 2) is
positively related to education. For both of these knowledge outcomes, the other three
countries have lower levels than Ghana, the omitted category and richest country in our
sample.
   Taking increased protective measures is not statistically related to education (column
3). Males and individuals in households with children are associated with more protective
measures, while those living in rural areas take fewer measures. As with the knowledge
outcomes, all of the point values on the country fixed eects are negative relative to Ghana,
the omitted country. None of the sociodemographic covariates besides gender­men have
more contacts­have a statistically significant relationship with the number of social contacts
(column 4). Respondents in both Malawi and Tanzania have more contacts relative to
Ghana, net of demographic dierences.
   Although individual characteristics included in our specification explain little of the vari-


                                              16
ation of symptom or transmission knowledge (4 percent), our independent variables explains
nearly 47 percent of the variation in social contacts. Most of the variation in contacts is
across countries, not within, potentially reflective of the messaging and political economy
surrounding the coronavirus experience.


                                        [Table 5 about here]


5.3       Relationship Between Knowledge and Behavior

In Table 6, we show that health knowledge is positively correlated with behaviors that
protect individuals against the coronavirus, whether or not we control for sociodemographic
controls. Specifically, knowledge of coronavirus transmission mechanisms and symptoms is
positively related to taking more risk mitigation measures--each correct symptom known
is associated with an additional 0.23 protective measures and each additional transmission
mechanism known is associated with another 0.40 eective protective measures. Despite
the correlations found in Table 3 between knowledge and sociodemographic controls, these
point values are nearly identical with the inclusion of those controls (column 2). Results
for individual outcomes are in Appendix Table B3. Individuals with knowledge of either
symptoms or transmission mechanisms report decreasing their contacts and hand shaking,
and increasing hand washing, hand sanitizing, and mask wearing.7 These results are evidence
that information makes individual-level NPIs more eective by encouraging risk mitigating,
protective practices.
       However, health knowledge does not increase the level of social distancing. In Table 7, we
estimate the correlation between knowledge and the number of contacts that the respondent
reported in the previous week, controlling for country fixed eects and sociodemographic
controls. In contrast to the results in Table 6 that showed higher knowledge resulted in more
   7
    Despite small sample sizes when analyzed by country, in each country symptom and transmission knowl-
edge are positively related to the number of protective measures, (see Appendix Table B4). Knowing an
additional symptom is associated with an increase of 0.10 (Sierra Leone) to 0.33 (Malawi) additional pro-
tective measures and knowing an additional transmission mechanisms with an increase of 0.20 (Malawi) to
0.35 (Tanzania) additional protective measures.


                                                   17
protective measures, higher knowledge of coronavirus transmission mechanisms are positively
correlated with the number of contacts, indicating those with more knowledge undertook ad-
ditional risky behaviors (column 1). These results lie in contrast to the results in Table 6:
despite reporting more eective protective measures individuals with more knowledge were
more likely to report more contacts. This coe cient remains positive and statistically signifi-
cant even after controlling for the number of other protective measures (column 2). Notably,
other protective measures are also positively correlated with the number of social contacts,
suggesting that individuals may be compensating from their increased social contacts with
increasing other risk mitigation measures.
   In column 3, we consider whether information is eective at reducing "formal" contacts:
the number of times an individual went to a location that would potentially be aected by
a lockdown (religious services, dining at restaurants, meetings, or other events). Consistent
with the results on total number of contacts, our analysis shows that knowledge does not
reduce the number of formal contacts. Therefore, individuals with higher knowledge are
patronizing both areas that would and would not be aected by a potential lockdown. In
particular, as Appendix Table B5 shows, knowledge is positively correlated with going to
other people's homes and taking public transport, suggesting more informed individuals are
more likely to interact with others in casual settings that might have lower perceived risk.
   In Appendix Figure B3, we plot the number of protective behaviors taken relative to a
person with 0 reported contacts to test if individuals relatively more exposed to the coro-
navirus are more likely to engage in protective measures. For individuals with only 1 or 2
contacts there is a weakly negative relationship. However, once an individual reports three
or more contacts, there is a weak, but positive relationship: as individuals frequent more
places, the number of protective behaviors that the individual engages in also tends to in-
crease. Although some estimates are not dierent than zero, these results suggest some
degree of risk compensation. Maintaining social distancing appears hard, and individuals
with knowledge compensate by engaging in other risk mitigation measures. However, for



                                              18
the specific outcome of mask-wearing, a highly eective way to reduce transmission in the
presence of close contacts, additional contacts are not associated with a higher likelihood of
mask wearing (see Appendix Figure B4), and the correlation is not dierential according to
health knowledge (not shown).
        Those with more contacts could have increased knowledge due to discussing the ongo-
ing pandemic. If true, then knowledge would be increasing during the course of our data
collection. In Figure 1, we measure the average knowledge of coronavirus symptoms and
transmission by interview date in each country. In each country, the time trend of knowl-
edge is relatively flat, suggesting that average knowledge of the disease was not growing
over time. As our question regarding contacts was in the previous 7 days, together these
facts suggest that individuals were not acquiring knowledge as a result of their higher social
contacts, but rather had knowledge and continued with relatively high rates of contacts.8



6         Discussion and Conclusion

In this paper we examine the role of information as a non-pharmaceutical intervention to
induce risk mitigation behaviors during the coronavirus pandemic. We find that knowledge
of the coronavirus symptoms and transmission mechanisms is relatively high. Information is
positively correlated with reports of other non-pharmaceutical interventions that mitigate the
spread of the coronavirus, such as hand washing, mask wearing, decreased social contacts,
and using hand sanitizer. Relatively high rates of use of these measures early on in the
pandemic may partly explain why Africa has had relatively few deaths per capita compared
to richer regions. Across the four countries we study, the same high rates of knowledge were
found both early and later during data collection.
        However, we find that health knowledge is either not correlated with or positively related
to a particular risky behavior, the number of social contacts that an individual has had in the
    8
    Sierra Leone and Tanzania have a weak positive trend in mask wearing, but social distancing has no
clear trend in any country (not shown).



                                                  19
past seven days. As a result, health knowledge is not clearly related to social distancing, a key
mechanism to controlling the spread of the coronavirus. Many of the places where individuals
have contact with others lack low-risk alternatives. For example, grocery deliveries may be
expensive or unavailable, particularly in rural areas. Car ownership is also less common in
developing countries, making public transportation more essential for travel. In addition,
many individuals patronize other people's homes. Limiting these sorts of informal settings
would likely be more di cult to enforce during a lockdown. While closing houses of worship
was eective at reducing the rates of people attending those locations, voluntary behavior
change, even among those with relevent health knowlege, is unlikely to produce desired
eects. These results have important insights for policymakers who rely upon voluntary
behavior change to reduce disease risk, and inform the likelihood of success as countries may
consider another wave of lockdowns as they wait for a vaccine.
   Our survey also highlights that mental health issues may be an important additional
consideration for policymakers to consider moving forward. While much attention has been
paid to the potential mortality impacts of the coronavirus, our results indicate that mental
health is also a pressing concern. Across all countries, respondents commonly report stress as
an impact of the pandemic, along with income loss, even in countries that did not institute a
lockdown. Although the negative eects of income loss are first-order, the potential negative
consequences of long-term stress should be given appropriate consideration, particularly in
the context of children at home from school at risk of abuse.
   Overall our results indicate that although knowledge is helpful, more aggressive support
for individuals to assist them in maintaining compliance with lockdowns and allowing them
to minimize contacts with others will maximize the e cacy of people's natural instincts to
mitigate risk in response to the pandemic.




                                               20
References
(2020). Operation of and demand for public transport during covid-19: Descriptive evidence
  from sierra leone.

Africa, U. (2020). Beating covid-19 with solidarity. Medium.com .

Alsan, M., L. Braghieri, S. Eichmeyer, M. J. Kim, S. Stantcheva, D. Y. Yang, et al. (2020).
  Civil liberties in times of crisis. NBER Working Paper (27972).

Alsan, M., S. Stantcheva, D. Yang, and D. Cutler (2020, 06). Disparities in Coronavirus
  2019 Reported Incidence, Knowledge, and Behavior Among US Adults. JAMA Network
  Open 3 (6), e2012403­e2012403.

Amare, M., K. A. Abay, L. Tiberti, and J. Chamberlin (2020). Impacts of Covid-19 on food
 security: panel data evidence from Nigeria, Volume 1956. Intl Food Policy Res Inst.

Asiamah, N., F. F. Opuni, E. Mends-Brew, S. W. Mensah, H. K. Mensah, and F. Quansah
  (2020). Short-term changes in behaviors resulting from covid-19-related social isolation
  and their influences on mental health. Community Mental Health Journal .

Badoe, E. (2017). A critical review of child abuse and its management in africa. African
  journal of emergency medicine 7, S32­S35.

Bank, W. (2020). World development indicators.

Cairncross, S., K. Shordt, S. Zacharia, and B. K. Govindan (2005). What causes sustainable
  changes in hygiene behaviour? a cross-sectional study from kerala, india. Social science
  & medicine 61 (10), 2212­2220.

Castex, G., E. Dechter, and M. Lorca (2020a). Covid-19: Cross-country heterogeneity in
  eectiveness of non-pharmaceutical interventions. Covid Economics 14, 175­199.

Castex, G., E. Dechter, and M. Lorca (2020b). Covid-19: The impact of social distancing
  policies, cross-country analysis. Economics of disasters and climate change , 1­25.

Chiplunkar, G. and S. Das (2020). Political institutions and policy responses during a crisis.
 Available at SSRN 3629397 .

Cowling, B. J. and A. E. Aiello (2020). Public health measures to slow community spread
  of coronavirus disease 2019. The Journal of infectious diseases 221 (11), 1749­1751.

Derksen, L., J. Kerwin, N. Ordaz Reynoso, and O. Sterck (2020). Appointments versus
  commitments: Overcoming self-control problems in preventive health.

Dupas, P. (2011a). Do teenagers respond to hiv risk information? evidence from a field
 experiment in kenya. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3 (1), 1­34.

Dupas, P. (2011b). Health behavior in developing countries. Annu. Rev. Econ. 3 (1), 425­449.



                                             21
Eikenberry, S. E., M. Mancuso, E. Iboi, T. Phan, K. Eikenberry, Y. Kuang, E. Kostelich,
  and A. B. Gumel (2020). To mask or not to mask: Modeling the potential for face mask
  use by the general public to curtail the covid-19 pandemic. Infectious Disease Modelling .
Erokhin, V. and T. Gao (2020). Impacts of covid-19 on trade and economic aspects of food
  security: Evidence from 45 developing countries. International journal of environmental
  research and public health 17 (16), 5775.
for Africa, U. N. E. C. (2020). Covid-19 in africa: protecting lives and economies.
for Strategic Studies, A. C. (2020, Apr). African Adaptations to the COVID-19 Response .
Gandhi, M., C. Beyrer, and E. Goosby (2020). Masks do more than protect others during
 covid-19: reducing the inoculum of sars-cov-2 to protect the wearer. Journal of general
 internal medicine 35 (10), 3063­3066.
Geldsetzer, P. (2020). Knowledge and perceptions of covid-19 among the general public in
 the united states and the united kingdom: A cross-sectional online survey. Annals of
 internal medicine .
Goldberg, P. K. and T. Reed (2020). The eects of the coronavirus pandemic in emerging
 market and developing economies an optimistic preliminary account. Brooking Papers on
 Economic Activity 6, 1.
GRID3 (2020). Sierra leone is fighting smart against covid-19. Blog Post .
Haushofer, J. and C. J. E. Metcalf (2020). Which interventions work best in a pandemic?
  Science 368 (6495), 1063­1065.
Jain, R., J. Budlender, R. Zizzamia, and I. Bassier (2020). The labor market and poverty
  impacts of covid-19 in south africa.
Jalan, J. and E. Somanathan (2008). The importance of being informed: Experimental
  evidence on demand for environmental quality. Journal of development Economics 87 (1),
  14­28.
Josephson, A., T. Kilic, and J. D. Michler (2020). Socioeconomic impacts of covid-19 in four
  african countries.
Kao, K., E. Lust, B. Dulani, K. E. Ferree, A. S. Harris, and E. Metheney (2020). The abcs
 of covid-19 prevention in malawi: Authority, benefits, and costs of compliance. World
 development 137, 105167.
Karing, A. (2020). Operation of and demand for public transport during covid-19: Descrip-
 tive evidence from sierra leone.
Kerwin, J. T. (2020). The eect of hiv infection risk beliefs on sexual behavior: Scared
  straight or scared to death?
Kerwin, J. T. and N. O. Reynoso (2020). You know what i know: Interviewer knowledge
  eects in subjective expectation elicitation. Demography .

                                             22
Kremer, M., J. Leino, E. Miguel, and A. P. Zwane (2007). Spring cleaning: a randomized
  evaluation of source water quality improvement. Quarterly Journal of Economics 4 (2),
  09­30.

Liu, Y., R. M. Eggo, and A. J. Kucharski (2020). Secondary attack rate and superspreading
  events for sars-cov-2. The Lancet 395 (10227), e47.

Lo, N. C., A. Lowe, and E. Bendavid (2016). Abstinence funding was not associated with
  reductions in hiv risk behavior in sub-saharan africa. Health aairs 35 (5), 856­863.

Lone, S. A. and A. Ahmad (2020). Covid-19 pandemic­an african perspective. Emerging
  Microbes & Infections , 1­28.

Lucas, A. M. (2010, April). Malaria eradication and educational attainment: Evidence from
  paraguay and sri lanka. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2 (2), 46­71.

Lucas, A. M. and N. L. Wilson (2018). Can at-scale drug provision improve the health of the
  targeted in sub-saharan africa? American Journal of Health Economics 4 (3), 358­382.

Lyu, W. and G. L. Wehby (2020). Community use of face masks and covid-19: Evidence
  from a natural experiment of state mandates in the us: Study examines impact on covid-
  19 growth rates associated with state government mandates requiring face mask use in
  public. Health aairs 39 (8), 1419­1425.

Madajewicz, M., A. Pfa, A. van Geen, J. Graziano, I. Hussein, H. Momotaj, R. Sylvi,
 and H. Ahsan (2007, November). Can Information Alone Change Behavior? Response
 To Arsenic Contamination Of Groundwater In Bangladesh. Journal of Development Eco-
 nomics 84 (2), 731­754.

Mahmud, M. and E. Riley (2020). Household response to an extreme shock: Evidence on
 the immediate impact of the covid-19 lockdown on economic outcomes and well-being in
 rural uganda.

Marois, G., R. Muttarak, and S. Scherbov (2020). Assessing the potential impact of covid-19
 on life expectancy. Plos one 15 (9), e0238678.

Masina, L. (2020, Mar). Malawi orders political opposition to halt coronavirus education
 campaigns. VOANews .

Meinck, F., L. D. Cluver, M. E. Boyes, and E. L. Mhlongo (2015). Risk and protective
 factors for physical and sexual abuse of children and adolescents in africa: A review and
 implications for practice. Trauma, Violence, & Abuse 16 (1), 81­107.

Murray, E. J. (2020). Epidemiology's time of need: Covid-19 calls for epidemic-related
 economics. Journal of Economic Perspectives 34 (4), 105­20.

Organization, W. H. et al. (2016). Global health observatory (gho) data. 2020. Hospital
  Beds (per 10,000 population). WHO, Geneva .



                                            23
Osseni, I. A. (2020). Covid-19 pandemic in sub-saharan africa: preparedness, response, and
  hidden potentials. Tropical medicine and health 48 (1), 1­3.

Oster, E. (2012). Hiv and sexual behavior change: Why not africa?         Journal of health
  economics 31 (1), 35­49.

Rannan-Eliya, R. P., N. Wijemunige, J. Gunawardana, S. N. Amarasinghe, I. Sivagnanam,
  S. Fonseka, Y. Kapuge, and C. P. Sigera (0). Increased intensity of pcr testing reduced
  covid-19 transmission within countries during the first pandemic wave. Health Aairs 0 (0),
  10.1377/hltha.2020.01409. PMID: 33264048.

Squires, M. (2020). Kinship taxation as an impediment to growth: experimental evidence
  from kenyan and tanzanian microenterprises. Working paper .

Zheng, Q., F. K. Jones, S. V. Leavitt, L. Ung, A. B. Labrique, D. H. Peters, E. C. Lee, and
  A. S. Azman (2020). Hit-covid, a global database tracking public health interventions to
  covid-19. Scientific data 7 (1), 1­8.




                                            24
                                  Figure 1: Time Trend of Symptom Knowledge


                                Ghana                                                         Malawi
    4                                                                4


    3                                                                3


    2                                                                2


    1                                                                1
         55            60               65             70                55    60        65            70     75        80
                      Days Since COVID entry                                        Days Since COVID entry


                             Sierra Leone                                                    Tanzania
    4                                                                4


    3                                                                3


    2                                                                2


    1                                                                1
         20             30                   40             50           25    30        35            40     45        50
                      Days Since COVID entry                                        Days Since COVID entry


        # of correct symptoms      # of correct transmission         # of correct symptoms         # of correct transmission


Notes: Above are the time trends of the primary knowledge variables disaggregated by country, weighted by the
number of interviews in the country per day. In Ghana, Sierra Leone, and Tanzania there is no statistically significant
time trend of symptom or transmission knowledge. In Malawi, there is a weak positive time trend for symptom
knowledge (p=0.052) but not transmission knowledge.




                                                                 1
                                Table 1: Country & Dataset Descriptions

                                                 (1)                (2)                  (3)                (4)
                                                Ghana              Malawi           Sierra Leone          Tanzania
 Panel A: COVID experiences
 First COVID case                             March 12              April 2           March 30            March 16

 Lockdown                                  March 16-May               --           May 2-June 24       March 17-June
                                                20                                                           1

 Scope of Closures                            All public       Lockdown was            2 3-day     Schools closed,
                                              gatherings       announced but         lockdown;      ban on mass
                                               banned,          challenged in        businesses        public
                                            churches and        court and did      churches/schools gatherings,
                                            schools closed        not occur             closed       otherwise
                                                                                                     limited in
                                                                                                       scope.

 Nationwide Mask                               April 24           August 7             April 24         Not Enacted
 Mandate                                                                                                (See notes)

 Est. Cases (Nov 2)                             48,200               5,933               2,366         509 (see notes)

 Cases Per Million Pop                           1,551                310                 297           9 (see notes)

 Panel B: COVID Survey Statistics
 Geographic Scope                             7 regions             Zomba             Freetown         Dar Es Salaam
                                                                                                        and Dodoma
                                                                                                          regions

 Respondent type                              Educators           Men who             Travelers        Microenterprise
                                                                frequent bars                             owners

 Data Collection                           May 7-May 22         May 29-June         April 22 - 30,     April 10-May 4
 Period                                                             19               May 6 - 16


 Total N                                          362                1232                 633                 557

 Survey Response Rate                            0.88                0.46                0.79                0.93
Notes: In Tanzania, the mask mandate nationwide is only a recommendation and not a requirement. Local o cials in Dar
es Salaam ordered residents to wear face masks starting April 18. Tanzania stopped reporting virus cases and deaths May 8.
Data on coronavirus caseloads and deaths are from the Kaiser Family Foundation database as of November 2, 2020.The Ghana
lockdown was partially lifted April 16.




                                                         2
                                          Table 2: Sample Statistics

                              (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)      (5)     (6)
                             Ghana       Malawi       Sierra     Tanzania Average PValue
                                                      Leone                        Joint
                                                                                    Eq
 Age                           34.8        35.1        30.5       37.0     34.2    0.00
 Male                          0.82        1.00        0.66       0.56     0.75    0.00
 Has children                  0.86        0.93        0.94       0.87     0.91    0.00
 Rural                         0.76          0          0         0.40     0.23    0.00
 No schooling                  0.00        0.00        0.02       0.02     0.01    0.02
 Some Schooling                0.00        0.20        0.17       0.83     0.35    0.00
 Secondary or Higher           1.0         0.79        0.82       0.15     0.63    0.00
 Observations                  362         563         633         557     2115
Notes: Above are averages of select variables aggregated for each country. Missing observations for
a given variable are not included. Column 6 contains the p-value of the joint test of equality of the
averages by country. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                          3
                 Table 3: Summaries of Main Outcome Measures by Country

                                                   Ghana      Malawi       Sierra      Tanzania Total          PValue
                                                                           Leone                                Joint
                                                                                                                 Eq
 Panel A: Transmission Knowledge                     (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)        (6)
 No transmission knowledge                          0.00        0.01        0.02         0.02        0.01       0.09
 #Correct transmission mechanisms                    2.4         2.1         2.0          2.1         2.1       0.66
 Airborne cough                                     0.84        0.96        0.82         0.79        0.85       0.00
 Touching others                                    0.80        0.71        0.77         0.82        0.77       0.00
 Touching surfaces                                  0.64        0.37        0.36         0.38        0.42       0.63
 Asymptomatic people                                0.10        0.03        0.08         0.08        0.07       0.00

 Panel B: Symptom Knowledge
 Stated no knowledge of symptoms                    0.01         0.01       0.02         0.05        0.02        0.00
 # Correct symptoms listed                           3.2          2.8        3.1          2.9         3.0        0.51
 Coughing                                           0.90        0.79        0.77        0.709        0.78        0.01
 Fever                                              0.74         0.80       0.73        0.618        0.72        0.00
 Sneezing                                           0.57        0.63        0.74         0.44        0.60        0.00
 Di culty breathing                                 0.38         0.60       0.39         0.46        0.46        0.00
 Headache                                           0.42         0.00       0.28         0.43        0.27        0.00
 Sore throat                                        0.32        0.01        0.26         0.13        0.17        0.00
 Fatigue                                            0.17        0.02        0.15         0.24        0.14        0.00
 Loss of smell                                      0.04         0.32       0.04         0.01        0.10        0.00
 Loss of taste                                      0.03        0.146       0.04         0.00        0.06        0.00

 Panel C: Protective Measures
 No protective measures                             0.00        0.13        0.00         0.00        0.04        0.00
 # Protective measures taken                         3.4         2.1         3.4          2.4         2.8        0.00
 # Eective protective measures taken                 3.0         1.7         3.0         1.7          2.3        0.00
 Wearing mask                                       0.78        0.30        0.82         0.18        0.49        0.00
 Hand washing                                       0.85        0.82        0.85         0.86        0.84        0.28
 Hand sanitizer                                     0.66        0.00        0.61         0.18        0.33        0.00
 Not shaking hands                                  0.25        0.48        0.35          .60        0.44        0.00
 Not sharing foods                                  0.04        0.01        0.00         0.01        0.01        0.11
 Not aected                                         0.08        0.11         --          0.18        0.14        0.00

 Panel D: Social Distancing
 Decreased social contacts                          0.74        0.75        0.66         0.52       0.66         0.00
 Contact non-household?                             0.72        1.00        1.00         1.00       0.95         0.00
 # Places In Last Week                              1.61        5.47        1.72         3.18       3.11         0.00
 Children Had Contact Outside HH                    0.48        0.79        0.50         0.60       0.60         0.00
 Observations                                       362         563         633          557        2115
Notes: Above are averages of select variables aggregated for each country. Missing observations for a given variable are
not included. Whether children living in the household had contacts with others is among the sample that has children
living in their household. Due to an omission, how respondents were aected by the pandemic were not asked in Sierra
Leone. Column 6 contains the p-value of the joint test of equality of the averages by country. Correct transmission is de-
fined as reporting contracting the coronavirus from others, through air; by touching others; from touching contaminated
surfaces, and asymptomatic infections. Correct symptoms    4 are defined as coughing, fever, fatigue, di culty breathing,
loss of smell/taste, headache, and sore throat.
           Table 4: Reports of Ways Aected by Pandemic


                                   (1)     (2)        (3)       (4)            (5)
                                 Ghana   Malawi    Tanzania   Average    PValue Joint Eq
 Reduction in income/resources    0.39    0.75       0.40      0.54           0.00
 Stress                           0.65    0.45       0.44      0.49           0.00
 Children home from school        0.44    0.47       0.25      0.38           0.41
 Reduction in food                0.17    0.11       0.05      0.10            0.0
 Household infected               0.01    0.09       0.00      0.04            0.0
 Increase in household size       0.09    0.02       0.04      0.04            0.0
 Less monetary transfers          0.00    0.08       0.00      0.03           0.32
 Sent more transfers              0.07    0.00       0.04      0.03            0.0
 Increase on phone/internet       0.07    0.00       0.01      0.02            0.0
 Decrease in household size       0.01    0.02       0.02      0.02            0.0
 More monetary transfers          0.00    0.00       0.01      0.08           0.32
 Household death                  0.01    0.01       0.00      0.01           0.45
 Self-infected                    0.01    0.01       0.00      0.01           0.99
 Observations                     278     563        557       1398

Notes: Above are averages of select variables aggregated for each country. Missing obser-
vations for a given variable are not included. Due to an omission these questions were not
asked in Sierra Leone. Column 5 contains the p-value of the joint test of equality of the
averages by country.




                                            5
                          Table 5: Correlates of Knowledge and Behavior

                                      (1)                       (2)                   (3)                 (4)
                                                                                 # Eective
                             # Correct Symptoms     # Correct Transmission   Protective Measures   # Social Contacts
 Demographic Variables
 Male                                -0.107                    0.063               0.110                0.267
                                    (0.066)                   (0.043)              (0.061)               (0.088)
 Age                                0.023                      0.007                0.014                0.018
                                    (0.013)                   (0.010)              (0.013)              (0.021)
 Children in HH                      -0.049                    -0.014              0.212                 0.055
                                    (0.089)                   (0.060)              (0.085)              (0.125)
 Some Schooling                     0.312                     0.390                 0.050                0.436
                                    (0.186)                   (0.168)              (0.216)              (0.422)
 Secondary or Higher               0.757                      0.634                 0.243                0.431
                                    (0.188)                    (0.171)             (0.219)              (0.420)
 Rural                               -0.111                    -0.078               -0.072               -0.146
                                    (0.089)                   (0.058)              (0.071)              (0.142)


 Country Dummies
 Malawi                              -0.185                -0.299                 -1.188                3.777
                                    (0.120)                 (0.080)                (0.103)               (0.172)
 Sierra Leone                       -0.214                 -0.272                   0.055                0.123
                                    (0.124)                 (0.080)                (0.101)              (0.156)
 Tanzania                            -0.062                    -0.105             -0.839                2.089
                                    (0.125)                   (0.082)              (0.108)               (0.186)
 Observations                       1,991                      1,991                1,991                1,991
 R2                                 0.04                       0.04                 0.21                 0.48
 Mean Dep.                          2.69                       2.11                 2.71                 3.17
 Country Jointly Zero               0.28                        0.00                0.00                  0.00
 Education Jointly Zero              0.00                      0.00                 0.03                 0.58

Notes: The omitted category for education is those with no schooling. The omitted country is Ghana. Individuals
with missing control variables have their value set equal to the mean for their country with a dummy variable to
mark the imputation. Robust standard errors correcting for heteroskedasticity in parenthesis. "Country Jointly Zero"
presents the p-value on the null that all country dummies are jointly equal to zero. "Education Jointly Zero" presents
the p-value on the null that all education dummies are jointly equal to zero. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                          6
        Table 6: Correlates of Protective Measures Taken

                                              (1)                   (2)
                                         # Eective             # Eective
                                     Protective Measures   Protective Measures
 # Correct Symptoms Listed                0.230                 0.230
                                           (0.020)               (0.021)
 # Correct Transmission Mechanisms        0.400                 0.398
                                           (0.030)               (0.031)
 Male                                                            0.092
                                                                 (0.055)
 Age                                                              0.010
                                                                 (0.012)
 Rural                                                            -0.013
                                                                 (0.064)
 Some Schooling                                                   -0.168
                                                                 (0.190)
 Secondary or Higher                                              -0.179
                                                                 (0.194)
 Observations                               1,991                 1,991
 R2                                         0.35                  0.35
 Mean Dep.                                  2.71                  2.71

Notes: All regressions include a country fixed eect. Column 2: The omitted
educational category is those with no schooling. Individuals with missing con-
trol variables have their value set equal to the mean for their country with a
dummy variable to mark the imputation. Robust standard errors to correct for
heteroskedasticity in parenthesis. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                      7
                          Table 7: Correlates of # Contacts

                                                         (1)          (2)             (3)
                                                      # Contacts   # Contacts   # Formal Contacts
 # Correct Symptoms Listed                              0.030        -0.007           -0.006
                                                       (0.035)      (0.035)          (0.018)
 # Correct Transmission Mechanisms                     0.258        0.191             0.037
                                                        (0.050)      (0.052)         (0.027)
 #Protective Measures (excluding social distancing)                 0.189           0.058
                                                                     (0.040)         (0.021)
 Male                                                  0.249        0.245           0.187
                                                        (0.086)      (0.086)         (0.043)
 Age                                                    0.017        0.015          0.027
                                                       (0.021)      (0.021)          (0.010)
 Rural                                                  -0.122       -0.100         0.363
                                                       (0.142)      (0.142)          (0.074)
 Some Schooling                                         0.329        0.346            0.267
                                                       (0.414)      (0.406)          (0.214)
 Secondary or Higher                                    0.247        0.278            0.226
                                                       (0.413)      (0.405)          (0.213)
 Observations                                           1,991        1,991            1,991
 R2                                                     0.49         0.50             0.53
 Mean Dep.                                              3.17         3.17             1.11

Notes: All regressions include a country fixed eect. Individuals with missing control variables
have their value set equal to the mean for their country with a dummy variable to mark the impu-
tation. Column 3: Number of formal contacts includes contacts at houses of worship, events such
as wedding or funerals, meetings, and meals at restaurants. Robust standard errors to correct for
heteroskedasticity in parenthesis. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                  8
A     Appendix A

Below are the list of questions asked of respondents in each country. Questions were trans-
lated into local languages as appropriate.

  1. Consider your household to be individuals who normally live and eat their meals to-
     gether. In the past 7 days, have you or any household member come within 2 meters
     of other individuals who are not part of your household?

      (a) Yes

      (b) No (if no, skip to Question 3)

  2. Where have you or any other household members come within 2 meters of other indi-
     vidual(s) not in your household? Do not prompt, tick all that respondent mentions.

      (a) Market or a trading center or mall or supermarket

      (b) Home of a friend or non-household family member

      (c) Food distribution location

      (d) Ate/drank at a Restaurant/bar/shop/hotel

      (e) Getting takeaway from a restaurant/bar/shop/hotel

       (f) During employment activities, e.g. working near someone.

      (g) Religious or other worship services (including bible study and choir)

      (h) Wedding or funeral or anniversary

       (i) Non-religious community, political or other group meeting

       (j) Minibus (Trotro) or Taxi

      (k) Okada (Motor cycle taxi)

       (l) Communal toilet or bath

      (m) Other (Specify)

                                             25
3. In the past 7 days, have the children or youth in your household played or socialized
  in close physical proximity with children outside of your household?

   (a) I do not have any children or youth in my household.

   (b) Yes

   (c) No

4. Can you tell me what you know about the symptoms of COVID? Do not prompt, tick
  all that respondent mentions.

   (a) I don't know any symptoms (if select this cannot select anything else)

   (b) Coughing

   (c) Fever

   (d) Sneezing

   (e) Fatigue

    (f) Di culty breathing

   (g) Loss of smell

   (h) Loss of taste

    (i) Headache

    (j) Sore Throat

   (k) Other (Specify)

5. Can you tell me what you know about how COVID is transmitted? Do not prompt,
  tick all that respondent mentions.

   (a) I do not know how it's transmitted (if select this cannot select anything else)

   (b) From other people coughing/breathing common air/inhaling germs

   (c) Shaking hands/touching other people

                                         26
   (d) Touching contaminated surfaces

   (e) Even people who do not show symptoms might be infected

    (f) Even people who do not show symptoms might be contagious

   (g) Eating bad/spoiled/unripe food

   (h) Witchcraft

    (i) It only/primarily aects older people

    (j) It only/primarily aects younger people

   (k) Other(specify)

6. What are you doing to prevent an infection of the Covid-19? Do not prompt, tick all
  that respondent mentions.

   (a) Nothing (if select this cannot select anything else)

   (b) Increased hand washing

   (c) Wearing a nose/face mask

   (d) Not shaking hands

   (e) Stay distanced from others

    (f) Not eating unwashed food

   (g) Not eating from a shared plate or drinking from shared cup

   (h) Drinking clean water

    (i) Praying

    (j) Preventative medicine (traditional or otherwise)

   (k) Eating more healthfully

    (l) Using hand sanitizer

   (m) Other (specify)

                                          27
7. How has Covid and any related restrictions aected you? Do not prompt, tick all that
  respondent mentions.

   (a) No eect (if select this cannot select anything else)

   (b) I am infected/believe to be infected

   (c) Someone in my household is infected/believe to be infected

   (d) Someone in my household died

   (e) I am stressed, depressed, worried, and/or anxious

    (f) Children home from school

   (g) A reduction in household income or resources

   (h) A reduction in food availability

    (i) The size of my household has increased, e.g. migrants have returned or other kin
       now reside together

    (j) The size of my household has decreased, e.g. kin have left to live elsewhere

   (k) Spending more time on the phone/internet

    (l) Receiving more monetary transfers

   (m) Receiving fewer monetary transfers

   (n) Sending more monetary transfers

   (o) Sending fewer monetary transfers

   (p) Other (specify)




                                          28
Appendix B




             9
                                            Figure B1: Percent of Respondents Reporting Each Protective Measure

                                  1




                                  .8
   Percent of Total Respondents




                                  .6




                                  .4




                                  .2




                                  0
                                       No Shaking Hands      Social Distance          Wear Mask              Hand Washing

                                                          Ghana        Malawi   Sierra Leone      Tanzania


Notes: This bar chart shows the percent of respondents reporting the most commonly mentioned protective measures
by country.




                                                                                     10
                                                  Figure B2: Type of Social Contacts By Country

                                  1




                                  .8
   Percent of Total Respondents




                                  .6




                                  .4




                                  .2




                                  0
                                       Market    Other Homes            Public Transport       Work         Religious Service

                                                Ghana          Malawi           Sierra Leone          Tanzania


Notes: This bar chart shows where respondents reported close contact with a person outside of their household in
the previous 6 days by country.




                                                                                      11
            Figure B3: Number of Preventive Behaviors By Number of Social Contacts


                                                Change Vs. Zero Contacts

     1 Contacts


     2 Contacts


     3 Contacts


     4 Contacts


     5 Contacts


     6 Contacts


     7 Contacts


    8+ Contacts

                       -.5                         0                           .5                          1


Notes: This coe cient plot displays the dierence in number of protective activities that a respondent engages in
disaggregated by the number of places that they report visiting in the past week. Coe cient estimates are based
upon a regression that includes country fixed eects and the standard controls.




                                                       12
               Figure B4: Likelihood of Mask Wearing By Number of Social Contacts


                                                Change Vs. Zero Contacts

     1 Contacts


     2 Contacts


     3 Contacts


     4 Contacts


     5 Contacts


     6 Contacts


     7 Contacts


    8+ Contacts

                    -.1                          0                            .1                          .2


Notes: This coe cient plot displays the dierence in number of protective activities that a respondent engages in
disaggregated by the number of places that they report visiting in the past week. Coe cient estimates are based
upon a regression that includes country fixed eects and the standard controls.




                                                      13
                  Table B1: Where Respondents Contacted Others in Past 6 Days


                                                     Ghana       Malawi   Sierra Leone   Tanzania   Average   PValue of Equality
                                                      (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)            (6)
 Panel A: Contact Variables
 Individual contact non-household                    0.72          1.0         1.0          1.0      0.95             1.0
 # Places In Last Week                               1.6          5.5         1.7          3.2       3.1             0.00
 Children contact non-household                      0.48         0.79        0.50         0.60      0.60            0.00

 Panel B: Contact Variables At Informal Gatherings
 Contact at a market                                 0.56         0.72        0.44         0.61      0.58            0.00
 Contact in another home                             0.40         0.60        0.41         0.40      0.46            0.00
 Contact on minibus                                  0.19         0.53        0.31         0.34      0.36            0.00
 Contact in communal toilet or bath                  0.04         0.41        0.02         0.12      0.16            0.00
 Contact by takeout from bar, restaurant, etc.       0.06         0.36        0.00         0.10      0.14            0.00

 Panel C: Contact Variables At Formal Gatherings
 Contact at work                                     0.08         0.72        0.20         0.30      0.35            0.00
 Contact at religious service/activity               0.02         0.54        0.00         0.5`      0.28            0.00
 Contact eating/drinking at bar, restaurant, etc.    0.09         0.61        0.03         0.18      0.24            0.00
 Contact at wedding, funeral, anniversary, etc.      0.01         0.29        0.00         0.22      0.14            0.00
 Contact at non-religious meeting                    0.01         0.15        0.01         0.07      0.06            0.00
 Observations                                        362          563         597          523       2045

Notes: Above are averages of select variables aggregated for each country. Missing observations for a given variable are not
included. Children contact non-household only uses the sample of respondents with children in their household. Column 6
contains the p-value of the joint test of equality of the averages by country.




                                                            14
                                      Table B2: Aected by Stress

                                      Did Not Report Stress      Reported Stress      Average    PValue of Equality
                                               (1)                    (2)               (3)             (4)
 Number of Ways Aected                          0.98                    2.23            1.58            0.00***
 Reduction in income/resources                  0.53                    0.54            0.54              0.18
 Children home from school                      0.27                    0.49            0.38            0.00***
 Self-infected                                  0.01                    0.00            0.01            0.067*
 Household infected                             0.07                    0.01            0.04            0.00***
 Household death                                0.01                    0.01            0.01             0.564
 Reduction in food                              0.12                    0.08            0.10            0.00***
 Increase in household size                     0.04                    0.04            0.04             0.937
 Decrease in household size                     0.01                    0.02            0.02             0.966
 Increase on phone/internet                     0.01                    0.02            0.07             0.621
 More monetary transfers                        0.01                    0.01            0.01             0.906
 Less monetary transfers                        0.06                    0.00            0.03             0.869
 Sent more transfers                            0.03                    0.04            0.03             0.729
 Observations                                   717                     681            1398
Notes: Above are averages of how respondents reported that they were aected by the pandemic, disaggregated by whether or
not the respondent reported that they felt increased stress.




                                                       15
         Table B3: Regression Correlates of Detailed Protective Measures Taken

                                           (1)               (2)              (3)          (4)         (5)
                                                                                       Not Shaking    Mask
                                     Sanitize Hands   Social Distancing   Wash Hands     Hands       Wearing
 # Correct Symptoms Listed              0.034              0.056            0.019        0.077       0.031
                                         (0.008)           (0.009)          (0.008)       (0.009)     (0.008)
 # Correct Transmission Mechanisms       0.029             0.088           0.067         0.158        0.030
                                         (0.012)            (0.014)         (0.012)       (0.014)     (0.013)
 Male                                     -0.028           0.061             0.016         0.011       0.034
                                         (0.025)           (0.027)          (0.020)       (0.026)     (0.021)
 Age                                      -0.003            0.005            -0.001        0.001      0.009
                                         (0.004)           (0.006)          (0.004)       (0.006)     (0.004)
 Rural                                    -0.034           0.074             0.035         -0.040    -0.055
                                         (0.030)           (0.037)          (0.026)       (0.035)     (0.028)
 Some Schooling                          0.154              0.005            -0.084      -0.207        -0.026
                                         (0.079)           (0.114)          (0.063)      (0.106)      (0.064)
 Secondary or Higher                     0.201              0.048          -0.125        -0.266        0.025
                                         (0.080)           (0.115)          (0.063)       (0.107)     (0.065)
 Observations                             1,991             1,991            1,991        1,991        1,991
 R2                                       0.37              0.10             0.03         0.18         0.37
 Mean Dep.                                0.33              0.66             0.84         0.44         0.49

Notes: All regressions include a country fixed eect. Additional controls include age, age-squared, male, urban-
rural status, and a set of dummies for educational attainment. Individuals with missing control variables have
their value set equal to the mean for their country with a dummy variable to mark the imputation.Robust stan-
dard errors to correct for heteroskedasticity in parenthesis.* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                      16
Table B4: Regression Knowledge and # Protective Measures:
Results by Country

                                         (1)        (2)           (3)         (4)
                                        Ghana      Malawi    Sierra Leone   Tanzania
 # Correct Symptoms Listed              0.092     0.327        0.095         0.150
                                        (0.044)    (0.047)      (0.033)       (0.036)
 # Correct Transmission Mechanisms     0.230      0.195        0.282         0.349
                                        (0.081)    (0.069)      (0.056)       (0.049)
 Age                                    -0.099      0.004        0.029        -0.015
                                        (0.056)    (0.018)      (0.023)      (0.020)
 Male                                    -0.181                  0.101        0.113
                                        (0.124)                 (0.080)      (0.074)
 Rural                                   -0.129                               -0.074
                                        (0.137)                              (0.087)
 Some Schooling                                     -0.642      -0.523        0.157
                                                   (0.392)      (0.274)      (0.210)
 Secondary or Higher                               -0.686        -0.394       0.307
                                                   (0.389)      (0.268)      (0.226)
 Observations                            277        491          633           557
 R2                                      0.43       0.37         0.39          0.21
 Mean Dep.                               3.29       2.10         3.29          2.33

Notes: All regressions include controls for age, age-squared, male, urban-rural status,
a set of dummies for educational attainment, and enumerator fixed eects. Individ-
uals with missing control variables have their value set equal to the mean for their
country with a dummy variable to mark the imputation. The sample in Malawi is
exclusively males in urban areas, and the sample in Sierra Leone is exclusively urban.
Robust standard errors to correct for heteroskedasticity in parenthesis. * p < 0.10,
** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                          17
  Table B5: Regression Knowledge and Type of Contacts: Results by Location

                                       (1)         (2)          (3)              (4)              (5)
                                      Market      Work      Other Homes   Public Transport   Ate Restaurant
 # Correct Symptoms Listed             0.003      -0.003       0.014           0.008             -0.005
                                      (0.010)    (0.009)      (0.010)         (0.010)           (0.008)
 # Correct Transmission Mechanisms     0.015      0.007       0.055           0.046             0.030
                                      (0.015)    (0.013)       (0.015)         (0.014)           (0.011)
 Male                                -0.082      0.090        0.048            0.025            0.080
                                      (0.028)     (0.022)     (0.028)         (0.025)            (0.016)
 Age                                  -0.013     0.015        -0.010           0.003            0.016
                                       (0.006)    (0.006)     (0.006)         (0.006)            (0.005)
 Rural                               -0.107      0.070         0.027         -0.281              0.007
                                      (0.037)    (0.033)      (0.037)         (0.033)           (0.027)
 Some Schooling                        0.011      0.113        -0.146          0.068             0.003
                                      (0.103)    (0.095)      (0.108)         (0.085)           (0.053)
 Secondary or Higher                   -0.024     0.102        -0.130          0.091             0.029
                                      (0.103)    (0.096)      (0.109)         (0.085)           (0.053)
 Observations                          1,991      1,991        1,991           1,991             1,991
 R2                                    0.07       0.26         0.05            0.10              0.32
 Mean Dep.                             0.58       0.36         0.46            0.36              0.25

Notes: All regressions include controls for age, age-squared, male, urban-rural status, a set of dummies for
educational attainment, and enumerator fixed eects. Individuals with missing control variables have their
value set equal to the mean for their country with a dummy variable to mark the imputation. Data on enu-
merator and schooling were not available for 72 respondents in Malawi. Robust standard errors to correct for
heteroskedasticity in parenthesis. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                     18
Table B6: Regression Knowledge and Number of Contacts: Results by
Country

                                                       (1)        (2)           (3)         (4)
                                                      Ghana      Malawi    Sierra Leone   Tanzania
 # Correct Symptoms Listed                             0.105      -0.098      0.048        -0.021
                                                      (0.090)    (0.092)     (0.032)      (0.079)
 # Correct Transmission Mechanisms                     -0.026    0.265      0.200         0.257
                                                      (0.114)    (0.125)     (0.054)      (0.115)
 #Protective Measures (excluding social distancing)    0.038     0.241      0.148         0.314
                                                      (0.092)    (0.105)     (0.037)       (0.100)
 Age                                                   0.005      0.017       -0.027       0.023
                                                      (0.089)    (0.039)     (0.024)      (0.053)
 Male                                                  0.087                  0.118       0.411
                                                      (0.220)                (0.074)      (0.173)
 Rural                                                -0.457                               0.054
                                                       (0.224)                            (0.180)
 Some Schooling                                                   0.328       -0.137       0.757
                                                                 (1.169)     (0.523)      (0.613)
 Secondary or Higher                                              0.638       -0.291       0.377
                                                                 (1.159)     (0.522)      (0.638)
 Observations                                           277       562          597          555
 R2                                                     0.04      0.04         0.10         0.14
 Mean Dep.                                              1.61      5.47         1.72         3.18

Notes: All regressions include controls for age, age-squared, male, urban-rural status, a set of
dummies for educational attainment, and enumerator fixed eects. Individuals with missing con-
trol variables have their value set equal to the mean for their country with a dummy variable to
mark the imputation. Enumerator data were not available for 72 respondents in Malawi. Ro-
bust standard errors to correct for heteroskedasticity in parenthesis. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, ***
p < 0.01




                                                19
