                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      MACHINE LEARNING AND PERCEIVED AGE STEREOTYPES IN JOB ADS:
                    EVIDENCE FROM AN EXPERIMENT

                                          Ian Burn
                                       Daniel Firoozi
                                        Daniel Ladd
                                       David Neumark

                                     Working Paper 28328
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28328


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2021




This research was supported by the Sloan Foundation. Any views expressed are our own and not
those of the Sloan Foundation. This experiment was approved by the UCI Institutional Review
Board, HS# 2015-2107. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Ian Burn, Daniel Firoozi, Daniel Ladd, and David Neumark. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Machine Learning and Perceived Age Stereotypes in Job Ads: Evidence from an Experiment
Ian Burn, Daniel Firoozi, Daniel Ladd, and David Neumark
NBER Working Paper No. 28328
January 2021
JEL No. J14,J71,K31

                                           ABSTRACT

We explore whether ageist stereotypes in job ads are detectable using machine learning methods
measuring the linguistic similarity of job-ad language to ageist stereotypes identified by industrial
psychologists. We then conduct an experiment to evaluate whether this language is perceived as
biased against older workers. We find that language classified by the machine learning algorithm
as closely related to ageist stereotypes is perceived as ageist by experimental subjects. The scores
assigned to the language related to ageist stereotypes are larger when responses are incentivized
by rewarding participants for guessing how other respondents rated the language. These methods
could potentially help enforce anti-discrimination laws by using job ads to predict or identify
employers more likely to be engaging in age discrimination.

Ian Burn                                          Daniel Ladd
University of Liverpool                           3151 Social Sciences Plaza
Department of Economics                           Irvine, Unit 92697
Chatham St, Liverpool L69 7ZH                     US
United Kingdom                                    dladd@uci.edu
ian.burn@liverpool.ac.uk
                                                  David Neumark
Daniel Firoozi                                    Department of Economics
Dept of Economics                                 University of California, Irvine
3151 Social Sciences Plaza                        3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697                                  Irvine, CA 92697
US                                                and NBER
dfiroozi@uci.edu                                  dneumark@uci.edu
Introduction

         There is an extensive body of research testing for employer discrimination against older workers

in labor markets, using correspondence studies to test for discrimination in hiring (e.g., Bendick et al.,

1997, 1999; Lahey, 2008; Neumark et al., 2019a, 2019b). This research focuses on measuring employer

behavior ­ specifically, whether there is less hiring of qualified older workers. There is little work that

studies how workers respond to discrimination in the labor market. In this paper, we explore potential

worker responses to one manifestation of discrimination in the labor market, in particular, whether

workers perceive job requirements using language related to ageist stereotypes as biased against older

workers. The use of ageist stereotypes in job ads, if it discourages older workers from applying for jobs,

can have the same adverse outcome on the hiring of older workers.1

         Utilizing ageist language in job ads may be rational for employers, despite it being illegal to

discriminate against older workers. Employers who do not want to hire older workers might, in order to

avoid unnecessary search costs, discourage older workers from applying by signaling their ageism.

Shaping the applicant pool by discouraging older applicants has an additional benefit for discriminatory

employers, because of the incentives created by age discrimination laws. A lower representation of older

workers in their applicant pool can make it easier to justify a lower representation of older workers among

employees, making it easier to rebut an allegation of age discrimination in hiring.

         In this paper, we use evidence from a large sample of job ads to explore how job-ad language is

interpreted by potential job applicants. First, we use machine learning methods, partly developed in Burn

et al. (2020), to identify phrases in job ads that are linguistically related to ageist stereotypes drawn from

the industrial psychology literature.2 We use these phrases to construct typical job-ad language (in the

form of sentences) that reflects specific age stereotypes. We show that machine learning methods are


1
  Viewed in the context of labor market search, direct discrimination by employers reduces the likelihood that
   employers make an offer to an older workers, whereas discouraging them from applying reduces the likelihood
   that older workers find a match. Both thus reduce the arrival rate of job offers, lengthening unemployment
   durations.
2
  The job ads were collected as part of a large-scale correspondence study of age discrimination (Neumark et al.,
   2019). This research, in turn, is being used to develop a field experiment on how actual job applicants respond to
   ageist language in job ads.




                                                          1
sensitive enough to detect the presence of stereotyped language, even when only one sentence in the job

ad is highly related to the ageist stereotype. Second, we conduct an MTURK experiment that asks

whether respondents perceive this job-ad language ­ which the machine learning algorithm classified as

related to ageist stereotypes ­ as ageist. Our experimental evidence shows that sentences that are

classified as closely related to ageist stereotypes by the machine learning algorithm are also rated as ageist

by respondents in many cases.

           Our paper makes two contributions to the literature. First, we contribute to the literature in

industrial psychology on employer and worker beliefs about stereotypes. Much of the previous literature

in industrial psychology utilizes surveys to understand how employers view older workers or how

workers view job ads. To incentivize the elicitation of respondents' true beliefs, we asked respondents to

guess how the average respondent to our survey rated each statement, and respondents were paid based on

how close to the true value their answers were. When asked to state their own beliefs, respondents in our

survey were less likely to rate a statement as ageist. But when asked how they thought the average

respondent would view the same statement, they rated statements as more ageist on average. These

findings suggest that standard surveying methods that do not incentivize responses may lead to an

underreporting of perceptions of ageism; one potential explanation is that it is not socially desirable to

perceive the language we use as ageist, since doing so indicates that one attributes the characteristics of

people used in this language as applying more to older people.

           Second, our results show the promise of machine learning methods to help reduce age

discrimination in the labor market. The potential for age stereotypes or other language in job ads to deter

applications from older job seekers is real. An extreme version of such language is stating maximum

experience levels in job ads ­ as occurred recently in Kleber v. Carefusion Corp. ­ which will clearly act

to exclude many older applicants.3 More generally, the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations covering the

ADEA currently states, "Help wanted notices or advertisements may not contain terms and phrases that


3
    See Kleber v. Carefusion Corp. (http://www.aarp.org/content/dam/aarp/aarp_foundation/litigation/pdf-beg-02-01-
     2016/kleber-amended-complaint.pdf, viewed November 8, 2017). Button (2019) discusses the ruling in this case.




                                                          2
limit or deter the employment of older individuals. Notices or advertisements that contain terms such as

age 25 to 35, young, college student, recent college graduate, boy, girl, or others of a similar nature

violate the Act unless one of the statutory exceptions applies" (§1625.4). Thus, our research asking

whether we can reliably detect age stereotyping in job ads can provide information and tools to parties

that enforce age discrimination laws on job-ad language that may predict employer discrimination in

hiring.4

Conceptual Framework and Implications of the Evidence

           Why might employers use stereotyped language in job ads? One hypothesis is that employers

who discriminate based on age use stereotyped language to try to shape the applicant pool, to reduce the

likelihood that age discrimination is detected. Using language that conveys positive stereotypes related to

young workers might discourage older workers from applying for the job (as might language conveying

negative stereotypes related to older workers ­ although that seems less likely and is, in fact, less common

in our data). This discouragement from applying would lead to the underrepresentation of older applicants

in the applicant pool. This underrepresentation, in turn, is potentially valuable to a discriminating

employer, because the probability of an age discrimination claim and of an adverse outcome for the

employer is smaller the higher is the ratio of job offers to applicants for older applicants vs. younger

applicants.5

           A second hypothesis is more closely related to statistical discrimination. Different jobs may have

different requirements, which could be stated in job ads. But employers may hold stereotypes about older

job applicants' abilities to meet these job requirements ­ for example, assuming that older workers are

less likely to be able to do the heavy lifting that a job requires. In this case, employers posting such ads



4
  In particular, this information can be useful for government enforcement agencies as well as attorneys representing
   plaintiffs in age discrimination actions.
5
  In legal cases, the most compelling data on hiring discrimination comes from comparing hiring rates of the group
   in question (older workers, in our case) relative to the applicant pool. In the absence of data on applicants, the
   analysis of a firm's workforce relative to the age structure of the relevant workforce in the population is
   sometimes used, but such analyses pose a greater challenge to establishing evidence consistent with age
   discrimination.




                                                          3
and offering fewer callbacks to older workers would be engaging in pure statistical discrimination.

           While social scientists are interested in the nature of discriminatory behavior, both statistical and

taste discrimination are illegal under U.S. law. EEOC regulations state: "An employer may not base

hiring decisions on stereotypes and assumptions about a person's race, color, religion, sex (including

pregnancy), national origin, age (40 or older), disability or genetic information."6 A somewhat different

and more complicated question is whether job requirements reflected in stereotyped language in job ads,

to the extent they result in less hiring of older workers, are legal. The legality of these requirements

generally requires an employer to show that the use of these requirements is based on a reasonable factor

other than age (RFOA), even if that factor is correlated with age. An RFOA is defined as "a non-age

factor that is objectively reasonable when viewed from the position of a prudent employer mindful of its

responsibilities under the ADEA under like circumstances."7 In other words, a job requirement that is

associated with less hiring of older workers is not necessarily illegal, but it may be.

           Age discrimination is an important policy issue. Reducing age discrimination in hiring is an

important component to lengthening work lives because many seniors transition to part-time or shorter-

term "partial retirement" or "bridge jobs" at the end of their careers (Cahill et al., 2006; Johnson et al.,

2009), or return to work after a period of retirement (Maestas, 2010). If ageist stereotypes in job ads

discourage older applicants from applying for jobs, the EEOC could utilize our evidence in two ways to

help reduce age discrimination in hiring. First, it could use the text of job ads to monitor for possible age

discrimination in hiring (as could plaintiffs' attorneys who help enforce the law). Second, the EEOC

could issue guidance to employers to avoid language that might discourage older workers from applying.

Thus, rigorous evidence on the role of ageist language in job ads could potentially influence policy to

reduce age discrimination in hiring and contribute to lengthening work lives.




6
    See http://www1.eeoc.gov//laws/practices/index.cfm?renderforprint=1 (viewed September 15, 2019).
7
    See https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2012/03/30/2012-5896/disparate-impact-and-reasonable-factors-
     other-than-age-under-the-age-discrimination-in-employment (viewed September 15, 2019).




                                                         4
Studying Job Ads

           Very few studies explore job ads, and fewer still focus on discrimination. Among studies of

issues other than discrimination, Modestino et al. (2016) use text data from job ads to document that

"downskilling" occurred during the recovery from the Great Recession, with firms reducing skill

requirements in their job ads. Deming and Kahn (2018) use text data in job ads to measure how ten

different skills relate to wages. Marinescu and Wolthoff (2020) match text data from job ads to job

application data to study the matching process between jobs and applicants. And He et al. (forthcoming)

study how job flexibility conditions influence job application behavior. Kuhn and Shen (2013) and Kuhn

et al. (2018) explore how gender preferences feature explicitly or implicitly in job ads in China, and

Hellester et al. (2020) explore age and gender preferences in job ads in China and Mexico.

           Two studies, to date, connect the text of job ads to measured discriminatory behavior of

employers.8 Tilcsik (2011) identifies words in job ads related to masculine stereotypes (decisive,

aggressive, assertive, and ambitious) and links those to hiring outcomes in a correspondence study of

discrimination against gay men. And, in the most systematic study of how the text of job ads is associated

with discrimination, Burn et al. (2020) identify common age stereotypes from the research literature in

industrial psychology, use machine learning to calculate the relationship between the text of the job ads

and specific age stereotypes, and then test whether job-ad language related to the stereotypes predicts

hiring discrimination against older workers in a correspondence study. As already noted, the present paper

builds on this prior work.

           There has been no research on whether the ageist language in job ads is actually perceived as

ageist by potential job applicants. Obviously, the use of this kind of language in job ads is much more

troublesome if, in fact, it is perceived as ageist and thus discourages older workers from applying for jobs.


8
    Though they did not focus on job ads, Hanson et al. (2011) and Hanson et al. (2016) study language used by
     mortgage originators and connect this language to their behavior. Hanson et al. (2011) study subtle discrimination
     through "keywords" used by landlords responding to prospective tenants. Hanson et al. (2016) had research
     assistants subjectively (and blindly) code the helpfulness and other characteristics of mortgage loan originator
     responses to prospective borrowers.




                                                            5
If this happens, it would rightly be viewed as another dimension of age discrimination in hiring ­ one that

has not been studied or detected in the research literature that studies hiring discrimination, mainly using

correspondence studies.9

           What is known about how job applicants read job ads focuses exclusively on gender bias in job

ads. Gaucher et al. (2011) found that job ads for male-dominated occupations used masculine wording

(i.e., words associated with male stereotypes, such as "leader," "competitive," or "dominant") more

frequently than advertisements for female-dominated occupations, and women find job advertisements

less appealing when they contained more masculine wording than feminine wording (Bem and Bem,

1973; Gaucher et al., 2011).

Methods

Selecting the Stereotypes

           To select the stereotypes we study, we start with a list of 17 ageist stereotypes from the industrial

psychology literature. These are listed in Table 1. See Burn et al. (2020) for documentation of the sources

used to identify these stereotypes and the larger set of phrases that correspond to them. Note that a few of

these appear as both positive and negative stereotypes about older workers.

           For our analysis, we selected a subset of these stereotypes that met the following criteria. First,

the stereotype is commonly expressed in job-ad language about the ideal or preferred candidate skills or

attributes; we did not want to focus on stereotypes that are not often included in job ads (e.g., hearing and

memory), even if, according to the industrial psychology literature, employers hold these stereotypes.

Second, we focus on stereotypes for which we had evidence of a correlation between discrimination and

the stereotype (from Burn et al., 2020) and evidence that the stereotype captures a skill that employers

view older workers as less likely to possess (from van Borm et al., 2019). Third, older workers should be

aware that employers held the stereotype. As evidence, we drew on various reports put out by AARP; see



9
    These include Baert et al. (2016); Bendick et al. (1997, 1999); Carlsson and Eriksson (2019); Farber et al. (2017,
     2019); Lahey (2008); Neumark et al. (2016, 2019a, 2019b); and Riach and Rich (2006, 2010).




                                                            6
Brenoff (2019) and Terrell (2019). Our final list of stereotypes is three skills or abilities for which older

workers are stereotyped as deficient: communication skills, physical ability, and technological skills.10

         Industrial psychology research focuses on the skills that employers desire in workers, but in

which older workers are deficient. That is, the literature typically frames the phrasing of these skills or

requirements in the negative. In contrast, job ads rarely seek candidates using negative formulations of a

skill requirement, but instead turn the language to a positive formulation (e.g., ads will ask that a

candidate be "adaptable," rather than that they are "not stubborn"). When describing skills and

requirements related to our stereotypes, employers use words like "outgoing" (Stewart and Ryan, 1982),

"sociable" (Kite et al., 1991), and "conversational skills" (Ryan et al., 1992; Schmidt and Boland, 1986)

to describe communication skills. Physical ability is expressed using words like "energy," "speed," and

"physical capability" (Levin, 1988; van Dalen et al., 2009). And technological skills focus on the ability

to use "new technology," or on "technological competence" (AARP, 2000; McCann and Keaton, 2013;

McGregor and Gray, 2002)

Creating the Treatment (Stereotyped) and Control Job-Ad Language

         To test whether stereotyped language is perceived as ageist by workers, we create two sets of

phrases: treatment phrases and control phrases. The treatment and control job-ad sentences differ in the

job requirements expressed and the type of language used in these phrases; we try as much as possible to

have the treatment and control phrases describe similar skills while allowing for some differences to be

appropriate to the occupation (see Table 2).11 As just noted, the requirements we manipulate have to do

with a candidate's communication skills, physical ability, and technology skills. Our control sentences

express job requirements that are also appropriate for the job but use age-neutral language not related to




10
   Communication skills are one of three stereotypes in Table 1 that appear both positively and negatively. Later, we
   discuss the implications of this for our evidence.
11
   For example, for the machine learning treatment for communication skills, the phrase for administrative assistants
   is "You must have good communication skills and teamwork on tasks," while for retail sales the phrase is "You
   must have good communication skills with customers and staff." In contrast, the control phrase ­ "You must be
   good at working without supervision" ­ is the same.




                                                          7
these age-stereotyped skills or abilities, while our treatment sentences use language highly related to these

ageist stereotypes.

           Our main method for generating phrases and sentences highly related to ageist stereotypes uses

measures of semantic similarity generated by machine learning methods. Moreover, to isolate the effects

of the different stereotypes, we used the results from these machine learning methods to construct

sentences that were highly related to only one of the three stereotypes we use. We calculate the semantic

similarity of nearly one million (997,562) phrases from the approximately 14,000 job ads collected in

Burn et al. (2019) to the communication skills, physical ability, and technology skills stereotypes,

measuring semantic similarity by the cosine similarity score.

           The machine learning methods are explained fully in Burn et al. (2020). Briefly, though, this

includes the following steps.

                1. We scrape the text of the job ads, deleting so-called "stopping words" (like "of," "and,"

                    "the"), which do not convey any real content.

                2. We use as the "corpus" the entirety of English-language Wikipedia, which contains all

                    words in the English language. With this corpus, we compute the semantic similarity

                    between any two words, based on the frequency with which they appear together in either

                    sentences or paragraphs of the Wikipedia corpus, a common procedure in computational

                    linguistics. The resulting measure is the "cosine similarity score," which ranges from -1

                    (the words never appear together) to 1 (they always appear together).

                3. We use the resulting scores to compute the similarity between all three-word phrases in

                    our ads and the stereotypes (from Table 1).12 Thus, we can calculate the cosine similarity

                    score (or semantic similarity score) of any phrase constructed using words from our job

                    ads to the stereotypes (see Burn et al., 2020).

           As an example, Figure 1 shows the distribution of cosine similarity scores of all three-word


12
     Burn et al. (2020) discuss and document why three-word phrases are appropriate to capture the job requirement
     content.




                                                           8
phrases (trigrams) with a particular stereotype (communication skills); the distribution is centered above

zero, which makes sense since we are looking at the text from job ads. To provide some examples,

trigrams at the lower end of the distribution are highly unrelated. These include, for example, "christmas

season near" and "hotel near seattle" (both with scores of -0.3). Examples of trigrams with scores close to

0.0 are "every Sunday pm" and "work year round." Trigrams at the top of the distribution with scores of

1.0 include "excellent communication skills" and "prioritizing skills communication."

        We use the list of words and phrases from our job ads to construct our treatment sentences. We

iteratively edited the sentences to ensure that only the cosine similarity score of the manipulated

stereotype substantively differed between the treatment and control sentences, whereas the cosine

similarity scores for the other stereotypes listed in Table 1 (including the other two treatment stereotypes)

were similar for the treatment and control sentences. For example, if the treatment language related to

communication skills was also highly related to the stereotype about personality, we identified which

words in the sentence were highly related to personality, and then we selected synonyms that were less

related to personality. Our control sentences were created to express requirements for similar jobs without

referring to ageist stereotypes about skills or abilities. We iteratively removed words and phrases that

were highly related to our stereotypes to minimize the semantic similarity. The resulting sentences, for the

treatment and control groups, are listed in columns (3) and (4) of Table 2, along with their cosine

similarity scores with the stereotype.

        We also use a second stereotype treatment that conveys bias by using ageist language identified

by the AARP as related to communication skills, physical ability, and technology skills. We select three

AARP examples that best correspond to our respective stereotypes: "cultural fit," "energetic person," and

"digital native" (Brenoff, 2019; Terrell, 2019). We adapted the language to fit our job ads and created

three sentences, one for each stereotype (Table 2, column (5)). Using the text about cultural fit, we

created the sentence "You must be up-to-date with current industry jargon and communicate with a

dynamic workforce" to reflect stereotypes about communication skills, emphasizing the communication

aspect of fitting in. Using the text about energetic persons, we created the sentence "You must be a fit and



                                                      9
energetic person" to reflect stereotypes about physical ability. Using the text about digital natives, we

created the sentence "You must be a digital native and have a background in social media" to reflect

stereotypes about technology skills by emphasizing social media.

        We thought it useful to use these rather blatant examples of stereotyped language suggested by

AARP as a way of validating our methods. One might think that if these phrases are not identified as

ageist, one might view it as less likely that our more subtle sentences would be. Conversely, at the other

extreme, the experimental responses to the AARP phrases might give a sense of the upper bound of

perceived stereotyping we could expect. On the other hand, note that ­ as shown in Table 2 ­ in every

case, the cosine similarity score with the stereotype for the machine learning phrase is higher than for the

AARP language. This does not necessarily mean that the AARP language is less ageist; rather, the AARP

language may be perceived as more ageist, while the language is less directly aligned with a particular

ageist stereotype. As an example, the AARP language we use for the communications stereotype includes

"up-to-date," "jargon," and "dynamic," all of which may be reflect ageist stereotypes that are not strongly

related to communications. This is not surprising since the AARP stereotypes were not chosen by

machine learning with the goal of high semantic similarity with a specific stereotype and not with others.

Indeed, as we noted earlier, the AARP language used for communications is in fact described as "cultural

fit," which could be much broader.

        It is also true that the treatment phrases for some stereotypes are stronger than for others. In

particular, the cosine similarity score is always lowest for the phrase corresponding to technological skills

than for the phrases corresponding to the other two stereotypes. As it turns out, the same is true for the

control phrases. Thus, the impact of the difference between treatment and control phrases may not be

expected to differ as much across stereotypes (if, in fact, they are perceived as ageist).

Validating the Treatment vs. Control Differences

        While the AARP language is quite blatant and should be perceived as ageist by workers, a first

question is how well the stereotyped vs. neutral sentences generated from the machine learning results

leads to ads that convey the intended stereotypes. In the language of epidemiology, we would like our



                                                      10
treatment sentences to have high "sensitivity" (conveying ageist stereotypes) and "specificity" (conveying

information about the specific ageist stereotype intended).

           To test whether our phrases are powerful enough to be detected in a job ad, we embedded the

treatment and control sentences in job-ad templates we created to correspond to actual job ads. In

particular, we created 12 templates per occupation using actual ads collected in Neumark et al. (2019) as a

guide to creating our experimental job ads. We supplemented the sample of ads with recent real ads

posted on the same job boards used in that study to capture contemporaneous patterns of behavior. Figure

2 provides a few examples, and online Appendix A provides the full set of job-ad templates.

           The treatment and control ads differ in the job requirements (denoted in bold with asterisks in

each template), with three sentences assigned to be either a treatment phrase (stereotyped) or a control

phrase (not stereotyped). As explained above, the requirements we manipulate have to do with a

candidate's communication skills, physical ability, and technology skills. Our control phrases express job

requirements that are also appropriate for the job but use age-neutral language not related to these age-

stereotyped skills or abilities, while our treatment phrases use language highly related to these ageist

stereotypes.

           Figures 3-5 illustrate how the semantic similarity differs across the templates for the treatment

and control job ads and show that our treatment job ads do activate the intended stereotypes.13

Information on the distribution of all phrases found in the ads is shown in grey, information for the

treatment job-ad language is shown with dashed black lines, and information for the control neutral job-ad

language with solid black lines. The figures show the median to 99th percentile range and the average

(with plotting symbols).

           These figures display a few key results. First, the biased (treatment) job ads have considerably

higher 99th percentiles than the control job ads, as well as higher means (and medians, although less so).

For example, this is apparent in Figure 3, looking at the bars and symbols for the Physically Able


13
     As explained above, words have been aggregated up to three-word phrases to ensure that we measure semantic
     meaning more accurately.




                                                         11
stereotype in the upper left-hand panel, the bars and symbols for the Technology stereotype in the upper

right-hand panel, and the bars and symbols for the Communication stereotype in the lower left-hand

panel. (In these three panels, we manipulate only the indicated stereotype, using the neutral language for

the other two.) On the other hand, for the remaining stereotypes ­ the ones we do not manipulate ­ the

control/neutral templates, treatment templates, and collected ads generally have similar medians, means,

and 99th percentiles; see, for example, the bars for Dependable in the upper right-hand panel in Figure 3.14

The implication of the differences in the means and especially the upper tails of the distributions is that

the ads we write using the treatment sentences do, in fact, create ads with notably stronger age stereotypes

for the "target" stereotype we are trying to convey. But our manipulated treatments do not create

similarity with the other stereotypes (besides the three we are trying to study). That is, our treatment ads

only generate a shift in similarity for the stereotypes we are seeking to activate, hence isolating those

stereotypes in the job ads.

           This key result is also apparent from the lower right-hand panel in each figure, where we use the

treatment ads in which we manipulate all three stereotypes at once. If one compares the bars and symbols

for any of the three manipulated stereotypes in this panel to the corresponding bars and symbols in the

first three panels, the results look almost identical. Again, this reinforces the conclusion that machine

learning generated semantic similarity scores are powerful enough to pick up the presence of stereotyped

language, even when only one or a few sentences in the ad are actually related to the ageist stereotype.

           In addition, the treatment effect is accentuated by using the control ads rather than simply using

all the collected ads (as we would expect). The figures show that the control ads are more neutral than the

full set of collected ads, as evidenced by the much lower values of the 99th percentiles for the control ads

than for the collected ads, for each of the stereotypes we manipulate, but not for the other stereotypes; for

example, compare the bars for Physically Able and for Hearing in the upper left-hand panel of Figure 3.

Experimental Evidence



14
     There are infrequent exceptions ­ e.g., for Ability to Learn in the lower left-hand panel.




                                                             12
           Our final step ­ and the key new contribution of this paper ­ was to conduct an experiment using

Amazon MTURK to measure whether and to what extent job-ad language using phrases with high cosine

similarity scores with age-related stereotypes, as identified by machine learning methods, are perceived as

ageist by potential job applicants, including older applicants.

           We recruited participants through the Amazon MTURK online platform. We restricted the

sample to U.S. residents. To guarantee that the median age of the sample was roughly 50, we used age-

based quotas with a third of the sample in each of the following age bins: 25 to 35, 45 to 55, and 55+.

Because the age bins are pre-set by Amazon MTURK, and MTURK's age data may not be up-to-date, we

ask participants to self-report their age. The bins we use to collect self-reported age (25 to 35, 35 to 50,

and 50+) broaden the MTURK bins to cover a gap in the age distribution and adjust the highest cutoff to

50, in line with our benchmark age for older workers in the survey. We did not balance the recruitment

sample on race or gender.15

           Our experiment consisted of two parts, the baseline survey and the incentivized survey, which

were conducted using Qualtrics. In the baseline survey, we recruited 50 respondents who met our criteria

and passed the manipulation checks. The responses from the baseline survey were used solely to provide

"correct" answers for the next step when we incentivize our second group of respondents to predict the

responses of this first group. For the incentivized survey, we recruited 151 respondents who met our




15
     Respondents who met the sample restrictions were excluded if they failed a manipulation check as the first step of
     the survey. This manipulation check acted as both a Turing test (ensuring our respondents were human) and a
     check for American English language fluency (to reduce the chance someone has masked their location). All
     questions were free response to prevent individuals or computer programs from clicking through and getting the
     right answers by accident. The first three questions test for English understanding by asking respondents to
     complete the analogy (e.g., Canine is to Dog as Feline is to ___, for which cat, kitten, Cat, or cats would all be
     correct). One of these questions (Pen is to Whiteout as Pencil is to ___) was designed to elicit different responses
     between American and U.K. English speakers. If participants listed "eraser," the correct answer in American
     English, they were allowed to proceed, while participants who responded with "rubber," the answer in U.K.
     English, were excluded. The last question was a free response that asked respondents to write two sentences of at
     least 140 characters telling us who their favorite band or artist is and why. These were checked after the fact to
     ensure the participant was paying attention and was capable of writing in coherent English sentences. The
     manipulation checks overall screened out nine respondents.




                                                            13
criteria and passed the manipulation checks. For both surveys we used the manipulation check questions

seen in online Appendix Figure B1.16

           In Table 3, we report the self-reported demographic composition of our sampled MTURK

respondents. The sample is relatively more-educated, white, and female than the U.S. population as a

whole. Consistent with the age-based quotas we set for recruiting participants, the sample is also

relatively older, which may explain some of the differences in the other demographic characteristics. In

line with our target, we generated a sample with a median age near 50, finding roughly 55% of

participants over that threshold and 45% below.

Baseline Survey

           The baseline survey had three separate blocks of questions. In the first block of questions,

subjects were asked to give their informed consent to participate in the survey (Appendix Figure B2). In

the second block, participants were shown a series of job requirements and told they were from job ads

posted online. An example is shown in Figure 6. For each requirement, respondents were asked whether

they personally agreed or disagreed with the statement that "[Treatment or control requirement] is biased

against workers over 50."

           Within each of the blocks that asked about whether or not phrases were perceived as biased, there

were three pages for each respective stereotype: communication, physical, and technology. All the

treatment and control phrases were tested on their respective pages, but the pages were not labeled by

stereotypes that respondents viewed. Respondents had to proceed sequentially through the pages and

could not go back or skip between them. The ordering of the questions was randomized within each page.

We adopted this approach to force respondents to compare treatment and control phrases in a specific

stereotype category without prompting them about the specific age-related stereotype in question. The

order of questions on a page was randomized for each respondent. Responses to the questions were given



16
     We recruited 150 respondents initially ­ 50 in each age bin ­ but one person completed the survey and then
     refused to accept payment. Thus, we ended up with 151 subjects because the quota filling on MTURK only counts
     people who accepted payment.




                                                         14
on a Likert scale with the options: Strongly agree, Somewhat agree, Neither agree nor disagree,

Somewhat disagree, Strongly disagree.

           In the third block, we concluded by collecting the demographic characteristics of our sample

(Appendix Figure B3). They were asked to report their age, gender, education, and race/ethnicity.

Incentivized Survey

           The second survey was split into five blocks of questions. The first asked the participants to give

their informed consent. The second block of questions repeated questions from the baseline survey and

asked respondents about their own opinions on job requirements.

           The next two parts formed the crux of the incentivized survey. In each part, the respondents were

asked to guess how the participants in the baseline survey rated the job requirements, and they were

rewarded for how correctly they guessed. Before starting each of these blocks of questions, respondents

were sent to a landing page that emphasized the new prompt and cash incentive.

           The third set of questions asked respondents to predict what the previous survey respondents

answered when they were shown job requirements from the job ads (Figure 7). For each requirement, they

were asked whether they thought previous respondents agreed or disagreed with the statement that "This

job requirement is biased against workers over 50." They were shown the same Likert scale shown to the

baseline respondents. Respondents were informed that either the third set of questions in the survey or the

fourth (described below) would be randomly selected for a cash incentive based on their answers to the

questions in that part. They were told they would earn bonus pay, which was to be calculated based on

how close they were to the correct answer. If they correctly predicted what the average participant said,

they would earn $0.32 per question.17 Incorrect answers received less money, with the penalty increasing

the further they were from the correct answer. Payouts were calculated using the quadratic scoring rule

[1]         = 0.32 - 0.02 × (      2
                               -  ) ,




17
     Average pay was $7.22.




                                                       15
where  was the payout to individual i for question q based on the average response to question q by

previous respondents ( ) and their answer about how previous respondents answered question q ( ).18

For example, they would earn $0.24 if the correct answer was "somewhat agree," and they guessed

"somewhat disagree." All the treatment and control phrases were tested on their respective pages, but the

pages were not labeled by stereotypes that respondents viewed. Respondents had to proceed sequentially

through pages and could not go back or skip between them. The question order was randomized within

each page.

           The fourth block of questions differed from the third in that we asked respondents to guess how

the older participants in the baseline survey (those over 50 years old) responded; see Figure 8. Before

starting this block of questions, respondents were sent to a landing page that emphasized both the scoring

rule and the age of respondents for whom they were guessing. The instructions read, "For each

requirement, please state whether you think previous respondents over the age of 50 agree or disagree

with the statement that "This job requirement is biased against workers over 50." The structure of this

section was identical to the third block of questions.

Analyses

           To test for differences in how the treatment and control phrases were perceived, we employ a

series of regression models. We begin with a simple regression testing for differences in respondent

beliefs between treatment and control phrases conditional on observable characteristics:

[2]         =  +  +   + 


           The ranking that individual i gave to question q ( ) is the dependent variable. We include

controls for gender, level of education, race, and age ( ). If respondents view the treatment phrases as

more biased against older workers than the control phrases, we should find that  is less than zero,




18
     Respondents were told that their earnings, "would be calculated according to the formula: M=$0.32 - $0.02
     *(Average Previous Answer - Your Prediction)^2." To illustrate their payoff, respondents were told they would
     earn $0.24 if the correct answer was "somewhat agree," and they guessed "somewhat disagree."




                                                          16
because the responses ( ) range from 1 for strongly agree to 5 for strongly disagree. If we observe  is

positive, then this is evidence that treatment phrases were rated as less biased by respondents. In Equation

[2], and all subsequent regressions, the standard errors are clustered at the respondent level.

           Our next step is to explore two forms of heterogeneity in our estimated treatment effects.19 The

first examines whether respondents view treatment phrases differently depending on the stereotype to

which the requirement is related. To test this, we define dummy variables for each of our three pairs of a

stereotype treatment and the corresponding control (omitting one from the regression), and interactions

between these dummy variables and the dummy variables for each stereotype treatment (communication

skills, physical ability, or technology skills):

[3]         =  + 1  ×   + 2  ×   + 3  ×  

           + 1   + 2   + X i + 


           Thus, the coefficients  , i = 1, 2, 3, capture how biased respondents view the treatment phrase

for the stereotype relative to the control phrase.

           The second form of heterogeneity we examine is the difference between the machine learning

derived treatment phrases and the AARP treatment phrases. To do this, we add an additional interaction

for when the treatment phrase is the AARP phrase:

[4]         =  + 1  ×   + 2  ×   + 3  ×  

           + 1  ×  ×   + 2  ×  ×   + 3  ×  ×  

           + 1   + 2   + Xi + 


           The coefficients  , i = 1, 2, 3, identify how much more biased respondents view the AARP

treatment phrases relative to the machine learning derived treatment phrases for the same stereotype.

Results



19
     We also examine heterogeneous differences in the treatment phrases across demographic groups. We find little
     evidence to support the hypothesis that different groups view job requirements differently. The pattern of results
     observed in Table 4 holds for by sex, age, education, or race. These results are available upon request.




                                                            17
        Figure 9 provides a graphical depiction of the answers from the MTURK survey participants.

Across the three blocks of the survey that solicited respondents' self-assessments of age-bias, their

predictions of previous' respondents' answers, and their predictions of the answers of respondents over

the age of 50, our results were fairly consistent. The participants, on average, strongly disagreed with the

notion that anyone would perceive the control phrases as biased against workers over the age of 50.

Respondents rated the physical and technology-biased phrases derived from our cosine similarity score

index as more biased than the control phrases, but viewed the communication skills stereotyped phrases

as roughly identical to the controls. Opinions of the AARP-derived treatment phrases were starker, as all

three were rated as far more age biased than their respective control counterparts.

        The absence of evidence for bias for the language related to communication stills may reflect the

fact that older workers are not always stereotyped as having worse communication skills, but are

sometimes, as Table 1 showed, perceived as having better communication skills. In that sense, one might

view the evidence of ageist ratings for the physical ability and technology-related stereotypes but not the

communications stereotype as further confirmation that respondent perceptions accord with the industrial

psychology literature. (Note that the cosine similarity scores from the machine learning do not detect

positive vs. negative uses of the language.)

        In Table 4, we estimate regression models for the survey responses that delve into more detail. In

all cases, standard errors are clustered at the respondent level. In column (1), we report the estimated

coefficient from a simple model of the responses for self-beliefs on a dummy variable for whether the

response is to any treatment phrase. The estimated coefficient of -0.886 implies that responses are lower

by almost one category of the Likert scale. Recall that the responses range from 1 for strongly agree to 5

for strongly disagree, so a negative estimate implies the phrase was perceived as more ageist. The




                                                     18
estimate is strongly statistically significant. To help interpret the magnitude, the third number (in square

brackets) reports the implied effect in terms of standard deviations of the responses.20

           Column (2) expands the specification to differentiate the treatment by the type of stereotype ­

communications, physical ability, or technology skills ­ without differentiating the machine learning

phrases from the AARP phrases. We find significant negative effects (implying more ageist phrases) for

all three, with the largest estimate (whether looking at the coefficient or the standard deviation effect) for

physical ability, followed by technology skills, and the smallest estimate for communications. In this

model, we also include controls for the different stereotype phrases (whether treatment or control) so that

the Treatment × stereotype interactions measure the differences relative to the paired control phrase.

           Column (3) expands the specification further to differentiate between machine learning and

AARP treatment phrases. In this column, the estimated coefficients of the Treatment × stereotype

coefficients measure the effects of the machine learning phrases, and the Treatment × stereotype × AARP

estimates measure the differential effects of the AARP treatments relative to the machine learning

treatments. We see that in every case the estimated effects of the AARP treatments are larger, in the

direction of more perceived bias. All of the estimated differences for the AARP phrases are statistically

significant, and the magnitudes are considerably larger for the communications and technology skills

stereotypes. For the machine learning stereotypes, the estimated treatment effects for physical ability and

technology skills are sizable, significant, and negative, while the effect for communications is near zero

and insignificant (paralleling what we found in the raw data). On the one hand, this suggests that the

phrases generated by machine learning for communications stereotypes do not evoke ageism, while the

phrases in the AARP treatment do; on the other hand, recall the earlier caution that the stronger evidence

for the AARP treatment for communications may not isolate the communications stereotype well.




20
     We estimated the specifications in Table 4 using an ordered probit model as well, to account for the fact that our
     dependent variable is actually ordinal, rather than cardinal. This led to qualitatively very similar results, so we
     report the OLS results for simplicity. Results available upon request.




                                                             19
           Columns (4)-(6) report estimates of the same specifications, but for the beliefs about other

respondents ­ i.e., how respondents think others would perceive the language. The qualitative pattern of

estimates is the same. However, one important difference is that the estimated impacts of the treatments

are generally larger. This can be seen most simply by comparing the estimated treatment effects between

columns (5) and (2). The estimated coefficients are substantially larger ­ especially for the physical

ability and technology skills stereotypes ­ and in all three cases, the differences are strongly statistically

significant (as indicated by the "daggers"). Comparing columns (6) and (3) indicates that the differences

between self-beliefs and perceived beliefs of others for the physical ability and technology stereotypes are

driven by the machine learning phrases, as their estimated coefficients are substantially larger in column

(6) than in column (3), whereas the estimated interactions with the AARP phrases are not uniformly

larger or smaller. As noted earlier, the differences in responses for perceived beliefs of others and self-

beliefs may reflect the incentives we offered in eliciting the former, which could counter social

desirability biases.

           Finally, columns (7)-(9) focus on the perceived beliefs of those over age 50. These estimates are

quite similar to those in columns (3)-(6), suggesting that respondents did not particularly believe that

older individuals were more likely to perceive language as ageist.21 Of course, given that the stereotyped

language was perceived as ageist, the impact on behavior would likely be stronger the older is the person

reading job ads with these phrases.

           Our last analysis compares the perceptions (self-beliefs, or of others) to the cosine similarity

scores for the phrases we use (see Table 2), providing a useful graphical depiction of our survey results

that captures many of our key points. Figure 10 does this for self-beliefs. Note the vertical axis is

decreasing in the reported belief because a lower number implies stronger perceived ageism. Consider

first the points plotted for control phrases. Referring back to Table 2, there are two control phrases for



21
     As further evidence that these perceptions that younger and older people to not perceive the ageist phrases
     differently, the estimated effects of the treatments on self-beliefs of respondents aged 50 or under and over age 50
     were very similar. Results available upon request.




                                                            20
physical ability and two for communications, so there are two circles for each of these. But there are three

circles for technology skills, for which there are three control phrases. The horizontal axis measures the

cosine similarity score for these, and they are clustered towards zero. The vertical height measures the

perceived bias of these phrases, and ­ by design ­ they are low.22 The triangles are for the machine

learning phrases. As Table 2 showed, these generally have the highest cosine similar scores with the

corresponding stereotypes. The squares are for the AARP stereotypes, which generally have lower cosine

similarity scores; there are only three of these plotted because there are only three phrases. Comparing the

height of the triangles to the squares, we see that the AARP phrases are generally perceived as more

biased, even though the cosine similarity scores with the stereotypes are lower.

           Figures 11 and 12 show the same kind of evidence of beliefs about others' perceptions in general,

and then for others over age 50. The qualitative patterns are the same, but Figures 11 and 12, in

comparison to Figure 10, show the stronger perceived bias reported when asked about others' perceptions

and how this shift is driven relatively more by the machine learning phrases.

Conclusions and Discussion

           In this paper, we explore whether the type of ageist stereotypes used in job ads is detectable in job

ads using machine learning methods and whether this language is perceived as biased against older

workers. This is important for three reasons. First, workers may respond to this language, with older

workers applying to a narrower set of jobs or perhaps choosing not to apply at all, hence diminishing their

job market opportunities. Second, the mechanism we study is plausible, as employers who want to

discriminate against older workers but also want to avoid getting caught might manipulate job-ad

language to discourage older workers from entering the applicant pool. And third, if ageist job-ad

language can be detected by machine learning methods, then these methods could, in principle, be used to

help enforce anti-discrimination laws by helping to predict or identify employers more likely to be

engaging in age discrimination.


22
     We do this analysis for the mean survey responses, rather than the regression coefficients, because we want to
     depict these for each occupation, and the regressions do not estimate separate effects by occupation.




                                                           21
        We use machine learning methods to identify phrases in job ads that are linguistically related to

standard ageist stereotypes from the industrial psychology literature. We use these phrases to construct

typical job-ad language that reflects specific age stereotypes. We show that machine learning methods are

sensitive enough to detect the presence of stereotyped language, even when only one sentence in the job

ad is highly related to the ageist stereotype. We then conduct an MTURK experiment that asks whether

respondents perceive this job-ad language ­ which the machine learning algorithm classifies as related to

ageist stereotypes ­ as ageist. We also used some "classic" ageist phrases identified by AARP.

        Our experimental evidence shows that sentences that are classified as closely related to ageist

stereotypes by the machine learning algorithm are generally perceived as ageist by respondents in our

MTURK experiment (and more so when asked, with incentives, how they will be perceived by others).

The AARP phrases were perceived as the most ageist. These results imply that the different age

stereotypes we study capture real ageist sentiments and will be perceived as such by job applicants.

        Although the AARP phrases were perceived as more ageist than those generated by our machine

learning methods, the latter were more directly and more distinctly related to specific ageist stereotypes.

This is potentially significant from a policy perspective, as it implies that machine learning can be used to

identify ageist stereotypes in job ads the pertain to specific stereotypes. Because the legality of an age

stereotype in a job ad might hinge on whether the language pertains to a job requirement based on a

reasonable factor other than age (RFOA), it is important to be able to ascertain the type of job

requirement to which the language might refer. In contrast, the AARP phrases we use, while perceived as

more ageist, are harder to tie to specific stereotypes and hence, perhaps, to specific job requirements.




                                                      22
                                               References


AARP. (2000). American business and older employees. AARP: Washington, DC.
Baert, S., Norga, J., Thuy, Y., & Van Hecke, M. (2016). Getting grey hairs in the labour market. An
        alternative experiment on age discrimination. Journal of Economic Psychology, 57, 86-101.
Bem, S.L., & Bem, D.J. (1973). Does sexbiased job advertising "aid and abet" sex discrimination?
       Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 3, 6-18.
Bendick, M., Jr., Brown, L.E., & Wall, K. (1999). No foot in the door: An experimental study of
       employment discrimination against older workers. Journal of Aging & Social Policy, 10, 5-23.
Bendick, M., Jr., Jackson, C.W., & Romero, J.H. (1997). Employment discrimination against older
       workers: An experimental study of hiring practices. Journal of Aging & Social Policy, 8, 25-46.
Brenoff, A. (2019). 5 ageist phrases to be aware of. AARP: Washington, DC.
Burn, I., Button, P., Munguia Corella, L.F., & Neumark, D. (2020). Older workers need not apply? Ageist
         language in job ads and age discrimination in hiring. NBER Working Paper No. 26552.
         Cambridge, MA.
Button, P. (2019). Population aging, age discrimination, and age discrimination protections at the 50th
        anniversary of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act. In Current and emerging trends in
        aging and work, Czaja, S.J., Sharit, J., & James, J.B., eds., 163-88. New York, NY: Springer.
Cahill, K.E., Giandrea, M.D., & Quinn, J.F. (2006). Retirement patterns from career employment. The
        Gerontologist, 46, 514-23.
Carlsson, M., & Eriksson, S. (2019). The effect of age and gender on labor demand ­ evidence from a
        field experiment. Labour Economics, 59, 173-83.
Deming, D., & Kahn, L.B. 2018). Skill requirements across firms and labor markets: Evidence from jJob
      postings for professionals. Journal of Labor Economics, 36, S337-69.
Farber, H.S., Silverman, D., & von Wachter, T.M. (2017). Factors determining callbacks to job
        applications by the unemployed: An audit study. RSF: The Russell Sage Foundation Journal of
        the Social Sciences, 3, 168-201.
Farber, H.S., Herbst, C.M., Silverman, D., & von Wachter, T.M. (2019). Whom do employers want? The
        role of recent employment and unemployment status and age. Journal of Labor Economics, 37,
        323-49.
Gaucher, D., Friesen, J., & Kay, A.C. (2011). Evidence that gendered wording in job advertisements
       exists and sustains gender inequality. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 101, 109-28.
Hanson, A., Hawley, Z., & Taylor, A. (2011). Subtle discrimination in the rental housing market:
       Evidence from email correspondence with landlords. Journal of Housing Economics, 20, 276-84.
Hanson, A., Hawley, Z., Martin, H., & Liu, B. (2016). Discrimination in mortgage lending: Evidence
       from a correspondence experiment. Journal of Urban Economics, 92, 48-65.
He, H., Neumark, D., & Weng, Q. Do workers value flexible jobs? A field experiment. Forthcoming in
        Journal of Labor Economics.
Hellester, M.D., Kuhn, P., & Shen, K. (2020). The age twist in employers' gender requests. Journal of
        Human Resources, 55, 482-69.
Johnson, R.W., Kawachi, J., & Lewis, E.K. (2009). Older workers on the move: Recareering in later life.
       AARP Public Policy Institute. AARP: Washington, DC.
Kite, M.E., Deaux, K., & Miele, M. (1991). Stereotypes of young and old: Does age outweigh gender?
        Psychology and Aging, 6, 19-27.
Kuhn, P., & Shen, K. (2013). Gender discrimination in job ads: Evidence from China. Quarterly Journal
       of Economics, 128, 287-336.
Kuhn, P., Shen, K., & Zhang, S. (2018). Gender-targeted job ads in the recruitment process: Evidence
       from China. NBER Working Paper No. 25365. Cambridge, MA.
Lahey, J. (2008). Age, women, and hiring: An experimental study. Journal of Human Resources, 43, 30-
        56.
Levin, W.C. (1988). Age stereotyping: College student evaluations. Research on Aging, 10, 134-48.
Maestas, N. (2010). Back to work: Expectations and realizations of work after retirement. Journal of
       Human Resources, 45, 718-48.
Marinescu, I.E., & Wolthoff, R. (2020). Opening the black box of the matching function: The power of
       words. Journal of Labor Economics, 38, 535-68.
McCann, R.M., & Keaton, S.A. (2013). A cross cultural investigation of age stereotypes and
      communication perceptions of older and younger workers in the USA and Thailand. Educational
      Gerontology, 39, 326-41.
McGregor, J., & Gray, L. (2002). Stereotypes and older workers: The New Zealand experience. Social
      Policy Journal of New Zealand, 18, 163-77.
Modestino, A.S., Shoag, D., & Balance, J. (2016). Downskilling: Changes in employer skill requirements
       over the business cycle. Labour Economics, 41, 333-47.
Neumark, D., Burn, I. & Button, P. (2016). Experimental age discrimination evidence and the Heckman
      critique. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 106, 303-8.
Neumark, D., Burn, I. & Button, P. (2019a). Is it harder for older workers to find jobs? New and
      improved evidence from a field experiment. Journal of Political Economy, 127, 922-70.
Neumark, D., Burn, I. Button, P., & Chehras, N. (2019b). Do state laws protecting older workers from
      discrimination reduce age discrimination in hiring? Evidence from a field experiment. Journal of
      Law and Economics, 62, 373-402.
Riach, P.A., & Rich, J. (2006). An experimental investigation of age discrimination in the French labour
        market. IZA Discussion Paper No. 2522. Bonn, Germany.
Riach, P.A., & Rich, J. (2010). An experimental investigation of age discrimination in the English labor
        market. Annals of Economics and Statistics, 99/100, 169-85.
Ryan, E.B., See, S.K., Meneer, W.B., & Trovato, D. (1992). Age-based perceptions of language
       performance among younger and older adults. Communication Research, 19, 423-43.
Schmidt, D.F., & Boland, S.M. (1986). Structure of perceptions of older adults: Evidence for multiple
       stereotypes. Psychology and Aging, 1, 255-60.
Stewart, M.A., & Ryan, E.B. (1982). Attitudes toward younger and older adult speakers: Effects of
        varying speech rates. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 1, 91-109.
Terrell, K. (2019). Age bias that's barred by law appears in thousands of job listings. AARP:
         Washington, DC.
Tilcsik, A. (2011). Pride and prejudice: Employment discrimination against openly gay men in the United
         States. American Journal of Sociology, 117, 586-626.
van Borm, H., Burn, I., & Baert, S. (2019). What does a job candidate's age signal to employers? IZA
       Discussion Paper No. 12849. Bonn: Germany.
van Dalen, H., Henkens, K., & Schippers, J.J. (2009). Dealing with older workers in Europe: A
       comparative survey of employers' attitudes and actions. Journal of European Social Policy, 19,
       47-60.
          Table 1: Age Stereotypes from Industrial Psychology Literature
         Health                 Personality                   Skills
 Less Attractive          Less Adaptable         Lower Ability to Learn
 Hard of Hearing          Careful                Better Communication Skills
 Worse Memory             Less Creative          Worse Communication Skills
 Less Physically Able     Dependable             More Experienced
                          Negative Personality   More Productive
                          Warm Personality       Less Productive
                                                 Worse with Technology
Note: See Burn et al. (2020).
                       Table 2: Control and Treatment Phrases by Occupation
   Occupation           Stereotype            Control            Machine Learning        AARP Treatment
                                                                    Treatment
        (1)                (2)                   (3)                    (4)                       (5)
Administrative      Communication       You must be good at    You must have good       You must be up-to-
Assistants          skills              working without        communication and        date with current
                                        supervision            teamwork on tasks        industry jargon and
                                        (CSS = 0.20)           (CSS = 0.48)             communicate with a
                                                                                        dynamic workforce
                                                                                        (CSS = 0.23)
Administrative      Physical ability    You must enter bills   You must be able to      You must be a fit and
Assistants                              and keep track of      lift 40 pounds           energetic person (CSS
                                        invoices               (CSS = 0.41)             = 0.30)
                                        (CSS = 0.11)
Administrative      Technological       You must produce       You must use             You must be a digital
Assistants          skills              and distribute         accounting software      native and have a
                                        documents such as      systems like Netsuite,   background in social
                                        correspondence         Freshbook, and           media (CSS = 0.22)
                                        memos, faxes           QuickBooks
                                        and forms              (CSS = 0.29)
                                        (CSS = 0.08)
Retail sales        Communication       You must be good at    You must have good       You must be up-to-
                    skills              working without        communication with       date with current
                                        supervision            customers and staff      industry jargon and
                                        (CSS = 0.20)           (CSS = 0.34)             communicate with a
                                                                                        dynamic workforce
                                                                                        (CSS = 0.23)
Retail sales        Physical ability    You must enter bills   You must be able to      You must be a fit and
                                        and keep track of      lift 40 pounds           energetic person (CSS
                                        invoices               (CSS = 0.41)             = 0.30)
                                        (CSS = 0.11)
Retail sales        Technological       You must help to       You must use software    You must be a digital
                    skills              clean and organize     such as Microsoft        native and have a
                                        the store              Office/Excel or          background in social
                                        (CSS = 0.09)           Google Sheets            media (CSS = 0.22)
                                                               (CSS = 0.27)
Security guard      Communication       You must follow        You must maintain        You must be up-to-
                    skills              instruction from       communication about      date with current
                                        supervisors            tasks with supervisors   industry jargon and
                                        (CSS = 0.21)           (CSS = 0.38)             communicate with a
                                                                                        dynamic workforce
                                                                                        (CSS = 0.23)
Security guard      Physical ability    You need to carry a    You must be able to      You must be a fit and
                                        flashlight             lift 50 pounds           energetic person (CSS
                                        (CSS = 0.20)           (CSS = 0.41)             = 0.30)
Security guard      Technological       You must write         You must type patrol     You must be a digital
                    skills              patrol records in      entries into a journal   native and have a
                                        journal notebook       application on a         background in social
                                        (CSS = 0.03)           computer system          media (CSS = 0.22)
                                                               (CSS = 0.24)
Note: See text for a description of how each sentence was created. The average cosine similarity score
with the stereotype for each phrase (averaging over the cosine similarity score of each word contained in
the phrase) is reported in parentheses. CSS = "cosine similarity score."
                      Table 3: Demographics of MTURK Sample
   Demographic Characteristic        Number of Respondents          Percent of Sample
A. Level of Education
Postgraduate Degree                              25                       16.6%
Bachelor's Degree                                60                       39.7%
Some College or 2 Year Degree                    49                       32.4%
High School Graduate or Less                     17                       11.3%
B. Age Group
21 to 35 years old                               45                       29.8%
35 to 50 years old                               23                       15.2%
Over 50 years old                                83                       55.0%
C. Sex
Female                                           83                        55%
Male                                             68                        45%
D. Race and Ethnicity
White                                           125                       82.8%
Black or African American                         8                        5.3%
Asian                                             6                        4.0%
Hispanic or Latino                                4                        2.7%
Other                                             3                        2.0%
Two or More                                       5                        3.3%
 Note: MTURK participants self-reported their demographic characteristics. Respondents
 who selected two or more of the race and ethnicity categories were grouped into the
 "Two or More" group.
                           Table 4: Differences in Beliefs by Treatment (Negative Implies More Biased Against Older Workers)
                                                     Self-beliefs                      Beliefs about all respondents         Beliefs about respondents over 50
                                             (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)               (5)             (6)       (7)           (8)         (9)
                                                 ***                                  ***                                           ***
Treatment                                 -0.886                               -1.266                                        -1.248
                                           (0.047)                               (0.050)                                      (0.053)
                                          [-0.718]                               [-0.900]                                    [-0.873]
Treatment × Communications                             -0.316***     0.015                      -0.465***            0.001               -0.450***       0.004
                                                        (0.033)     (0.022)                        (0.050)         (0.046)                 (0.045)     (0.038)
                                                       [-0.256]     [0.013]                       [-0.330]         [0.001]                [-0.315]     [0.003]
                                                               ***         ***                           ***             ***                      ***
Treatment × Physical ability                           -1.623      -1.526                       -2.153          -2.060                   -2.079       -2.066***
                                                        (0.098)     (0.106)                        (0.091)         (0.099)                 (0.101)     (0.108)
                                                       [-1.315]    [-1.237]                       [-1.531]        [-1.465]                [-1.454]    [-1.445]
Treatment × Technology skills                          -0.895*** -0.488***                      -1.403***       -1.040***                -1.432*** -1.108***
                                                        (0.064)     (0.063)                        (0.072)         (0.078)                 (0.078)     (0.083)
                                                       [-0.725]    [-0.395]                       [-0.998]        [-0.739]                [-1.001]    [-0.775]
Treatment × Communications × AARP                                  -1.327***                                    -1.865***                             -1.819***
                                                                    (0.105)                                        (0.106)                             (0.114)
                                                                   [-1.705]                                       [-1.326]                            [-1.272]
Treatment × Physical ability × AARP                                -0.288***                                      -0.281***                             -0.040
                                                                    (0.091)                                        (0.076)                             (0.076)
                                                                   [-0.233]                                       [-0.200]                            [-0.028]
Treatment × Technology skills × AARP                               -1.629***                                     -1.455***                            -1.296***
                                                                    (0.099)                                        (0.090)                             (0.096)
                                                                   [-1.320]                                       [-1.035]                            [-0.906]
Physical ability                                        0.179***    0.179***                      0.172***         0.172***               0.152***     0.152***
                                                        (0.046)     (0.046)                        (0.053)         (0.053)                 (0.056)     (0.056)
                                                        [0.145]     [0.145]                        [0.122]         [0.122]                 [0.106]     [0.106]
Technology skills                                        0.011       0.011                          -0.052          -0.052                  -0.079      -0.079
                                                        (0.049)     (0.049)                        (0.060)         (0.060)                 (0.062)     (0.062)
                                                        [0.009]     [0.009]                       [-0.037]        [-0.037]                [-0.056]    [-0.056]
Adjusted R2                                 0.149        0.230       0.353         0.211             0.332           0.452     0.205         0.321       0.422
Observations                                2,718        2,718       2,718         2,718             2,718           2,718     2,718         2,718       2,718
Note: * indicates statistical significance of the coefficient. * p<0.1,** p<0.05,*** p<0.01.  indicates significant differences between the same coefficients in the Beliefs about all
respondents and the Self-beliefs models.  p<0.1,  p<0.05,  p<0.01. In each regression, we include a constant and controls for gender, level of education, race, and age (not
reported). Numbers in parentheses are robust standard errors clustered at the respondent level; numbers in brackets are coefficients normalized to standard deviations of the
outcome variable. Negative numbers indicate higher levels of perceived bias against older workers, as the outcome ranges from 1 for "strongly agree" to 5 for "strongly
disagree."
                Figure 1: Example of the Distribution of Cosine Similarity (CS) Scores

      3
      2
      1
      0




          -.5                          0                      .5                                       1
                           Cosine similarity score with "communication skills"

Note: Figure reports the distribution of cosine similarity scores for all trigrams from the job ads with the
communication skills stereotype. The higher the cosine similarity score, the more related the trigram is
to "communication skills."
                                        Figure 2: Job Ad Examples


Administrative Assistants Template 1 (Admin Assistant)
Psychiatric office is in need of a full or part time Administrative Assistant to assist in front/back office
general clerical duties. This individual will work on a several tasks and stay on course at all times. The
Administrative Assistant we hire will be trained in various duties that cover the entire office.

This individual MUST possess the following:

-Exceptional customer service background to greet and register patients, answer phones, schedule
appointments.
-Can multitask.
-High School diploma or GED.
-Professional attitude.
-*Communication Skill Requirement*.
-*Technology Requirement*
-*Physical Requirement*
-Available for flexible hours.
(Schedule hours and days will alternate every other week)

Please email us a CV or resume and put "full-time" or "part-time" in the subject line.


Retail Sales Associate Template 1 (Retail Sales Job)
Our women's clothing store in *City* is looking for a sales associate to help us out weekday afternoons.
We are pretty busy store and you must *Physical Requirement*. We are looking for someone with open
to working in retail, who *Communication Skill Requirement*. We need you to *Technology
Requirement*. So if this sounds like you, send us your resume and your earliest possible starting date
and we will be in touch.


Security Guard Template 1 (HIRING UNARMED SECURITY GUARDS)
We currently have a position for a full-time or part-time security officer available. Training and uniforms
will provided. We offer flexible working hours and have shifts any day of the week. Our pay scale is
competitive. Email your resume and potential work hours to apply.

Requirements
-Professional appearance & attitude
-Detail oriented
-*Communication Skill Requirement*
-*Physical Requirement*
-*Technology Requirement*
-At least 18 years of age
-Access to transportation
                                   Figure 3: Cosine Similarity Score of Administrative Assistant Templates




Note: Graphs display median to 99th percentile range of trigram semantic similarity scores for each stereotype for Administrative Assistant ads.
The average trigram semantic similarity score for each stereotype is represented by the respective shape for each template. Control ("neutral")
templates contain trigrams from the created ad templates with only non-stereotyped phrases included. Collected ads comprise trigrams from all
Administrative Assistant job ads. Treatment templates contain trigrams from the created ad templates with the respective stereotyped phrase or
phrases included.
                                          Figure 4: Cosine Similarity Score of Retail Sales Templates




Note: Graphs display median to 99th percentile range of trigram semantic similarity scores for each stereotype for Retail Sales ads. The average
trigram semantic similarity score for each stereotype is represented by the respective shape for each template. Control ("neutral") templates
contain trigrams from the created ad templates with only non-stereotyped phrases included. Collected ads comprise trigrams from all Retail Sales
job ads. Treatment templates contain trigrams from the created ad templates with the respective stereotyped phrase or phrases included.
                                       Figure 5: Cosine Similarity Score of Security Guard Templates




Note: Graphs display median to 99th percentile range of trigram semantic similarity scores for each stereotype for Security Guard ads. The average
trigram semantic similarity score for each stereotype is represented by the respective shape for each template. Control ("neutral") templates
contain trigrams from the created ad templates with only non-stereotyped phrases included. Collected ads comprise trigrams from all Security
Guard job ads. Treatment templates contain trigrams from the created ad templates with the respective stereotyped phrase or phrases included.
                    Figure 6: Block 1 Example (Exists in Survey 1 and Survey 2)




Note: Respondents were asked about their opinions for all of the treatment and control phrases within a
given age-related stereotype. The treatment and control phrases within the communication, physical, and
technology categories were shown on three separate pages, and the Qualtrics software disallowed
skipping or going back between sections. The order of phrases was randomized for each participant, and
they were required to provide an answer in order to proceed to the next section of the survey. In this
example, the first three phrases for the communication category are shown.
                            Figure 7: Block 2 Landing Page and Example




Note: After survey participants completed the block soliciting their personal opinions on whether certain
phrases were age-biased, they were directed to the landing page pictured on the left-hand side of the
figure. The landing page stressed the incentivized nature of the subsequent section and that bonus pay
would be based on how accurately they could identify what the average respondent to the baseline survey
said. The questions in the section reflected the new prompt and a highlighted portion at the top of each
page reminded MTURK participants that their answers were incentivized based on accuracy.
Figure 8: Block 3 Landing Page and Example (Exists only Survey 2)
                                        Figure 9: Survey Results




Note: These numerical ratings reflect the degree to which survey respondents rated phrases as age-biased
or not age-biased, with lower numbers indicating a greater bias against older workers. Likert Scale ratings
were translated to a numerical value such that "Strongly Agree" mapped to 1, "Somewhat Agree" mapped
to 2, "Neither agree nor disagree" mapped to 3, "Somewhat Disagree" mapped to 4, and "Strongly
Disagree" mapped to 5. The three categories: "Self," "Others," and "Over 50," refer to which group's
opinions the MTURK respondents were asked to provide or predict in a given survey block. The average
bias rating was collapsed on the treatment status of phrases (control, treatment, and AARP) as well as the
category of the stereotype (communication, physical, or technology). Hence, each point in the figure
above reflects the average bias rating MTURK respondents gave to a given treatment status for a specific
stereotype from the perspective of a given group of people. For example, the triangle in the first row of
the above figure indicates that when respondents were asked for their self-assessment of whether or not
the physical stereotype control phrases were age-biased, they, on average, stated that they strongly
disagreed.
          Figure 10: Scatter of Self-Beliefs of Age Bias and Cosine Similarity (CS) Scores




Note: CSS = "cosine similarity score." Figure plots MTURK respondents' average self-perception of age
bias against CSS stereotype ratings from Table 2. Lower numbers on the y-axis indicate higher levels of
perceived age bias. Higher CSS scores on the x-axis indicate higher average levels of semantic similarity
of a phrase with its respective stereotype. Circular, triangular, and square markers represent control
phrases, CSS treatment phrases, and AARP treatment phrases, respectively. Black (solid), blue (shaded),
and red (unshaded) markers represent physical, technology, and communication phrases, respectively.
 Figure 11: Scatter of Belief of Others' Perceptions of Age Bias and Cosine Similarity (CS) Scores




Note: CSS = "cosine similarity score." Figure plots MTURK respondents' average belief about the
perception of other's age bias against CSS stereotype ratings from Table 2. Lower numbers on the y-axis
indicate higher levels of perceived age bias. Higher CSS scores on the x-axis indicate higher average
levels of semantic similarity of a phrase with its respective stereotype. Circular, triangular, and square
markers represent control phrases, CSS treatment phrases, and AARP treatment phrases, respectively.
Black (solid), blue (shaded), and red (unshaded) markers represent physical, technology, and
communication phrases, respectively.
Figure 12: Scatter of Belief of Others over 50s' Perceptions of Age Bias and Cosine Similarity (CS)
                                               Scores




Note: CSS = "cosine similarity score." Figure plots MTURK respondents' average belief about
respondents over 50s' perception of age bias against CSS stereotype ratings from Table 2. Lower
numbers on the y-axis indicate higher levels of perceived age bias. Higher CSS scores on the x-axis
indicate higher average levels of semantic similarity of a phrase with its respective stereotype. Circular,
triangular, and square markers represent control phrases, CSS treatment phrases, and AARP treatment
phrases, respectively. Black (solid), blue (shaded), and red (unshaded) markers represent physical,
technology, and communication phrases, respectively.
                                  Online Appendices

Machine Learning and Perceived Age Stereotypes in Job Ads: Evidence from an Experiment
                                 Appendix A (online): Job Ad Templates

Administrative Assistants

Administrative Assistants Template 1 (Admin Assistant)
Psychiatric office is in need of a full or part time Administrative Assistant to assist in front/back office
general clerical duties. This individual will work on a several tasks and stay on course at all times. The
Administrative Assistant we hire will be trained in various duties that cover the entire office.

This individual MUST possess the following:

-Exceptional customer service background to greet and register patients, answer phones, schedule
appointments.
-Can multitask.
-High School diploma or GED.
-Professional attitude.
-*Communication Skill Requirement*.
-*Technology Requirement*
-*Physical Requirement*
-Available for flexible hours.
(Schedule hours and days will alternate every other week)

Please email us a CV or resume and put "full-time" or "part-time" in the subject line.


Administrative Assistants Template 2 (Administrative Job)
About the Employer: We are a well-established but growing law office looking for a Full-Time
Receptionist/Administrative Assistant. We have a team of dedicated attorneys who work with a range of
independent and corporate clients. Prior background is preferred, but not required.

Responsibilities include:
-Answering up to 6 phone lines
-Coordinating mail in and out of the office
-Filing and basic paperwork

The ideal candidate will possess the following qualifications:
-Can multitask
-*Physical Requirement*
-Organized and detail-oriented
-*Communication Skill Requirement*
-Maintain a professional attitude at all times
-High School diploma or equivalent
-Be a team player
-*Technology Requirement*
-Can work in a fast paced environment!

If you meet these requirements, please send a resume and some interview hours to the provided email.
Administrative Assistants Template 3 (Office Assistant)
About: Growing company, over 30 years history, family owned and operated.

About the position: Office Assistant
* will train, prior background preferred;
* fast paced environment;
* answer 6 phone lines;
* record daily records;

Qualifications:
* can multitask;
**Physical Requirement*;
**Technology Requirement*;
* organized;
* *Communication Skill Requirement*;
* a team player, the company is run by the team.

Please email your resume and availability for more information.


Administrative Assistants Template 4 (HIRING ADMIN ASSISTANT)
Job Description: Administrative Assistant position open now. Email resumes with a start date in the
header!

We are a Commercial Roofing company. All applicants need the judgement to make independent
decisions when circumstances warrant. Excellent time management and strong organization are required.
This position requires you to work under pressure, be self-directed with good business judgment and
handle confidential information appropriately.

In this position you will be responsible for:
-Answering a multi-line phone system.
-Greeting incoming guests.
-Filing incoming faxes.
-Light data entry.
-Filing and other basic clerical duties.
-Help co-workers as needed

To qualify for this position, you must have:
-*Communication Skill Requirement*.
-*Physical Requirement*
-*Technology Requirement*
-Can multitask
-Detail oriented
Administrative Assistants Template 5 (Looking for Admin Assistant)
A well-established service company is currently seeking an Administrative Assistant.

Qualified candidates will possess the following:

Proficiency in answering, screening, or forwarding calls, providing information, taking messages, or
scheduling appointments.
Maintain a professional presence at all times.
*Communication Skill Requirement*.
Be self-motivated.
Pay attention to detail and multitask.
*Physical Requirement*.
Possess strong organizational and critical thinking
*Technology Requirement*
Please submit your resume via email. Put "Re: Administrative Assistant Position" in the subject line.


Administrative Assistants Template 6 (ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT)
Our accounting firm is seeking an administrative assistant to work in account receivable.

Minimum Qualifications:
H.S. Graduate or GED (higher education is a plus)
Administrative background useful
*Technology Requirement*
*Communication Skill Requirement*
Other assorted office duties

Responsibilities include, but are not limited to:
Managing contracts, certificates, releases, etc.
Handling invoices, collections, liens, etc.
*Physical Requirement*

Email resumes to us at: * email address*. Be sure to let us know when your earliest possible start date is!


Administrative Assistants Template 7 (Administrative Assistant)
Our family-run business is looking for an Administrative Assistant in *City*. We would like someone
who is detail oriented, has a solid work ethic, and *Communication Skill Requirement*. If you fit this
description, then please submit your resume by email and preferred work hours!

Duties include client interaction, filing paperwork and testing, *Physical Requirement*, *Technology
Requirement*, answering phone calls and emails, and scheduling.
Administrative Assistants Template 8 (Office Admin Assistant)
We are searching for an administrative assistant for our office manager. Our work hours are fast paced.
Your main tasks would be to greet clients, answer the phone, schedule appointments also organize tax
returns, filing, light cleaning and other office jobs as needed.

The following are absolute must haves:
*Communication Skill Requirement*
*Technology Requirement*
*Physical Requirement*
High School Diploma (equivalents also acceptable)

Please send resume via email with the heading "Administrative Opening".


Administrative Assistants Template 9 (Office Assistant Wanted)
We are a furniture store in need of a part or full time administrative assistant in downtown *City*.
Candidate must be highly organized and reliable. Job duties include but are not limited to:

- *Communication Skill Requirement*

- Making appointments for project managers and clients

- Making calls and greeting clients as the enter the store.

- *Technology Requirement*

- *Physical Requirement*

Simply reply to this posting by email with "part time" or "full time" and attach your resume.
Administrative Assistants Template 10 (Admin Position)
We are looking for an administrative assistant that can operate in a team environment. Candidates will
assist visitors to the company and handle office tasks. Ideal candidates can provide professional assistance
via phone, mail, and email.

Job Responsibilities:

- *Physical Requirement*.
- Greet and assist visitors.
*Communication Skill Requirement*
- Handle tasks, like filing paperwork, setting up for meetings, and reordering supplies.

Requirements:

- Good time management and organization.
- *Technology Requirement*
Attention to detail.

If you're interested in this position, email us your resume and let us know the earliest you begin working.
We can discuss details of the position in an interview.


Administrative Assistants Template 11 (Admin Job)
Are you interested in an administrative assistant position in a growing business? We are hiring qualified
candidates in *City*! Apply with your resume and your preferred work hours. Submissions accepted via
email.

Duties include but are not limited to; greeting and checking-in guests, sending and receiving packages via
Fedex/UPS/USPS, as well as admin support to management.

Qualifications:
· Relevant background or high school diploma (or equivalent) required
· *Technology Requirement*
· *Communication Skill Requirement*
· Organized and great follow through on tasks

Additional Responsibilities:
· *Physical Requirement*
· Assist in greeting and escorting high profile guests.
· Assisting with various administrative duties as needed.
· Provide executive assistance as required.
Administrative Assistants Template 12 (Administrative Assistant Wanted)

Our firm is seeking an Office Administrative Assistant committed to providing premier client service and
working well in a team environment. The best candidate *Communication Skill Requirement*,
*Physical Requirement*, and maintain and organized work environment. General duties include
managing space reservations and serving as a contact for facilities related issues.

Responsibilities and Qualifications:
-*Technology Requirement*
-Work with team with individuals at all levels
-Follow-up and address issues in a timely and prompt manner.
-Strong attention to detail, commitment to producing accurate work
-Manage and maintain inventory of kitchen and office supplies, including printer paper and toner supplies
-High School Diploma/GED required
-Place catering orders, including set up for office meeting meals
-Provide administrative support to the administrative team
-Assist in other projects and responsibilities as assigned

Please contact us if you are interested. We accept resumes or curricula vitae at * email address*. Put
"Office Assistant Position" in the first line of your email. Thanks!
Retail Sales Associate

Retail Sales Associate Template 1 (Retail Sales Job)
Our women's clothing store in *City* is looking for a sales associate to help us out weekday afternoons.
We are pretty busy store and you must *Physical Requirement*. We are looking for someone with open
to working in retail, who *Communication Skill Requirement*. We need you to *Technology
Requirement*. So if this sounds like you, send us your resume and your earliest possible starting date
and we will be in touch.


Retail Sales Associate Template 2 (SALES ASSOCIATE WANTED)
Seeking a sales associate for our hardware store in *City*. We have flexible hours available during the
week. You *Physical Requirement*. Previous retail background is a plus, and our ideal candidate has a
proven *Communication Skill Requirement*. *Technology Requirement*. Email a resume and
specify your ideal work hours.


Retail Sales Associate Template 3 (Sales Associate)
Position: Retail Sales Associate (Retail Store)

Requirements and duties:
   Greet retail customers
   Answering phones/email
   Receive inventory
   Stock merchandise
   *Communication Skill Requirement*
   *Technology Requirement*
   *Physical Requirement*
   High school diploma or college degree
   Access to transportation

Full Time and Part Time Available + Competitive Wages

If you meet the above mentioned qualifications, please reply with resume (put full or part-time in the
subject line). We look forward to your application!
Retail Sales Associate Template 4 (Entry-Level Retail Sales Associate)
Entry-level sales position. Please read all requirements and apply if you are looking for a long-term
position. This can be either full-time or part-time position.

Requirements:
- *Communication Skill Requirement*
- Work in sales preferred but not required
-*Technology Requirement*
- Can multitask and work as a team
- GED or High School Diploma
- *Physical Requirement*

More information will be discussed during the interview. Please email resumes and list your schedule
availability.


Retail Sales Associate Template 5 (RETAIL SALES ASSOCIATE)
Seeking enthusiastic, part time or full time Retail Associate for our store.

Responsibilities Include
- Customer Service: greeting customers, assisting them as they shop, answering their questions
- Over The Counter Sales: manage the cash register, handle product returns
- Packing & Shipping Online Orders

Qualifications
- Applicants must have good attendance and punctuality, access to transportation
- Applicants must be 18 years old or older
- Applicants must have at least a high school diploma
- Applicants must *Communication Skill Requirement*
- Applicants must *Physical Requirement*
- Applicants must *Technology Requirement*

Email us a resume and indicate part-time or full-time if you are interested.
Retail Sales Associate Template 6 (Hiring Sales Associate)
We are a shoe store hoping to hire a new sales associate in *City*!

Our ideal candidate can:
· *Physical Requirement*
· *Technology Requirement*
· Assist customers with in-store purchases.
· Has a High School diploma or equivalent
· Confirm labels match the correct products.
· Inspect for damaged deliveries and merchandise.
· Finalize work orders and *Communication Skill Requirement*

If you're interested please reply to this ad with your résumé! (List your hours.)


Retail Sales Associate Template 7 (Family Owned Store: Retail Sales Position)
Be a part of our family owned, fabric wholesaler! We are searching for a part or full time sales assistant in
our *City* location. Our business is committed to quality design and excellent service. As an employee
you will work with staff, handle transactions, schedule deliveries, and *Technology Requirement*.

Qualifications:

-Qualified applicants will have a welcoming presentation.
-We are looking for candidates with a High School diploma or equivalent GED, having a retail
background is a plus.
-Excellent customer service, *Communication Skill Requirement*.
-*Physical Requirement*.
-Complete our pre-employment background screening.

Please send in your preferred schedule and resume to apply.



Retail Sales Associate Template 8 (Furniture Showroom Sales Associate)
Seeking a sales associate for a furniture showroom who has solid design training for a part time position
(full time is available as well) in a fast-moving environment. Candidate must have the following
qualifications:

* Strong interest in retail.
* High School Diploma/GED.
* Interest or background in interior design.
* *Physical Requirement*.
* *Technology Requirement*.
* Passion for interior design.
* *Communication Skill Requirement*.

Email us your resume/cv for consideration. Let us know if you are looking for part-time or full-time work
in the header of email.
Retail Sales Associate Template 9 (Pawnshop Job)
We're running a small pawnshop in *City* and are looking for a new team member. Qualified applicants
will:
· Be a team player.
· *Physical Requirement*
· Have familiarity with retail environment
· *Technology Requirement*

Your duties will include but are not limited to organizing paperwork, selling watches and other items,
evaluating new items, write loans, *Communication Skill Requirement* and all general store duties.
Email us a resume and list of available work hours if interested.


Retail Sales Associate Template 10 (Floral Design Sales Associate)
We are searching for a full or part-time sales associate to join our small business in floral design. We
offer flexible work hours with competitive pay. You will have to *Communication Skill Requirement*.
You need to *Physical Requirement*, *Technology Requirement*, and be organized. Please send a
resume and potential in-person interview hours. Thank you!


Retail Sales Associate Template 11 (Novelty Products Shop Opening)
We are a local retail shop in the novelty products business looking for sale associate. We are looking for
someone with strong sales techniques and with good customer service.

We require:
*Communication Skill Requirement*
*Technology Requirement*
*Physical Requirement*
flexible work hours

To apply for a position:
Please email your resume.
Please indicate your M-F availability in the email.


Retail Sales Associate Template 12 (Retail Job Opening)
We are an upscale business working with select clients and are looking for a talented sales associate. This
can be a part time or full time position and the number hours will vary, but the schedule will be posted far
in advance. We prefer candidates with a track record in sales. Our business is growing and we are looking
for someone to continue to grow with our team.

Qualified candidate should:
* *Technology Requirement*
* Be available to work on weekends
* *Communication Skill Requirement*
* *Physical Requirement*
* Work well in a team environment

This position pays competitive wages. To apply, email your resume or curricula vitae and let us know
many hours per week you prefer.
Security Guard

Security Guard Template 1 (HIRING UNARMED SECURITY GUARDS)
We currently have a position for a full-time or part-time security officer available. Training and uniforms
will provided. We offer flexible working hours and have shifts any day of the week. Our pay scale is
competitive. Email your resume and potential work hours to apply.

Requirements
-Professional appearance & attitude
-Detail oriented
-*Communication Skill Requirement*
-*Physical Requirement*
-*Technology Requirement*
-At least 18 years of age
-Access to transportation


Security Guard Template 2 (Security Guard)
Responsibilities
* Monitor and report flow of people on client property.
* Monitor and inform any illegal or incorrect activity.
* Give protection for individuals and property.
* Take control of emergency conditions and inform to authorities as appropriate.

Job requirements
* Proficient in English.
* Respond to emergency conditions fast and appropriately.
*Technology Requirement*
*Physical Requirement*
* Can work flexibly and/or late night hours as needed.
* Meet requirements for professional conduct and ethics.
*Communication Skill Requirement*

Send resumes and propose interview time/dates via email.
Security Guard Template 3 (Security Officer)
We're looking for security guards for a local office park.

Duties:
* Report suspicious things and look out for felony acts or law infractions at or near assigned post that may
be a danger to the property, client or workers at the site
* Report all incidents as required

Requirements:
*Communication Skill Requirement*.
* Capability to perform important tasks of the position.
**Technology Requirement*
**Physical Requirement*.
* Capacity to maintain satisfactory attendance standard

If you're interested in this posting send us your resume and list a few hours for a sit-down interview. We
will correspond by email.


Security Guard Template 4 (HIRING UNARMED SECURITY GUARDS)
Hiring UNARMED SECURITY GUARDS for a construction site!

Overview:
We are looking for guards to keep materials, tools, and trailers secured in *city*. You are expected to
patrol the site and prevent vandalism and theft while on duty. Guards must *Technology Requirement*
each day and report suspicious or criminal activity.

Requirements:
- High level of integrity
- *Communication Skill Requirement*
- *Physical Requirement*

Reply to this ad with your resume plus your earliest start date and a member of our team will contact you.
Security Guard Template 5 (Event Security)
We are seeking qualified applicants for UNARMED security officers to staff local events.

MEET THE FOLLOWING QUALIFICATIONS:
-*Physical Requirement*
-Bring and own a flashlight and a pair of boots
-Carry and use a pair of handcuffs
-High School Diploma are equivalent
-*Communication Skill Requirement*
-*Technology Requirement*

Note: Veterans/reservist background is a plus

EMAIL YOUR RESUME AND TYPICAL WEEKLY SCHEDULE FOR CONSIDERATION


Security Guard Template 6 (Hiring Security Guards)
HIRING *UNARMED* SECURITY GUARDS FOR A CLUB.
PAID IN CASH WEEKLY.

We are looking for security officers that can:
- Check guest I.D.s upon entry
- *Physical Requirement*
- Frisk/pat down guests for weapons

Job Description:
- *Technology Requirement*
- *Communication Skill Requirement*
- Report unusual or suspicious activity to managers
- Must be 18 years of age

If you are qualified to this position contact us soon with your workday preferences.
PLEASE EMAIL RESUMES FOR A RESPONSE
Security Guard Template 7 (Unarmed Security)
Our golf club is searching for security professionals in *City*

JOB: Unarmed Security Guard

QUALIFICATIONS:

- *Technology Requirement*
- Minimum age of 18 years old,
- High School Diploma or Equivalent
- *Communication Skill Requirement*
- *Physical Requirement*

-Duties include...
Enforce parking rules and regulations
Report incidents and suspicious activity
Look and monitor doors and gates

PLEASE EMAIL ALL RESUMES AND SPECIFY FULL OR PART-TIME


Security Guard Template 8 (UNARMED GAURDS)
Join our team if you're a security professional seeking a full-time or part-time position! We are a local
warehouse and delivery company operating in *City*.

REQUIREMENTS:
· Must be at least 18 years of age.
· *Physical Requirement*.
· Must meet, follow, and maintain company policy at all times.
· Must pass a background check.
· *Communication Skill Requirement*.
· Must have a High School Diploma or GED.
· *Technology Requirement*.

Join our team today! Tell us how many hours you'd like to sign up for! Submit resumes by email!
Security Guard Template 9 (SECURITY GUARD JOBS)
FULL OR PART TIME SECURITY GUARD OPENING
Location: *City*

We are hiring security guards for corporate offices in *city*. You are expected to patrol entry points and
verify I.D.s upon entry. Work may involve contacting emergency services, responding to fire alarms, or
interviewing suspicious people.

DAILY FUNCTIONS:
· Office patrols to deter criminal activity.
· *Technology Requirement*.
· Activity reporting to investigate and record suspicious persons.

MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS:
· Must be at least 18 years of age.
· *Physical Requirement*.
· *Communication Skill Requirement*.
· Must have a High School Diploma or GED.

Interested in these positions? Send us an email with your resume and a few possible dates for an
interview.


Security Guard Template 10 (Retirement Community Residential Security)
Security officers wanted for part-time and full-time work at a retirement community in *City*. Email
resumes and say part-time/full-time to express interest.

Position Summary: This role involves responding to emergencies, offering assistance, as well as
monitoring the security to ensure resident safety.
Qualifications:
· *Physical Requirement*
· *Technology Requirement*
· Detail-oriented, and can multitask
· *Communication Skill Requirement*

Duties:
· Record information on units, keys, and deliveries
· Monitor security of the buildings
· Maintain resident roster: Use and maintain current resident information
· Enforce policies such as parking policies and amenity reservations
Security Guard Template 11 (Security Officers Wanted)
We are a security company looking for new guards that can join our ranks. Our business contracts locally
in *City* and has several upcoming openings.

We want our team members to have the following:

*Knowledge of security service, defense, etc.
*High school diploma or GED
*Attention to detail
* *Physical Requirement*
* *Technology Requirement*
* *Communication Skill Requirement*

Please email your resume or summary of experience and suggested work hours for review.

Security Guard Template 12 (Unarmed Security Officer)
NEW OPENINGS for Security Guards in *City* *State*. Contact us by email with your resume and start
date.

Professional duties:

*Conducting patrols and security checks.
*Maintain consistent attendance.
*Responding to alarms as needed.
* *Technology Requirement*
*Monitor, address, and report fire & safety hazards.
*Maintain security of a complex, building and/or premises.


Requirements:

*Must be at least 18 years of age.
*Must have High School diploma or GED equivalent.
* *Communication skill Requirement*.
* *Physical Requirement*.

Veterans encouraged to apply but previous service is NOT required!
          Appendix B (online)

Appendix Figure B1: Manipulation Checks
Appendix Figure B2: Informed Consent
Appendix Figure B3: Demographic Questions
