                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               WEALTH TRAJECTORIES ACROSS KEY MILESTONES:
            LONGITUDINAL EVIDENCE FROM LIFE-COURSE TRANSITIONS

                                        Gopi Shah Goda
                                        Jialu Liu Streeter

                                      Working Paper 28329
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28329


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2021




The research project described in this paper received funding from Prudential Financial, Inc. The
opinions, findings and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily represent the views of Stanford University, the National Bureau of Economic
Research, Prudential Financial, Inc., or any of its subsidiaries or affiliates. We are grateful to
Gary Koenig, Joanna Lahey, Gina Li, Melinda Morrill, and Sita Slavov for helpful comments. All
errors are our own.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Gopi Shah Goda and Jialu Liu Streeter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Wealth Trajectories Across Key Milestones: Longitudinal Evidence from Life-Course Transitions
Gopi Shah Goda and Jialu Liu Streeter
NBER Working Paper No. 28329
January 2021
JEL No. G51,I13,J1

                                          ABSTRACT

Wealth varies considerably across the population and changes significantly over the lifecycle. In
this paper, we trace out trajectories of wealth across several key life milestones, including
marriage, homeownership, childbirth, divorce, disability, health shocks, retirement and
widowhood using multiple decades of longitudinal panel data. We estimate both changes over the
ten-year period before and after each milestone and assess whether those changes occur gradually
or sharply after the milestone. We find evidence of significant long-run increases in wealth
associated with homeownership and retirement, and significant long-run reductions in wealth
associated with divorce, health shocks, and disability. In general, these changes appear to occur
gradually rather than immediately after the milestone. Our results also indicate a large degree of
heterogeneity across demographics, socioeconomic status and risk protection from insurance. In
particular, those with lower levels of socioeconomic status and those without access to risk
protection experience smaller wealth gains (or larger wealth losses) following life-course
transitions. These results identify populations and life stages where individuals are most
vulnerable to large reductions in wealth.


Gopi Shah Goda
Stanford University
SIEPR
366 Galvez St.
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
gopi@stanford.edu

Jialu Liu Streeter
Stanford University
365 Lasuen St
Stanford, CA 94305
jialu.streeter@stanford.edu
I.      INTRODUCTION

        The large differences in wealth that are prevalent across many different socioeconomic

groups are well-documented. According to the 2019 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), median

family net worth for households where the reference person has a college degree was more than

four times higher than for households where the reference person's highest level of education is a

high school diploma. 1 Net worth also varies significantly by race and ethnicity, with median

family net worth of white, non-Hispanic families eight times higher than for Black, non-Hispanic

families, and five times higher than Hispanic families. The SCF also shows evidence of significant

differences in net worth over the lifecycle. For example, median family net worth is higher for

couples relative to singles, and the median net worth for homeowners was 40 times that of non-

homeowners. Net worth varies considerably by age of the reference person, with low levels early

in life to higher levels for those aged 65 and older.

        While these cross-sectional data highlight wealth disparities across subpopulations, they

do not indicate how wealth changes longitudinally throughout life, holding other factors fixed.

This distinction is important as the rationale for policy interventions from the above statistics may

differ greatly depending on whether, for instance, higher wealth among homeowners represents

the selection of those who purchase homes or a wealth gain associated with homeownership. In

addition, it is unclear from cross-sectional data whether certain socioeconomic groups have lower

levels of wealth due to lower rates of homeownership or whether the wealth gains associated with

homeownership for these groups are smaller.


1
 These data were obtained from the SCF Interactive Chart, available at
https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/scf/dataviz/scf/chart/, on December 2, 2020. A family in the Survey of
Consumer Finances is defined as the economically dominant single person or couple and all other persons in the
household who are financially interdependent with that economically dominant person or couple. If a person is
economically dominant, that person is denoted the reference person in a family. If a couple is economically
dominant, the reference person is the male in a mixed-sex couple or the older person in a same-sex couple.


                                                                                                                 3
       Our study helps us better understand wealth disparities by examining wealth changes

during different key times in the lifecycle, often referred to as "life milestones," and how these

wealth changes vary across different groups using longitudinal panel data. The milestones we

examine, namely marriage, divorce, childrearing, homeownership, retirement, the onset of health

shocks, and widowhood, can represent both positive and negative shocks to income and/or

consumption and often signify changes in financial circumstances when people may change

patterns of spending, work, and saving. Some ­ such as the onset of health shocks and disability

­ may be unanticipated, and present a role for public and private insurance to cushion losses

resulting from these events.    Others ­ such as marriage, childrearing, homeownership and

retirement ­ represent life events that are often anticipated but require planning and foresight in

order to transition through them without negative consequences.

       We analyze net financial and non-financial wealth among households surveyed repeatedly

over time in the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79) between 1985 and 2016, and

in the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) between 1992 and 2016. Our measure of wealth

includes housing wealth, net of outstanding debt, as well as financial sources of wealth owned by

a family and is divided by two if a respondent is married. We employ individual fixed effects and

an event-study framework, which allows us to trace out wealth trajectories of households before

and after they experience a particular milestone.

       We investigate both short- and long-run changes in wealth surrounding each milestone.

The long-run change is defined as the estimated difference in the outcome over the ten-year period

after the milestone relative to the ten-year period before the milestone, after controlling for

observables and individual fixed effects. The short-run change is defined as the estimated




                                                                                                 4
discontinuous difference in the outcome at the time of the milestone after fitting smooth

polynomials to the data on either side of the milestone, conditional on the same controls.

       The estimated changes reflect the forces of both causal and non-causal factors. A milestone

may directly impact income, consumption, or savings, or trigger behavioral changes with long-

term implications. For example, having a child may impact family work decisions, increase levels

of consumption, or prompt additional savings to prepare for future education expenses. The

changes we estimate may also reflect other behavioral changes that are coincident with the

milestone in question. For example, promotions may occur around the same time as child-rearing,

causing earnings growth to be higher, and leading to more disposable income that occurs in the

years surrounding child-rearing. It is also possible that some behaviors made in anticipation of a

milestone, such as saving for a down payment on a house, may affect wealth trajectories both

before and after the milestone. Therefore, our estimates do not isolate the pure causal effects of

each milestone on wealth; however, they help identify the life stages that tend to be associated

with increases or declines in wealth and whether the change occurs sharply or gradually.

       We find strong evidence that long-run wealth changes with respect to many of the

milestones we examine, including marriage, homeownership, childbirth, divorce, disability, health

shocks, retirement, and widowhood. On an absolute basis, homeownership and retirement have

the largest positive changes overall, and both early and late health shocks as well as disability are

associated with large negative changes. On a relative basis, the positive change in wealth

associated with homeownership is much larger than those for retirement due to the higher baseline

wealth later in life when retirement is typically experienced. In addition, disability has a much

larger proportional effect than early or late health shocks, and is accompanied by an almost 300

percent decline in wealth. The increase in wealth at retirement appears to be partly driven by




                                                                                                   5
conversions from retirement wealth in defined contribution plans (which are not included in HRS

measures of wealth) to Individual Retirement Accounts (which are).

       We find that most of the long-run changes in wealth that we observe occur gradually rather

than suddenly. When we examine how wealth changes in the short run, our analysis suggests that

marriage, divorce, homeownership, retirement, and widowhood are associated with more

immediate changes in overall wealth. However, these short-run changes are generally small in

magnitude, indicating that the underlying factors resulting in long-run wealth changes are likely

to be more gradual and perhaps anticipated. The largest short-run change on an absolute basis is

widowhood, where the death of a spouse eliminates the need to divide total wealth by two, and the

largest short-run relative change appears to happen at the time of homeownership.

       We next examine how changes in wealth across these milestones differ by race, gender,

education and health status. When experiencing the same milestones, different subpopulations

show varying degrees of wealth change. Specifically, while whites experience long-run increases

in wealth after marriage, having children, divorce, and retirement, non-whites experiences long-

run reductions for these milestones. In addition, non-whites have significantly larger reductions in

wealth after early-life health shocks and disability. These results are echoed across educational

attainment, with college-educated and those without college education experiencing similar

disparities in the long-run changes in wealth, and health status, where reporting poor health status

is associated with significantly worse long-run changes in wealth after experiencing milestones.

When we examine how wealth changes differ by sex, we find that the long-run changes in wealth

associated with any marital status change, such as marriage, divorce, and widowhood, are driven

by changes for women, while the changes for men are either smaller or statistically insignificant.




                                                                                                  6
       We also analyze whether our results vary based on insurance coverage to determine

whether forms of risk protection are associated with different outcomes. We find that health

insurance coverage, retirement plan access and life insurance mitigate negative wealth changes

associated with certain life milestones, possibly signifying the importance of employer benefits

and policies that increase access to health insurance and retirement savings instruments outside of

employment. Finally, we decompose the changes into home equity and non-housing wealth, and

find that, with the exception of homeownership that significantly increases home equity in the long

run, the milestones generally have similar proportional effects on these two types of wealth. Our

results are also robust to a variety of alternative specifications and sample restrictions.

       Our findings add to a large literature that investigates the relationship between

demographic milestones and wealth. Generally, studies on younger individuals focus on one or

two milestones and analyze how wealth changes with these milestones. For examples, see

Zagorsky (2005) and Lersch (2017) on marriage and divorce; Scholz and Seshadri (2007) Maroto

(2018) on children; Di, Belsky, and Liu (2007), Herbert, McCue, and Sanchez-Moyano (2013),

Killewald and Bryan (2016), and Turner and Luea (2009) on homeownership. For older

households, several studies examine the broader impacts of health shocks, retirement, and

widowhood (Coile and Milligan 2009; De Nardi, French, and Jones 2015; Jones et al. 2020; Lee

and Kim 2008; Love, Palumbo, and Smith 2009; Poterba, Venti, and Wise 2011; Ward-Batts

2001). In general, these studies show similar qualitative findings ­ increases in wealth upon

marriage and homeownership; reductions in wealth upon divorce, childbearing, health shocks and

widowhood ­ though the magnitudes vary depending on the methods and data used.

       Our study contributes to this literature in several ways. First, our approach of an event-

study framework with individual fixed effects allows us to trace out within-person wealth changes




                                                                                                 7
surrounding different milestones and separately estimate both the short-run and long-run changes

for each milestone. Second, our analysis examines a large set of key milestones over the lifecycle

using one unified framework, which allows a comparison in both absolute and relative terms across

different points in the lifecycle. Finally, we examine several sources of heterogeneity in our results

by socioeconomic status and whether risk protection from insurance and workplace pensions are

associated with better outcomes. Our results illuminate populations that may be more or less

vulnerable to changes in financial outcomes at different life stages, and the potential for policy

instruments to protect households from negative outcomes.

       The rest of our paper proceeds as follows. In Section II, we describe the data we use in our

study. Section III illustrates our empirical methodology. In Section IV, we describe both our main

results as well as the results of our heterogeneity analysis and robustness exercises. Section V

concludes.



II.    DATA

       Our data come from two sources that focus on individuals in different stages of life. We

use the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79) between 1985 and 2016 to examine

early-life milestones such as marriage and family formation, and use the Health and Retirement

Study (HRS) between 1992 and 2016 to examine later-life milestones such as retirement and

widowhood. Both data sources provide rich longitudinal information on demographics, income,

assets, health, and family structure.

       The first data source, the NLSY79, is a nationally representative sample of Americans born

between 1957 and 1965, who were interviewed annually between 1979 and 1994, and are currently

interviewed biannually. We use all observations in this cohort where the wealth and income




                                                                                                    8
measures are available. We then construct a panel spanning 1985 to 2016, which spans ages from

the early 20s to early 50s, with an average age of 34 years old. Our full data sample from the

NLSY79 includes 11,301 distinct individuals and 122,646 person-year records. The second data

source, the HRS, is a national longitudinal survey of individuals over age 50 and their spouses or

partners regardless of age. Participants have been interviewed biannually since 1992, and new

cohorts are added every six years. The average age is 67 years old. Our full data sample from the

HRS includes 42,032 distinct individuals and 246,672 person-year records. The samples used in

our analysis change from these totals in order to accommodate the empirical strategy, and differ

by the milestone examined. These additional sample restrictions are discussed in more detail in

the following section.

        The measure of wealth in the NLSY79 includes total net family wealth, home equity, and

financial wealth. More specifically, total net family wealth is computed from a wide range of

wealth and debt components, including home value, mortgages, other residential debt, market

value and debt of farm, business, and real estate, market value and debt of vehicles, value of money

assets such as checking and savings accounts, stocks, bonds, mutual funds, CDs, IRAs, workplace

retirement plans such as 401(k)s and 403(b)s, and other debt such as credit cards and student loans.

In the HRS, the measure of wealth is total net wealth, which is computed as the sum of all wealth

components less all debt. More specifically, the wealth components include market value of home,

business, vehicles, IRAs, stock and bond, checking account, and CDs. Debt items include home

mortgages and home loans, and all other debt. 2 The wealth measures between the two data sources

are similar with the exception that the latter does not include balances in workplace retirement




2
 While these wealth measures are self-reported, the wealth data in the HRS in particular is known to be of high
quality (Venti 2011).


                                                                                                                  9
plans. Thus, if individuals convert wealth from workplace plans into IRAs or other forms of

wealth, it will appear that wealth is increasing.

       Some milestones involve changes in the household structure, which may mechanically

change the wealth calculation. Therefore, we divide family wealth by two for married couples.

This adjustment allows us to focus on the per person changes in wealth levels due to marriage,

divorce and widowhood.

       Table 1 presents the summary statistics of the variables used in our analysis for the NLSY

and HRS data. All monetary variables are converted to 2018 real dollars using the Consumer Price

Index (CPI-U-RS). As shown in the table, the average age of respondents in the HRS is much

higher than that in the NLSY. By and large, the control variables match up pretty well across the

two datasets, but there are some differences in the controls for health status variables and

geographic information. The net wealth is much higher in the HRS owing to the higher ages

represented.

       Table 2 shows the share of individuals in our data who we observe experiencing each

milestone during the study period. About 66% of survey participants got married during the study

period, 58% had children, 70% bought a home, and 38% of the married later divorced. Among

those who have completed these milestones during the study period, we find the median ages for

the first marriage, child, home, and divorce are 27, 29, 31 and 35, respectively. Among individuals

who were observed to be married, 23% of them lost their spouses, with the median age entering

widowhood being 75 years old. Among those who have worked for at least ten years, we observe

44% of them enter retirement (both partly and completely) in subsequent years. The median

retirement age is 62 years. Lastly, about 43% of the households in the HRS experienced a health




                                                                                                10
shock that prevented them from working, with the median age of such late-life health shocks

happening at 72 years old.



III.   EMPIRICAL METHODS

       We adopt an event-study framework and estimate a model with binary variables

representing the time relative to the occurrence of a life event using panel data and individual fixed

effects. The formulation is very similar to the framework specified in Bayaz-Ozturk, et al. (2018):
                          
           =  +   + 10
                    =-10   +  +  +                               - 10    10             (1)

where  is a measure of wealth for individual  in calendar year . On the right-hand-side of

expression (1),  represents a set of time-varying socioeconomic-demographic characteristics

such as age, age-squared, marital status, employment, family size, self-reported health status, and

family income (adjusted for family size).  represents a set of survey year fixed effects. The

parameter  represents the individual time-invariant fixed-effects.  is an error term that is

                                                                       
independent and identically distributed. A series of dummy variables, {  =  ( =  )}, are used

to indicate a person's timing position relative to the year of a life milestone. The baseline is the

period immediately prior to a milestone occurring; in the NLSY79, we omit  = -1, and in the

HRS, we omit  = -2 because the dataset is biannual.

       To collapse the long-run impact of a milestone into a single coefficient, we replace the

relative year time dummies in expression (1) with a single indicator,  (  0), that takes value 1

during the ten years after a milestone, and 0 during the ten years prior to a milestone. Time outside

of the [-10,10] time frame is omitted as shown below:

        =  +   +   (  0) +  +  +                                 - 10    10            (2)




                                                                                                   11
The coefficient estimate for  in equation (2) represents the long-run change in wealth associated

with a life event. This value represents the average change from the ten years before the milestone

to the ten years after the milestone.

       To assess the short-run impact of a milestone, we fit parametric functions of time since a

milestone, allowing for different parameters on either side of the milestone:

            =  +   +   (  0) +  () +  () ×  (  0) +  +  + 

                                                                      -10    10          (3)

Here,  () represents the polynomial on the left of the milestone, while  () represents the

polynomial on the right of the milestone. Again, we omit years more than 10 years before or after

a milestone. The short-run change in wealth associated with a milestone is defined as the value 

in the expression above. This value represents the changes in wealth at the time of a life event

after accounting for smooth changes before and after the milestone. If  from equation (3) is small

and statistically insignificant, while  in equation (2) is large and significant, it suggests that the

estimated long-run change is gradual rather than immediate.

       To implement the analyses described above, we identify survey participants as being in the

following three categories: (1) people who already experienced a shock before the time s/he

entered the study; (2) people who experienced a shock during the study period; and (3) people who

never experienced a shock by the end of the study period. For the first group, we often do not have

information on the timing of the shock, and hence, cannot calculate the time lapsed. Therefore, we

omit these individuals from our analysis. For the second group, it is possible that they experienced

the same type of shocks more than once during the study period, in which case, we focus on the

first occurrence.




                                                                                                   12
         The final sample for each milestone includes individuals who experienced a milestone

during the survey period, as well as those who never experienced the milestone. For example, the

final data sample for the marriage milestone includes those who got married during the observation

period, as well as those who were never married. The advantage of including the never-married

individuals instead of only focusing on the married is that the never-married group experienced

changes in well-being that allow for us to better control for time-varying conditions such as booms

and busts. Excluding the single individuals can result in an overestimate of the loss due to marriage

during economic downturns and an underestimate in a booming economy (Bayaz-Ozturk et al.

2018; Tach and Eads 2015).



IV.      RESULTS

      A. Main Results

            1. Event study results

         For each milestone summarized in Table 2, we first display the series of event-study

coefficients  from equation (1) in Figure 1. The figure is divided into early-life milestones that

use the NLSY79, and late-life milestones that use the HRS. These coefficients show the pattern

of wealth for ten years prior to and ten years after the milestone relative to the baseline year after

controlling for observables, year fixed effects and individual fixed effects. The baseline year is

defined as the year prior to a milestone in the annual NLSY79, and two years before a milestone

in the biannual HRS.

         The early-life milestones we examine include marriage, having children, buying a home,

divorce, the onset of a work-limiting health shock, and disability. As shown in the figure, wealth

appears to gradually increase with marriage. Wealth also increases leading up to the birth of a first




                                                                                                   13
child and then levels off. Wealth increases leading up to and following homeownership, but there

appears to be a discrete jump at the time of homeownership, which we explore when we examine

short-run changes. We see gradual declines in wealth before and after divorce, work-limiting

health shocks, and the onset of disability.

       The bottom panel of Figure 1 displays the results for late-life milestones including

widowhood, retirement, and work-limiting health shocks. We find that widowhood is associated

with increases in per capita wealth. This increase is due to the adjustment in the wealth figures by

marital status, which results in dividing family wealth by two in the years prior to widowhood, and

using raw family wealth figures after widowhood. Ceteris paribus, the wealth increase due to the

change in family size should be 100%; however, our results show only a 78% wealth increase in

the year of spousal loss, suggesting other factors, such as costly end-of-life expenditures, carry a

negative impact on the surviving spouse's financial status. Work-limiting health shocks are

associated with large declines in wealth that begin in the years leading up to the shock and continue

for up to 10 years afterwards. Retirement appears to be associated with a non-monotonic pattern

of wealth changes, exhibiting an increase in the first two years after retirement.

       We also examine specific health shocks measured in the HRS summarized in the bottom

panel of Table 2. These include the onset of high blood pressure, diabetes, cancer, lung disease,

heart disease, stroke, psychiatric conditions, and arthritis. The results from estimating equation

(1) with these shocks are shown in Appendix Figure A.1. Similar to the more general work-

limiting health shock, we find that wealth gradually declines with the onset of most health shocks.

These reductions are more pronounced in the case of high blood pressure, diabetes, and lung

disease.

           2. Long-run changes




                                                                                                  14
       Table 3 displays the results of estimating the long-run and short-run changes in wealth

following each milestone. Column (1) shows the mean of family wealth in the period before each

milestone to provide a benchmark. Column (2) shows the estimates of  from equation (2) while

Column (3) shows the estimates of  from equation (3). Starting with the early-life milestones in

the NLSY, we do not find evidence that marriage and having children are associated with long-

run changes in wealth. However, homeownership is associated with a $44,394 long-run increase

in wealth. This result is statistically significant and large relative to the baseline mean of $21,057.

Divorce is associated with a $5,461 reduction in wealth in the long run, relative to a baseline mean

of $23,800. Note that our results are on a per capita basis, and so they are not the mechanical result

of changes in household size, such as those occurring at marriage and divorce. Both work-limiting

health shocks and disabilities are associated with large reductions in wealth over the long run:

$26,688 and $34,629, respectively. Both of these reductions are larger than the baseline mean.

       When we turn to the late-life milestones in the HRS data, we find that retirement is

associated with a $18,933 increase in wealth over the long run, seemingly at odds with lifecycle

models that predict that wealth is spent down during retirement. We investigate these results

further when we analyze different sources of wealth. For widowhood, our analysis shows that

widowhood is associated with a $116,906 increase in wealth. However, this increase results from

our adjustment for marital status. Since we divide by two if a household has a married couple and

no longer make this adjustment after widowhood, no change in wealth would imply that wealth

increases by a factor of two. The increase in wealth is less than the baseline wealth, suggesting

that unadjusted wealth still declines in the long run after widowhood.

       Finally, we estimate the long-run change in wealth associated with work-limiting health

shocks at older ages. The reduction of $27,560 is statistically significant and similar in magnitude




                                                                                                    15
to that found for work-limiting health shocks in early life; however, since baseline wealth is higher

for HRS households (who are older), this reduction represents a smaller relative decline in late life.

Finally, we report the long-run changes in wealth associated with specific health shocks, including

a diagnosis of high blood pressure, diabetes, cancer, lung disease, heart disease, stroke, psychiatric

conditions, and arthritis. We find that high blood pressure, diabetes, lung disease, psychiatric

conditions, and arthritis are associated with statistically significant reductions in long-run wealth,

ranging from $12,000-25,000.

         In order to better compare the results across milestones, we plot the absolute and relative

long-run changes in wealth for both the early- and late-life milestones in Figure 2.      Aside from

widowhood, homeownership is associated with the largest long-run wealth increase. This finding

may be specific to the cohorts we examine, given the high growth in housing prices the U.S.

experienced during the period of our study. These increases may also be due to high earnings

growth or behavioral changes (such as financial prudence) associated with home purchases.

Disability and early-life health shocks are associated with the largest reductions in long-run wealth

in relative terms, 295 percent and 154 percent reductions, respectively. Health shocks that

occurred in later life appear to have a smaller relative impact as households are likely better able

to cushion this shock at later ages given the higher baseline level of wealth. Also, Medicare may

shield older individuals from the financial impact of medical treatment. The long-run changes in

wealth associated with marriage, children, and divorce are small in both absolute and relative

terms.

            3. Short-run changes

         We display the estimated short-run changes in wealth associated with each milestone in

Table 3, Column (3). We find evidence that marriage and having a child is associated with




                                                                                                   16
immediate declines in wealth of $9,249 and $4,191, respectively, that eventually reverse

themselves over the 10-year period that we measure long-run wealth changes in Column (2). A

portion of the long-run increase in wealth associated with homeownership appears to appear

immediately at the time of homeownership, which is associated with a $23,138 short-run increase

in wealth. Divorce, mirroring marriage, is associated with an immediate increase in wealth of

$8,553, but also appears to reverse over the 10-year period given the opposite sign of the long-run

change in Column (2). When we turn to late-life milestones, we find that much of the long-run

changes associated with retirement and widowhood appear to be immediate; however, the change

in long-run wealth associated with work-limiting health shocks appears to be more gradual. The

event study estimates in Figure 1 suggest caution is warranted in fitting linear functional forms

given the non-monotonic nature of the wealth trajectory after retirement. We do not find evidence

of statistically significant short-run changes in wealth occurring at the time of health shocks or

disability. We display these changes in both absolute and relative terms in Figure 3.

       One challenge in interpreting the results above is that many of the life events may be

correlated and happen in clusters. Therefore, it is not clear whether, for example, homeownership

leads to an increase in wealth or whether homeownership occurs at the same time as marriage, and

marriage leads to greater wealth accumulation. We examine this in Appendix Figure A.2, where

we use the same event-study framework to investigate the extent to which the timing of certain life

events is correlated with other life events. The figures shown in Figure A.2 are the result of

estimating equation (1) with a binary variable of one life milestone as the dependent variable, and

shows how passing through one milestone is associated with achieving a different milestone. The

top-left panel shows that both the likelihood of buying a home and having children increase sharply

within the first five years of marriage. The top-right and middle-left panels indicate that people are




                                                                                                   17
more likely to buy homes before children than the other way around. The bottom two panels show

a strong correlation between the occurrences of disability and work-limiting health problems.

These figures show that indeed, many of the early-life milestones are correlated in timing.

Therefore, it is important to interpret the results above as potentially the result of one or more

milestones.

    B. Heterogeneity

         As discussed in the introduction, large amounts of variation in wealth exist across race,

ethnicity, education and other factors.             We next consider whether socioeconomic status is

associated with different changes in financial resources after achieving the same life milestones.

In addition, we examine whether insurance coverage and access to saving plans can mitigate long-

run reductions in wealth after people experience negative shocks.

         We explore heterogeneity in our main results across several dimensions, including race,

education, gender, insurance coverage and general health status. The full set of results are shown

in Appendix Table A.1. The first two columns report estimates of the long-run change in wealth

from a modified version of equation (2) where an interaction term for the characteristic shown is

used. Similarly, the last two columns report estimates of the short-run change from an interacted

version of equation (3). The interpretation of columns (1) and (3) is the long- or short-run change

in wealth for the omitted group, while the interpretation of columns (2) and (4) is the incremental

change for the group represented by the interaction term. Note that the interaction term must be a

fixed value over time for each person, so we aggregate time varying characteristics, such as health

insurance coverage and health status, into a single measure that does not vary for a given

individual. 3


3
 We define seven interaction variables that are held fixed over time for each observation. The first is "non-white,"
which includes those who report Hispanic ethnicity or that their race is not white. The second is "no college


                                                                                                                  18
         Here, we focus on the heterogeneity by race/ethnicity and sex, and refer the reader to the

appendix for the full set of results. The absolute long-run and short-run changes in wealth for

whites and non-whites are depicted in Figure 4 along with 95 percent confidence intervals. In

Panel A, the results show that for every milestone we examine, non-whites, who comprise 49%

and 29% of the early- and later-life samples respectively, experience significantly smaller long-

run increases in wealth (or larger long-run reductions in wealth) than their white counterparts. In

some cases, such as homeownership, disability, widowhood and both early- and late-life work-

prohibiting health conditions, the overall sign of the long-run change in wealth is the same for

whites and non-whites, though non-whites experience significantly worse outcomes in each case.

For other milestones, such as marriage, children, divorce, and retirement, white respondents

experience positive changes in wealth while non-whites experience substantial negative declines.

We see no evidence that short-run changes differ across race, with the exception of widowhood

which is associated with a much smaller change for non-whites than whites. Heterogeneity by

education and health status follow similar patterns (see Appendix Figures A.3.-A.4), with those

without college degrees experiencing worse outcomes than those with college degrees, and those

with better self-reported health status experiencing better outcomes than those with worse self-

reported health.




education," which includes those who had no more than 12 years of education. Third, we have an interaction term
for women. Fourth, we define an interaction term for "worse than average health" as those whose health status at
age 40 (for early-life milestones) and between age 50 and 65 (for late-life milestones) were below the average levels
of people in the same age range. Fifth, we have an interaction term for not having continuous health insurance that
measures whether health insurance is observed less than 90% of time during the study period, where 90% roughly
corresponds to the average level of health insurance over the study period in the HRS. Sixth, we have an interaction
term for "no work pensions," which is defined as not having any retirement plans that are sponsored by one's
employer or union. Such retirement plans include not only basic pension or retirement plans, but also tax-deferred
plans like thrift plans, savings plans, 401(k)'s, deferred profit sharing, or stock ownership. Finally, we include an
interaction term for spouse never had life insurance, which denotes whether the interviewee was ever named as a
beneficiary on their spouse's life insurance.


                                                                                                                  19
       In both Figure 5 and Panel C of Table A.1, we see that the small overall long-run changes

in wealth associated with marriage, childbirth and divorce in our sample overall from Table 3 mask

significant heterogeneity in the changes across men and women. Women experience substantially

larger long-run increases in wealth after marriage and childbirth than men, as well as larger long-

run decreases following divorce and widowhood. Our results show some evidence that the changes

associated with marriage and divorce occur at the same time as marriage formation and dissolution

and that the lack of short-run changes in the full sample may be masked by short-run changes in

opposite directions for men and women. Women fare worse in the long-run after retirement than

men, but their wealth changes are similar to men after disability.

   We also examined how our results differ across ownership of health insurance, workplace

pension programs, and life insurance ownership (Table A.1 and Figures A.5.-A.7.). These latter

two indicators are only available for our late-life milestones, so we limit this analysis to retirement,

widowhood and work-limiting health conditions in late-life. Lack of continuous health insurance

ownership, which includes approximately 47% and 18% of our early- and later-life samples over

our sample period, is associated with significantly smaller long-run increases in wealth or larger

long-run reductions in wealth for all of the milestones we examine. For work-prohibiting health

conditions in early life, the long-run reductions in wealth are concentrated among this group,

suggesting that health insurance can mitigate losses from health shocks with continuous coverage.

The fact that long-run changes in wealth differ across health insurance status for non-health-related

milestones, such as homeownership and marriage, suggest that health insurance coverage is

correlated with other factors that may be associated with better outcomes.

   Not having access to a retirement savings plan (60% of the sample) is associated with negative

long-run changes in wealth at retirement while the rest of the sample experience positive changes




                                                                                                     20
in wealth after retirement, suggesting that workplace pensions are important sources of wealth in

retirement. Not having life insurance (34% of the sample) is not associated with statistically

significant differences in long-run wealth at the time of widowhood; however, those without life

insurance experience significantly smaller increases in the short-run at the time of widowhood,

which is unsurprising given that life insurance can provide immediate financial support at the time

of bereavement.

   C. Sources of Wealth

       Beyond aggregate wealth levels, we are also interested in decomposing the effects across

different types of wealth to determine the sources of these wealth changes. While both the NLSY

and the HRS report several components of wealth, the source that we are able to estimate most

consistently throughout each survey is home equity. Therefore, we estimate equations (2) and (3)

for both home equity and all other wealth separately. Given that housing wealth represents a large

source of wealth for American households, but is often less liquid than other forms of wealth, these

results can help determine whether different types of milestones affect the accumulation and

decumulation of resources differently depending on the type of wealth. For retirement, we also

examine wealth in IRA accounts separately to better understand wealth changes associated with

retirement.

       The results of this analysis are included in Appendix Tables A.2 and A.3. While the

baseline mean varies by milestone, in general, home equity represents approximately half of non-

housing wealth, or one third of total wealth. Correspondingly, the results show that the changes

in wealth are about half the magnitude for home equity than for non-housing wealth, and that the

changes are roughly proportional across the two sources.              One notable exception is

homeownership, which is associated with a long-run change in home equity that is twice the




                                                                                                 21
associated long-run change for non-housing wealth and where the entire associated short-run

change is attributed to home equity. We also find that the overall small short-run changes in wealth

associated with marriage and children can be decomposed into a small and insignificant increase

in home equity and a statistically significant decline in non-housing wealth. When we perform

our analysis for the retirement milestone for IRA wealth, we find that increases in IRA wealth

occur after retirement and account for a significant portion of the short-run and long-run changes

in wealth associated with retirement. 4 This suggests that the increase in wealth occurring at the

time of retirement can be attributed to the conversion of assets in workplace saving plans (which

are not included in the HRS wealth measure) to IRAs (which are included).

       D. Robustness Tests

           Tables 4 and 5 summarize the results of several alternative specifications in order to

understand the robustness of our results. Column (1) in each table repeats the baseline results from

Table 3. In column (2), we report the results of a specification where log wealth is the dependent

variable. This specification allows us to understand whether the effects are concentrated among

high-wealth households or apply proportionately across the distribution.          Specifically, the

dependent variable is ln (wealth + 1) if wealth  0, and ­ ln (|wealth| + 1) if wealth < 0 which

allows us to include households with negative wealth in the analysis. In column (3), we use

sampling weights from the NLSY or HRS as appropriate. In column (4), we address the concern

that there may be selection in the timing of when we observe individuals relative to experiencing

the milestone. In this column, we omit individuals who responded less than three times in each of

the five years before and after the milestone (NLSY) or less than three times in each of the four

waves before and after the milestone (HRS). This reduces our sample by approximately 10-78%,



4
    These results are not reported but are available upon request.


                                                                                                 22
depending on the specific milestones. We estimate quantile regressions at the median and report

the results in column (5). In these specifications, we are unable to use individual fixed effects in

the specifications, so we run these with random effects. We report bootstrapped standard errors

for the quantile regressions. In column (6), we exclude individuals who never experience the

milestone, so that the estimates are driven solely by differences in timing among those who

experience the milestone.

       Across all of these models, our results are generally qualitatively and quantitatively similar.

When we use log wealth as the dependent variable, the coefficients tell us the proportional change

in wealth experienced over 10 years after the given milestone. For example, divorce is associated

with an 83 percent long-run decline in wealth, while homeownership is associated with a 236

percent increase. These results are fairly consistent in both magnitude and statistical significance

to our baseline results, suggesting that the changes in wealth affect those with both low and high

levels of wealth. When we use weights, our results are largely unchanged. The results using a

more balanced panel are similar, though marriage is now associated with a statistically significant

long-run increase in wealth. The results from quantile regressions produce results that are similar

in magnitude to the baseline results, suggesting that our baseline estimates are not being driven by

outliers. Excluding those who never experienced the milestone produces results that differ from

our baseline specification for several of the milestones, indicating that having a population to serve

as a control for economic conditions for those experiencing the milestones has important

implications for the results.

   For the short-run changes in wealth reported in Table 5, we see that the log specification

produces results that provide some evidence that disability, late-life work-limiting health shocks,

and health shocks such as cancer and stroke are associated with immediate short-run changes in




                                                                                                   23
wealth, where our baseline results do not. In addition, the sign for the direction of the short-run

change is flipped for marriage, and the estimated short-run changes for widowhood are statistically

insignificant under the log specification. Running weighted regressions, trimming the samples to

be balanced, running quantile regressions, and excluding those who never experienced the

milestone does not result in statistically different short-run estimates than our baseline

specification. In Table 5, we also report the results of estimating Equation (3) with a quadratic

parametric specification in Column (7). This change produces estimates that are very similar to

our baseline estimates that fit linear functions on each side of the milestone, with the exception of

retirement. Given the patterns in our event study estimates shown in Figure 1, the evidence for

short-run changes in wealth associated with retirement is weak.

V.     DISCUSSION

       Overall, the results in our work are qualitatively consistent with prior findings. For

instance, prior studies show wealth is positively associated with marriage (Zagorsky 2005),

homeownership (Di et al. 2007; Herbert et al. 2013; Killewald and Bryan 2016; Turner and Luea

2009), and retirement (Love et al. 2009), and negatively associated with health problems and

widowhood (Coile and Milligan 2009; Lee and Kim 2008; Ward-Batts 2001). However, since we

examine multiple milestones, we are able to quantify the relative sizes of financial risks associated

with life events. For example, though marriage, family formation, and homeownership often

occurs during similar stages of the lifecycle, homeownership is clearly associated with

substantially more wealth gain than marriage and childbearing. Work-limiting health shocks and

disability during one's prime age can deplete their family wealth. In comparison, health shocks in

later life present a smaller financial risk, as families have already accumulated sufficient financial

cushion.




                                                                                                   24
       In the framework of the lifecycle hypothesis (LCH), which states that individuals aim to

smooth consumption across time and over different states of the world (Friedman 1957; Modigliani

and Brumberg 1954), our results can help identify life stages where various factors prevent

individuals from achieving these goals. These factors include market imperfections such as

incomplete credit markets that prevent individuals from borrowing to invest in education (Lochner

and Monge-Naranjo 2011); frictions in insurance markets that lead to incomplete insurance for

health and disability shocks (Brown and Finkelstein 2011); or adjustment costs that prevent illiquid

wealth from being accessed in response to shocks (Kaplan and Violante 2014). In addition, beliefs

and preferences, such as bequest motives that may limit the amount that people spend down in

retirement (Hurd 1987), or the role of uncertainty (Davies 1981) can influence the ability to smooth

consumption. Finally, behavioral explanations, such as time-inconsistent preferences, mental

accounting, myopia and self-control, may contribute (Laibson 1997; O'Donoghue and Rabin 1999;

Shefrin and Thaler 1988; Thaler 1990, 1994, 1999).

       The LCH would predict that individuals demand insurance for unanticipated shocks such

as disability or health shocks to aid in consumption smoothing. While we analyze wealth and not

consumption, the fact that wealth drops significantly in the long run following these points in the

lifecycle appears to suggest that individuals are not fully insured against these shocks. We also

see that homeownership is associated with large increases in wealth over the long run. While these

results may not be causal, it is important to consider whether homeownership is lower than optimal,

perhaps due to lack of access to credit. Finally, our results do not show strong evidence for

reductions in wealth following retirement. These results are consistent with previous literature

(see De Nardi, et al (2016) for a survey), but also suffer from the fact that our wealth measure does




                                                                                                  25
not include annuitized Social Security wealth as well as wealth in workplace savings plans

(Modigliani, 1986).



VI.      CONCLUSION

      We find strong evidence that certain life milestones are associated with long-run increases in

wealth, while others, including divorce, work-limiting health shocks, and disability are associated

with declines in wealth over the long-run. While our results show that wealth increases over the

long-run after widowhood and retirement, these increases are driven by the fact that our analysis

adjusts for marital status and analyzes per capita wealth (for widowhood) and conversions from

wealth in workplace saving plans to IRAs (for retirement). For most of the milestones we examine,

the changes in wealth are gradual and not sudden.            However, we do find evidence that

homeownership and widowhood are associated with more immediate changes in wealth.

      In our data, marriage, family formation, and homeownership often happen in clusters, and they

are associated with significant wealth accumulation in the long-run. Compared to prior

generations, Millennials and GenZs have showed clear trends of delaying these life milestones,

due to reasons such as more time spent in school, rising mobility, and rising housing costs. The

delay of crucial milestones may translate to a missed opportunity to accumulate wealth if these

individuals are making lower returns on these financial resources in the absence of buying a house.

      Our results vary greatly with population characteristics. Both non-whites and those without a

college education see significantly more negative long-run changes in wealth from their white and

highly-educated counterparts. In some of these cases, such as marriage, childbearing, divorce, and

retirement, the differences are so large that the white and high education populations experience

positive long-run changes in wealth while non-white and less educated populations experience




                                                                                                 26
negative long-run changes in wealth. Those who report being in worse than average health also

experience worse outcomes for almost every milestone we examine. When we stratify the sample

by men and women, we find that increases in wealth upon marriage (and reductions upon divorce)

are concentrated among women, and that women fare worse after widowhood as compared to men.

Our results also indicate that those with more continuous health insurance, access to workplace

pensions and life insurance coverage are able to minimize their losses to wealth. It is important to

note that these results are descriptive, and the heterogeneity in the effects shown may be due to

other factors correlated with insurance coverage. However, our study helps identify the life stages

and individual characteristics associated with large changes in wealth and highlight points in the

life cycle where certain populations are most vulnerable. Our results are also consistent with the

idea that policies that expand health insurance and access to retirement plans through the

Affordable Care Act and the SECURE Act could help mitigate wealth losses surrounding certain

life milestones.

   While changes in wealth may not perfectly correlate with changes in consumption due to

interfamily transfers, in-kind government transfers and capital gains, it is highly likely that

consumption drops during times of large reductions in wealth. To the extent that changes in wealth

are also accompanied by changes in consumption, our results indicate situations where the

consumption-smoothing predictions of lifecycle models do not hold due to either market

imperfections, adjustment costs, or lack of planning. Our findings thus have implications for the

optimal role for policy intervention in many arenas, including the adequacy of social insurance,

the function of private insurance markets, and the role of informational and awareness campaigns.

Examining how the private sector and social insurance design may allow people to be better

protected from financial risks is an important area for future research.




                                                                                                 27
28
VII.   REFERENCES

Bayaz-Ozturk, Gulgun, Richard V. Burkhauser, Kenneth A. Couch, and Richard Hauser. 2018.
      "The Effects of Union Dissolution on the Economic Resources of Men and Women: A
      Comparative Analysis of Germany and the United States, 1985­2013." The ANNALS of
      the American Academy of Political and Social Science 680(1):235­58. doi:
      10.1177/0002716218793608.

Brown, Jeffrey R., and Amy Finkelstein. 2011. "Insuring Long-Term Care in the United States."
      Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(4):119­42. doi: 10.1257/jep.25.4.119.

Coile, Courtney, and Kevin Milligan. 2009. "How Household Portfolios Evolve After
       Retirement: The Effect of Aging and Health Shocks." Review of Income and Wealth
       55(2):226­48. doi: 10.1111/j.1475-4991.2009.00320.x.

Davies, James B. 1981. "Uncertain Lifetime, Consumption, and Dissaving in Retirement."
       Journal of Political Economy 89(3):561­77.

De Nardi, Mariacristina, Eric French, and John Bailey Jones. 2015. Couples' and Singles'
      Savings after Retirement. SSRN Scholarly Paper. ID 2664111. Rochester, NY: Social
      Science Research Network.

De Nardi, Mariacristina, Eric French, and John Bailey Jones. 2016. "Savings After Retirement:
      A Survey." Annual Review of Economics 8(1):177­204. doi: 10.1146/annurev-
      economics-080315-015127.

Di, Zhu Xiao, Eric Belsky, and Xiaodong Liu. 2007. "Do Homeowners Achieve More
       Household Wealth in the Long Run?" Journal of Housing Economics 16(3­4):274­90.

Friedman, Milton. 1957. "A Theory of the Consumption Function."

Herbert, Christopher E., Daniel T. McCue, and Rocio Sanchez-Moyano. 2013. "Is
       Homeownership Still an Effective Means of Building Wealth for Low-Income and
       Minority Households? (Was It Ever?)." Jont Center for Housing Studies. Harvard
       University. HBTL-06 56.

Hurd, Michael D. 1987. "Savings of the Elderly and Desired Bequests." The American Economic
       Review 77(3):298­312.

Jones, John Bailey, Mariacristina De Nardi, Eric French, Rory McGee, and Rachel Rodgers.
        2020. Medical Spending, Bequests, and Asset Dynamics Around the Time of Death.
        Working Paper. 26879. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kaplan, Greg, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2014. "A Model of the Consumption Response to
      Fiscal Stimulus Payments." Econometrica 82(4):1199­1239. doi: 10.3982/ECTA10528.

Killewald, Alexandra, and Brielle Bryan. 2016. "Does Your Home Make You Wealthy?" RSF:
       The Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences 2(6):110­28.


                                                                                            29
Laibson, D. 1997. "Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting." The Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 112(2):443­78. doi: 10.1162/003355397555253.

Lee, Jinkook, and Hyungsoo Kim. 2008. "A Longitudinal Analysis of the Impact of Health
        Shocks on the Wealth of Elders." Journal of Population Economics 21(1):217­30.

Lersch, Philipp M. 2017. "The Marriage Wealth Premium Revisited: Gender Disparities and
       Within-Individual Changes in Personal Wealth in Germany." Demography 54(3):961­83.
       doi: 10.1007/s13524-017-0572-4.

Lochner, Lance J., and Alexander Monge-Naranjo. 2011. "The Nature of Credit Constraints and
      Human Capital." American Economic Review 101(6):2487­2529. doi:
      10.1257/aer.101.6.2487.

Love, David, Michael Palumbo, and Paul A. Smith. 2009. "The Trajectory of Wealth in
       Retirement." Journal of Public Economics 93(1­2):191­208.

Maroto, Michelle. 2018. "Saving, Sharing, or Spending? The Wealth Consequences of Raising
      Children." Demography 55(6):2257­82. doi: 10.1007/s13524-018-0716-1.

Modigliani, F., and R. H. Brumberg. 1954. "Utility Analysis and the Consumption Function: An
      Interpretation of Cross-Section Data." Pp. 388­436 in Post-Keynesian Economics. New
      Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.

O'Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. 1999. "Doing It Now or Later." American Economic
     Review 89(1):103­24. doi: 10.1257/aer.89.1.103.

Poterba, James, Steven Venti, and David Wise. 2011. "The Composition and Drawdown of
       Wealth in Retirement." Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(4):95­118. doi:
       10.1257/jep.25.4.95.

Scholz, John Karl, and Ananth Seshadri. 2007. Children and Household Wealth. SSRN Scholarly
       Paper. ID 1083829. Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network.

Shefrin, Hersh M., and Richard H. Thaler. 1988. "The Behavioral Life-Cycle Hypothesis."
       Economic Inquiry 26(4):609­43. doi: 10.1111/j.1465-7295.1988.tb01520.x.

Tach, Laura M., and Alicia Eads. 2015. "Trends in the Economic Consequences of Marital and
       Cohabitation Dissolution in the United States." Demography 52(2):401­32. doi:
       10.1007/s13524-015-0374-5.

Thaler, Richard H. 1990. "Anomalies: Saving, Fungibility, and Mental Accounts." Journal of
        Economic Perspectives 4(1):193­205. doi: 10.1257/jep.4.1.193.

Thaler, Richard H. 1994. "Psychology and Savings Policies." American Economic Review
        84(2):186­92.




                                                                                             30
Thaler, Richard H. 1999. "Mental Accounting Matters." Journal of Behavioral Decision Making
        12(3):183­206. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1099-0771(199909)12:3<183::AID-
        BDM318>3.0.CO;2-F.

Turner, Tracy, and Heather Luea. 2009. "Homeownership, Wealth Accumulation and Income
       Status." Journal of Housing Economics 18(2):104­14.

Venti, Steven. 2011. "Economic Measurement in the Health and Retirement Study."

Ward-Batts, Jennifer. 2001. Health, Wealth and Gender: Do Health Shocks of Husbands and
      Wives Have Different Impacts on Household Wealth? wp016. University of Michigan,
      Michigan Retirement Research Center.

Zagorsky, Jay. 2005. "Marriage and Divorce's Impact on Wealth." Journal of Sociology.




                                                                                          31
Table 1: Summary statistics, NLSY79 and HRS
                                                 NLSY 79, 1985-2016                  HRS, 1992-2016
                                                 Mean             SD                 Mean            SD
  Age                                            34               9                  67              11.4
  Male                                           51%              0.5                42%             0.49
  Education, <12 yrs                             14%              0.35               26%             0.44
  Education, 12 yrs                              34%              0.47               33%             0.47
  Education, 13-16 yrs                           40%              0.49               31%             0.46
  Education, 17+ yrs                             12%              0.33               10%             0.30
  Race/ethnicity, White                          51%              0.5                71%             0.45
  Race/ethnicity, Black                          28%              0.45               16%             0.37
  Race/ethnicity, Hispanic                       19%              0.39               10%             0.31
  Race/ethnicity, Others                         2%               0.16               3%              0.16
  Family size                                    3.1              1.70
  Live in rural areas                            21%              0.41               .               .
  Live in urban areas                            78%              0.41               .               .
  Rural-urban areas unknown                      1%               0.08               .               .
  Not in MSA                                     18%              0.39               .               .
  MSA, non-central city                          38%              0.48               .               .
  MSA, central city                              22%              0.42               .               .
  MSA, unknown city                              22%              0.41               .               .
  Marital status, Never married                  33%              0.47               4%              0.19
  Marital status, Married                        48%              0.5                63%             0.48
  Marital status, Separated/divorced             18%              0.38               15%             0.36
  Marital status, Widowed                        1%               0.09               19%             0.32
  Health, Excellent                              .                .                  12%             0.32
  Health, Very good                              .                .                  28%             0.45
  Health, Good                                   .                .                  31%             0.46
  Health, Fair                                   .                .                  20%             0.40
  Health, Poor                                   .                .                  9%              0.29
  Family income (equivalence scale)              44,178           71,582             54,230          446,875
  Family net wealth (per capita)                 54,982           133,043            303,328         1,114,791
     Home equity (per capita)                    20,357           74,400             99,920          254,167
     Non-housing wealth (per capita)             34,870           111,090            203,408         958,862
  Number of observations                         122,646                             246,672
  Number of distinct persons                     11,301                              42,032
Note: (1) People in the NLSY79 cohort were born between 1957 and 1964. We include observations whose wealth
measures are available in survey years 1985-1994, 1996, 1998, 2002, 2006, 2010, and 2014. There are 11,301 distinct
individuals and 122,646 person-year records.
(2) The HRS includes people aged 50+ and their spouses regardless of age. There are 42,032 distinct individuals and
246,672 person-year records.
(3) All monetary variables are converted to 2018 constant dollars using CPI-U-RS.
(4) Equivalence-scale means we divide a variable by the square root of household size.
(5) In wealth measures, "per capita" means that if married, we divide the wealth measure by 2.
(6) These samples differ from those used in the estimation due to the omission of individuals who experienced the
milestone prior to the beginning of the study period, and the omission of observations more than 10 years away from
the milestone.




                                                                                                                32
Table 2: Prevalence and timing of life events
 Events                                         % of surveyed who          Median age of reaching event, among
                                                experienced the event      those who experienced the event
                                                during the study period    during the study period
 Life Milestones
  Marriage                                      66%                        27
  Children                                      58%                        29
  Homeownership                                 70%                        31
  Divorce (among who married)                   38%                        35
  Work-limiting health problem (early-life)     35%                        36
  Disability                                    24%                        42
  Retirement (among who worked 10+ years)       44%                        62
  Widowhood (among who married)                 23%                        75
  Work-limiting health problem (late-life)      43%                        72

 Health Shocks
  High blood pressure                           38%                        65
  Diabetes                                      16%                        66
  Cancer                                        12%                        71
  Lung disease                                  9.5%                       69
  Heart disease                                 21%                        71
  Stroke                                        8%                         75
  Psychiatric conditions                        14%                        67
  Arthritis                                     43%                        66

 Cumulative health shocks (among the 8 shocks)
  0                                            41%
  1                                            24%
  2                                            18%
  3                                            11%
  4+                                           7%
Note: Sample excludes people who experienced the event before the study period began, i.e., 1985 in the NLSY79 and
1992 in the HRS.




                                                                                                               33
Table 3: Changes in Family Wealth by Milestone
                                        (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)
                                        Baseline           Long-run           Short-run
                                        Mean and S.D.      Change             change             N
 Early-life Milestones: NLSY 79
  Marriage                              26,752             2,528*             -9,248***          38,377
                                        (68,300)           (1,425)            (1,890)
  Children                              37,044             2,275              -4,191***          39,755
                                        (66,298)           (1,773)            (2,270)
  Homeownership                         21,057             44,394***          23,138***          50,920
                                        (45,759)           (968)              (1,249)
  Divorce                               23,800             -5,461***          8,553***           70,627
                                        (56,213)           (1,605)            (2,629)
  Work-limiting health shock            17,286             -26,688***         3,989              60,095
                                        (47,414)           (1,799)            (2,865)
  Disability                            11,718             -34,629***         96                 70,977
                                        (32,774)           (2,317)            (3,705)
 Late-life Milestones: HRS data
  Retirement                            311,721            18,933***          20,808***          129,276
                                        (784,906)          (7,003)            (9,652)
  Widowhood                             192,965            116,906***         137,089***         120,667
                                        (289,576)          (4,123)            (5,372)
  Work-limiting health shock            280,187            -27,560***         1,644              182,222
                                        (998,640)          (6,065)            (8,598)
 Health shocks: HRS data
  High blood pressure                   306,552            -24,832***         -6,679             132,799
                                        (947,172)          (6,182)            (9,213)
  Diabetes                              232,426            -25,704***         2,991              208,304
                                        (555,235)          (7,536)            (12,627)
  Cancer                                344,110            4,253              15,183             219,472
                                        (1,263,229)        (8,035)            (13,260)
  Lung disease                          245,695            -18,398**          -11,642            222,241
                                        (1,024,694)        (9,371)            (15,564)
  Heart disease                         283,143            -10,402            9,314              197,031
                                        (828,140)          (6,839)            (10,925)
  Stroke                                246,301            -9,676             17,504             230,852
                                        (588,021)          (9,869)            (16,179)
  Psychiatric conditions                215,474            -18,371**          -5,158             207,458
                                        (517,734)          (8,482)            (13,937)
  Arthritis                             274,548            -12,126*           -756               143,092
                                        (616,162)          (7,004)            (10,056)

Note: Sample excludes those who experience the milestone prior to entering the sample, and observations outside the
10-year window surrounding the milestone. Dependent variable is total family wealth. For all milestones, family
wealth is divided by 2, if married. Column (1) summarizes baseline values measured one period before a milestone
(NLSY ­ 1 year; HRS ­ 2 years). Column (2) displays estimates of  from equation (2). Column (3) displays  from
equation (3) using a linear functional form. Numbers in parentheses are standard deviations for column (1) and
standard errors for columns (2) and (3). * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. See text for more details.




                                                                                                                34
Table 4: Alternative Specifications: Long-run Changes in Wealth
                    (1)              (2)          (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)
                    Baseline         Log          Weighted        Balanced         Quantile        Exclude
                    specification    wealth       Regression      Panel            regression      "never"
                                                                                   (median)
 Early-life Milestones: NLSY data
  Marriage           2,528*          1.188***     -3,199**        5,837***         2,623           -10,460***
                     (1,425)         (0.095)      (1,626)         (2,118)          (1,646)         (1,590)
  Children           2,275           -0.09        285             -2,382           2,108           -1,059
                     (1,773)         (0.09)       (1,972)         (2,576)          (1,613)         (1,654)
 Homeownership 44,394***             2.36***      45,958***       41,502***        43,643***       22,637***
                     (968)           (0.0787)     (1,106)         (1,143)          (1,399)         (1,407)
  Divorce            -5,461***       -0.906***    -9,522***       -3,438           -5,494***       6,051**
                     (1,605)         (0.087)      (1,798)         (2,431)          (2,010)         (2,460)
  Work-limiting      -26,688***      -0.630***    -30,791***      -22,607***       -26,517***      2,882
     health shock (1,799)            (0.091)      (2,108)         (2,703)          (1,512)         (2,193)
  Disability         -34,629***      -1.027***    -42,014***      -26,496***       -34,461***      903
                     (2,318)         (0.116)      (2,799)         (3,581)          (2,164)         (2,794)
 Late-life Milestones: HRS data
  Retirement         18,933***       0.12***      28,910***       21,552**         19,186***       21,117***
                     (7,003)         (0.04)       (7,057)         (9,581)          (5,921)         (7,426)
  Widowhood          116,906***      -0.18***     135,945***      114,899***       113,787***      152,671***
                     (4,123)         (0.06)       (4,814)         (5,169)          (3,978)         (6,740)
  Work-limiting      -27,560***      -0.17***     -36,066***      12,764           -26,010***      4,342
     health shock (6,065)            (0.03)       (6,392)         (17,245)         (6,357)         (8,301)

 Health shocks: HRS data
  High blood       -24,832***        -0.08**      -28,965***      -2,868           -24,489***      -1,086
      pressure     (6,182)           (0.03)       (6,873)         (12,985)         (6,255)         (9,089)
  Diabetes         -25,704***        -0.13***     -29,932***      -12,817          -24,643***      -1,547
                   (7,536)           (0.04)       (7,883)         (10,787)         (4,851)         (6,937)
  Cancer           4,253             -0.01        19,832**        3,912            5,621           20,347
                   (8,035)           (0.04)       (8,586)         (33,918)         (11,311)        (19,821)
  Lung disease     -18,398**         -0.18***     -27,584***      -32,500          -18,622         -6,928
                   (9,371)           (0.05)       (10,022)        (50,575)         (15,577)        (24,571)
  Heart disease    -10,402           -0.09**      -15,085**       7,050            -9,109          5,576
                   (6,839)           (0.04)       (7,382)         (22,650)         (5,674)         (12,359)
  Stroke           -9,676            -0.37***     2,855           3,174            -11,611         20,123
                   (9,869)           (0.05)       (11,211)        (18,470)         (10,192)        (13,522)
  Psychiatric      -18,371**         -0.24***     -23,943***      6,915            -17,882***      3,851
     conditions    (8,482)           (0.04)       (9,136)         (12,808)         (4,517)         (7,414)
  Arthritis        -12,126*          0.01         -19,663***      -9,462           -10,400         3,774
                   (7,004)           (0.03)       (7,086)         (20,519)         (6,531)         (9,434)

Notes: Column (1) displays results from Table 3, Column (2). Dependent variable in Column (2) is log(wealth + 1)
if wealth  0, and ­ ln (abs(wealth + 1)) if wealth  0. Column (3) uses survey sampling weights. Column (4) omits
those who responded less than 3 times in each of the 5 years before and after the milestone (NLSY) or less than 3
times in the 4 waves before and after the milestone (HRS). Column (5) excludes those who never experienced a
milestone.




                                                                                                              35
Table 5: Alternative Specifications - Short-run Changes in Wealth
                   (1)              (2)          (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)               (7)
                   Baseline         Log          Weighted        Balanced-        Quantile        Exclude           Quadratic
                   specification    wealth       Regression      panel            regression      "never"
                                                                                  (median)
  Early-life Milestones: NLSY data
   Marriage          -9,248***       0.976***      -11,028***      -9,655***          -8,991***        -9,644***    -10,615***
                     (1,890)         (0.126)       (2,084)         (3,094)            (1,738)          (1,643)      (2,796)
   Children          -4,191*         -0.302**      -4,052          -6,640*            -4,170***        -3,278**     -3,518
                     (2,270)         (0.122)       (2,499)         (3,793)            (1,428)          (1,670)      (3,359)
  Homeownership 23,138***            1.768***      23,651***       18,526***          22,900***        23,894***    22,007***
                     (1,249)         (0.102)       (1,358)         (1,563)            (1,260)          (1,435)      (1,868)
   Divorce           8,553***        -0.527*** 11,374***           3,992              8,323***         5,349**      5,864
                     (2,629)         (0.143)       (2,942)         (4,193)            (2,088)          (2,495)      (4,091)
   Work-limiting     3,989           -0.114        7,067**         3,569              3,625*           2,938        -1,724
     health shock (2,865)            (0.145)       (3,382)         (4,671)            (1,996)          (2,214)      (4,427)
   Disability        96              -0.478**      644             3,644              -157             954          347
                     (3,705)         (0.185)       (4,551)         (6,398)            (2,336)          (2,801)      (5,958)
  Late-life Milestones: HRS data
   Retirement        20,808**        0.08          37,774***       24,761*            21,138***        17,743*      589
                     (9,652)         (0.05)        (9,660)         (14,455)           (7,740)          (9,490)      (16,866)
   Widowhood         137,089***      0.04          155,854***      141,920***         132,859***       147,733***   152,738***
                     (5,372)         (0.08)        (6,232)         (7,440)            (5,139)          (6,920)      (10,777)
   Work-limiting     1,644           -0.14***      -3,250          14,171             1,189            1,654        -6,559
  health shock       (8,598)         (0.04)        (9,141)         (18,113)           (8,268)          (8,785)      (15,471)
  Health shocks: HRS data
   High blood        -6,679          -0.07         -6,205          -9,668             -7,689           -5,467       31,937*
       pressure      (9,213)         (0.05)        (10,273)        (13,643)           (9,293)          (9,661)      (16,712)
   Diabetes          2,991           -0.04         -2,509          -9,011             2,589            1,057        2,176
                     (12,627)        (0.06)        (13,141)        (11,281)           (6,107)          (7,285)      (22,766)
   Cancer            15,183          -0.14**       33,474**        5,766              13,458           14,274       32,558
                     (13,260)        (0.07)        (14,112)        (35,357)           (14,606)         (20,455)     (23,619)
   Lung disease      -11,642         -0.13         -36,758**       -21,020            -13,856          -7,982       41,421
                     (15,564)        (0.08)        (16,628)        (52,694)           (14,953)         (25,612)     (27,971)
   Heart disease     9,314           -0.03         -10,052         21,877             6,605            10,552       -16,577
                     (10,925)        (0.06)        (11,800)        (23,595)           (14,063)         (12,846)     (19,621)
   Stroke            17,504          -0.41***      36,047*         7,556              14,117           17,386       4,015
                     (16,179)        (0.08)        (18,439)        (19,072)           (13,311)         (13,861)     (28,792)
   Psychiatric       -5,158          -0.12*        -9,094          -6,556             -5,376           -2,496       759
      condition      (13,937)        (0.07)        (15,072)        (13,473)           (6,715)          (7,848)      (25,307)
   Arthritis         -756            0.02          1,205           -15,565            -56              875          17,631
                     (10,056)        (0.05)        (10,195)        (21,721)           (9,897)          (10,239)     (18,434)
Notes: Column (1) displays results from Table 3, Column (2). Dependent variable in Column (2) is log(wealth + 1)
if wealth  0, and ­ ln (abs(wealth + 1)) if wealth  0. Column (3) uses survey sampling weights. Column (4) omits
those who responded less than 3 times in each of the 5 years before and after the milestone (NLSY) or less than 3
times in the 4 waves before and after the milestone (HRS). Column (5) excludes those who never experience a
milestone. Column (6) displays results when a quadratic term of relative time is included in the regression.




                                                                                                              36
Figure 1: Wealth Trajectories by Milestone




                                              (a) Early-life milestones




                                              (b) Late-life Milestones

Notes: Plots represent coefficients  in equation (1). Early-life milestones use NLSY79 with per capita wealth and
display results relative to one year before milestone. Late-life milestones use HRS with per capita wealth and display
results relative to one wave (two years) before milestone.




                                                                                                                  37
Figure 2: Long-run Changes in Wealth across Milestones




Notes: Upper figure displays coefficients  from equation (2). Lower figure displays these coefficients divided by
baseline wealth. Baseline wealth represents wealth measured one period before a milestone. Ranges represent 95
percent confidence interval. See text for more details.




                                                                                                              38
Figure 3: Short-run Changes in Wealth across Milestones




Notes: Upper figure displays coefficients D from equation (3) using a linear functional form. Lower figure displays
these coefficients divided by baseline wealth. Baseline wealth represents wealth measured one period before a
milestone. Ranges represent 95 percent confidence interval. See text for more details.




                                                                                                                39
Figure 4: Heterogeneity in Long-run Changes in Wealth across Milestones by
Race/Ethnicity




                                           (A) Long-run changes in wealth




                                           (B) Short-run changes in wealth
Notes: Panel A displays coefficients  from equation (2) for groups separated by observable characteristics. Ranges
represent 95 percent confidence interval. Panel B displays coefficients D from equation (3) with a linear functional
form for groups separated by observable characteristics. See text for more details.




                                                                                                                 40
Figure 5: Heterogeneity in Long-run Changes in Wealth across Milestones by Sex




                                        (A) Long-run changes in wealth




                                       (B) Short-run changes in wealth
   Notes: Panel A displays coefficients  from equation (2) for groups separated by observable characteristics.
   Ranges represent 95 percent confidence interval. Panel B displays coefficients D from equation (3) with a linear
   functional form for groups separated by observable characteristics. See text for more details.




                                                                                                                41
APPENDIX
Table A.1: Heterogeneity analysis
                               Long-run Change                         Short-run Change
                               (1)             (2)                     (3)            (4)
                               1(t  0)         1(t  0) × Interaction   1(t  0)        1(t  0) × Interaction
              A. Interaction = Non-Whites
Marriage                       16,721***       -31,076***              -11,482***      3,460
                               (1,756)         (2,260)                 (2,469)         (3,645)
Children                       12,635***       -26,563***              -4,733*         2,781
                               (2,083)         (2,812)                 (2,823)         (4,551)
Homeownership                  55,354***       -23,993***              21,938***       2,258
                               (1,181)         (1,490)                 (1,615)         (2,449)
Divorce                        6,021***        -24,749***              10,483***       -5,002
                               (2,132)         (3,029)                 (3,540)         (5,241)
Work-limiting health           -13,699***      -23,723***              7,312*          -6,229
  conditions (early-life)      (2,568)         (3,348)                 (4,187)         (5,694)
Disability                     -24,698***      -16,819***              1,884           -3,100
                               (3,495)         (4,430)                 (5,746)         (7,462)
Retirement                     39,778***       -73,591***              26,875**        -20,808
                               (7,681)         (11,149)                (11,319)        (21,256)
Widowhood                      157,211***      -121,950***             173,783***      -110,455***
                               (4,571)         (6,025)                 (6,032)         (10,595)
Work-limiting           health -21,016***      -24,826**               3,509           -5,981
conditions (late-life)         (6,752)         (11,266)                (9,909)         (19,238)
              B. Interaction = No College Education
Marriage                       13,976***       -31,076***              -9,388***       1,002
                               (1,662)         (2,260)                 (2,321)         (3,743)
Children                       13,145***       -31,846***              -4,727*         2,864
                               (2,023)         (2,870)                 (2,768)         (4,601)
Homeownership                  57,399***       -33,400***              25,054***       -4,740*
                               (1,140)         (1,521)                 (1,570)         (2,478)
Divorce                        6,365***        -24,050***              9,576**         -1,672
                               (2,177)         (3,024)                 (3,693)         (5,224)
Work-prohibiting health        -10,554***      -29,849***              5,843           -3,732
  conditions (early-life)      (2,545)         (3,345)                 (4,180)         (5,699)
Disability                     -22,512***      -20,122***              4,095           -6,214
                               (3,559)         (4,465)                 (5,893)         (7,541)
Retirement                     70,402***       -97,506***              29,365**        -16,793
                               (8,757)         (9,969)                 (14,009)        (19,089)
Widowhood                      216,716***      -137,737***             243,260***      -146,641***
                               (5,638)         (5,327)                 (8,447)         (9,413)
Work-limiting           health -2,962          -39,980***              -437            3,997
conditions (late-life)         (8,701)         (10,142)                (13,773)        (17,341)
              C. Interaction = Women
Marriage                       -1,735          9,850***                -16,270***      16,215***
                               (1,730)         (2,269)                 (2,468)         (3,667)
Children                       -1,035          7,979***                -4,128          34
                               (2,112)         (2,770)                 (2,951)         (4,458)
Homeownership                  44,213***       377                     19,046***       8,578***
                               (1,198)         (1,472)                 (1,701)         (2,428)
Divorce                        2,602           -15,196***              14,500***       -10,800**
                               (2,271)         (3,029)                 (3,837)         (5,234)


                                                                                                          42
Work-limiting health              -34,198***   12,860***               2,488        2,238
 conditions (early-life)          (2,669)      (3,375)                 (4,386)      (5,752)
Disability                        -38,209***   6,511                   -3,236       6,061
                                  (3,340)      (4,375)                 (5,475)      (7,379)
Retirement                        29,727***    -19,692*                14,534       10,753
                                  (8,930)      (10,109)                (14,099)     (19,116)
Widowhood                         139,815***   -30,626***              130,195***   9,500
                                  (5,906)      (5,655)                 (8,952)      (9,865)
Work-limiting            health   -21,444**    -10,391                 -5,531       12,214
conditions (late-life)            (8440)       (9,973)                 (13,152)     (17,027)

              D. Interaction = Worse than average health
Marriage                        11,214***       -19,048***             -14,151***   7,739*
                                (1,950)         (2,459)                (2,801)      (4,048)
Children                        9,893***        -17,021**              -4,311       352
                                (2,360)         (2,966)                (3,310)      (4,916)
Homeownership                   54,133***       -17,072***             21,953***    3,089
                                (1,316)         (1,599)                (1,880)      (2,687)
Divorce                         3,677           -17,051***             10,591***    -2,163
                                (2,375)         (3,263)                (4,094)      (5,737)
Work-limiting health            -23,251***      -6,761*                4,059        -1,015
  conditions (early-life)       (3,168)         (3,796)                (5,266)      (6,517)
Disability                      -37,811***      2,884                  -3,176       4,220
                                (4,435)         (5,198)                (7,294)      (8,750)
Retirement                      46,043***       -65,905***             30,029**     -20,869
                                (8,241)         (10,314)               (12,314)     (19,584)
Widowhood                       151,760***      -116,963***            180,381***   -114,867***
                                (5,478)         (6,134)                (8,047)      (10,970)
Work-limiting            health -37,898***      -3,687                 1,011        10,043
conditions (late-life)          (9,547)         (12,864)               (15,076)     (21,887)
              E. Interaction = Heath Insurance observed <90% of time
Marriage                        16,199***       -35,458***             -13,551***   7,855**
                                (1,678)         (2,316)                (2,337)      (3,748)
Children                        16,034***       -40,243***             -4,758*      3,144
                                (2,027)         (2,887)                (2,742)      (4,646)
Homeownership                   56,760***       -31,291***             20,845***    5,661**
                                (1,137)         (1,527)                (1,538)      (2,504)
Divorce                         14,987***       -38,862***             10,680***    -4,255
                                (2,259)         (2,150)                (3,809)      (5,222)
Work-prohibiting health         -3,290          -39,615***             7,243        -6,366
  conditions (early-life)       (2,692)         (3,392)                (4,434)      (5,768)
Disability                      -16,565***      -26,272***             2,210        -3,001
                                (3,976)         (4,697)                (6,503)      (7,871)
Retirement                      34,529***       -66,141***             25,257**     -17,919
                                (7,555)         (12,033)               (10,958)     (22,682)
Widowhood                       137,986***      -109,521***            154,224***   -91,324***
                                (4,356)         (7,365)                (5,718)      (12,827)
Work-limiting health            -22,350***      -28,456**              25           9,883
  conditions (late-life)        (6,546)         (13,458)               (9,419)      (22,475)
              F. Interaction = No work pensions
Retirement                      38,373***       -55,409***             29,368**     -19,430
                                (7,921)         (10,551)               (11,960)     (19,959)
Widowhood                       129,973***      -19,062***             157,517***   -27,737***
                                (5,642)         (5,619)                (8,934)      (9,892)
Work-prohibiting health         -21,071**       -10,642                6,970        -7,349
  conditions (late-life)        (8,870)         (10,614)               (14,320)     (17,770)


                                                                                                  43
               G. Interaction = Spouse never had life insurance
 Retirement                      24,883***          -22,147*                 19,120*        7,925
                                 (7,644)            (11,405)                 (11,255)       (21,485)
 Widowhood                       118,053***         -6,697                   144,177***     -39,166***
                                 (4,283)            (6,744)                  (5,756)        (11,737)
 Work-limiting health            -25,530***         -5,797                   7,306          -16,279
   conditions (late-life)        (7,063)            (10,343)                 (10,675)       (17,510)
Note: Sample excludes those who experience the milestone prior to entering the sample, and observations outside the
10-year window surrounding the milestone. Dependent variable is total family wealth. For all milestones, family
wealth is divided by 2 if married. Columns (1) and (2) report estimates of the long-run change in wealth from a
modified version of equation (2) using the interaction as shown. Columns (3) and (4) report estimates of the short-
run change from a modified version of equation (3) using a linear functional form. Standard errors in parentheses. *
p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. See text for more details.




                                                                                                                 44
Table A.2: Changes in Family Wealth by Milestone: Home Equity
                                         (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)
                                         Baseline           Long-run           Short-run
                                         Mean and S.D.      Change             change             N
 Early-life Milestones: NLSY 79
  Marriage                               6,490              2,868***           524                37,996
                                         (43,440)           (1,113)            (1,471)
  Children                               6,905              4,702***           3,187*             39,581
                                         (113,868)          (1,398)            (1,789)
  Homeownership                          0                  30,472***          22,988***          50,440
                                         (0)                (926)              (1,198)
  Divorce                                6,446              -2,111*            3,731**            70,075
                                         (76,418)           (1,151)            (1,879)
  Work-limiting health shock             3,310              -8,401***          2,405              59,788
                                         (74,168)           (1,333)            (2,117)
  Disability                             5,169              -13,736***         -4,063             70,543
                                         (22,600)           (1,641)            (2,624)
 Late-life Milestones: HRS data
  Retirement                             99,251             2,509              6,164***           129,276
                                         (192,108)          (1,676)            (2,310)
  Widowhood                              73,161             55,802***          64,113***          120,667
                                         (93,519)           (1,459)            (1,901)
  Work-limiting health shock             88,410             -5,731***          1,069              182,222
                                         (217,947)          (1,419)            (2,012)

 Health shocks: HRS data
  High blood pressure                     103,612            -6,947***           -2,317           132,799
                                          (239,271)          (1,723)             (2,568)
   Diabetes                               83,682             -5,670***           3,659            208,304
                                          (144,313)          (1,778)             (2,979)
   Cancer                                 103,007            6,061***            7,911**          219,472
                                          (151,494)          (1,896)             (3,129)
   Lung disease                           78,607             -9,563***           -127             222,241
                                          (190,598)          (2,246)             (3,730)
   Heart disease                          92,940             -1,174              1,280            197,031
                                          (167,302)          (1,601)             (2,558)
   Stroke                                 86,921             -8,998***           -321             230,852
                                          (164,356)          (2,336)             (3,829)
   Psychiatric conditions                 81,515             -9,123***           -6,700**         207,458
                                          (183,503)          (2,052)             (3,373)
   Arthritis                              92,872             -390                2,555            143,092
                                          (159,952)          (1,539)             (2,210)
Note: Sample excludes those who experience the milestone prior to entering the sample, and observations outside the
10-year window surrounding the milestone. Dependent variable is total home equity. For all milestones, family wealth
is divided by 2, if married. Column (1) summarizes baseline values measured one period before a milestone (NLSY ­
1 year; HRS ­ 2 years). Column (2) displays estimates of  from equation (2). Column (3) displays  from equation
(3) using a linear functional form. Numbers in parentheses are standard deviations for column (1) and standard
errors for columns (2) and (3). * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. See text for more details.




                                                                                                                 45
Table A.3: Changes in Family Wealth by Milestone: Non-Housing Wealth
                                        (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)
                                        Baseline           Long-run           Short-run
                                        Mean and S.D.      Change             change             N
 Early-life Milestones: NLSY 79
 Marriage                               20,266             -721               -9,704***          38,377
                                        (63,479)           (1,416)            (1,880)
  Children                              30,143             -2,514             -7,315***          39,755
                                        (125,493)          (1,807)            (2,314)
  Homeownership                         21,057             13,739***          134                50,920
                                        (45,759)           (1,084)            (1,409)
  Divorce                               17,355             -3,559**           4,880*             70,627
                                        (82,400)           (1,546)            (2,533)
  Work-limiting health shock            13,980             -17,967***         1,601              60,095
                                        (92,809)           (1,784)            (2,843)
  Disability                            6,550              -20,707***         3,923              70,977
                                        (26,463)           (2,239)            (3,582)
 Late-life Milestones: HRS data
  Retirement                            212,470            16,424**           14,644             129,276
                                        (690,263)          (6,650)            (9,165)
  Widowhood                             119,804            61,104***          72,977***          120,667
                                        (242,832)          (3,737)            (4,870)
  Work-limiting health shock            191,777            -21,829***         575                182,222
                                        (926,721)          (5,796)            (8,218)
 Health shocks: HRS data
  High blood pressure                    202,940            -17,884***         -4,362            132,799
                                         (835,423)          (5,826)            (8,683)
   Diabetes                              148,744            -20,034***         -668              208,304
                                         (480,848)          (7,180)            (12,030)
   Cancer                                241,104            -1,808             7,272             219,472
                                         (1,219,602)        (7,664)            (12,647)
   Lung disease                          167,088            -8,836             -11,515           222,241
                                         (976,380)          (8,941)            (14,850)
   Heart disease                         190,203            -9,227             8,034             197,031
                                         (763,705)          (6,505)            (10,392)
   Stroke                                159,380            -678               17,825            230,852
                                         (503,105)          (9,416)            (15,437)
   Psychiatric conditions                133,959            -9,248             1,542             207,458
                                         (432,525)          (8,072)            (13,264)
   Arthritis                             181,676            -11,737*           -3,311            143,092
                                         (535,011)          (6,720)            (9,650)
Note: Sample excludes those who experience the milestone prior to entering the sample, and observations outside the
10-year window surrounding the milestone. Dependent variable is total family wealth ­ home equity. For all
milestones, family wealth is divided by 2, if married. Column (1) summarizes baseline values measured one period
before a milestone (NLSY ­ 1 year; HRS ­ 2 years). Column (2) displays estimates of  from equation (2). Column
(3) displays  from equation (3) using a linear functional form. Numbers in parentheses are standard deviations for
column (1) and standard errors for columns (2) and (3). * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. See text for more
details.




                                                                                                                46
Figure A.1.: Wealth Event Study by Milestone: Health Shocks




                                                              47
Figure A.2: Interrelationships between life milestones




                                                         48
Figure A.3.: Heterogeneity in Long-run Changes in Wealth across Milestones by
Education




                                         (A) Long-run changes in wealth




                                         (B) Short-run changes in wealth
  Notes: Panel A displays coefficients  from equation (2) for groups separated by observable characteristics.
  Ranges represent 95 percent confidence interval. Panel B displays coefficients D from equation (3) with a linear
  functional form for groups separated by observable characteristics. See text for more details.




                                                                                                               49
Figure A.4.: Heterogeneity in Long-run Changes in Wealth across Milestones by
Health Status




                                         (A) Long-run changes in wealth




                                          (B) Short-run changes in wealth

  Notes: Panel A displays coefficients  from equation (2) for groups separated by observable characteristics.
  Ranges represent 95 percent confidence interval. Panel B displays coefficients D from equation (3) with a linear
  functional form for groups separated by observable characteristics. See text for more details.




                                                                                                               50
Figure A.5.: Heterogeneity in Long-run Changes in Wealth across Milestones by
Continuous Health Insurance




                                         (A) Long-run changes in wealth




                                         (B) Short-run changes in wealth
  Notes: Panel A displays coefficients  from equation (2) for groups separated by observable characteristics.
  Ranges represent 95 percent confidence interval. Panel B displays coefficients D from equation (3) with a linear
  functional form for groups separated by observable characteristics. See text for more details.




                                                                                                               51
Figure A.6.: Heterogeneity in Long-run Changes in Wealth across Milestones by
Access to Workplace Pensions




                                         (A) Long-run changes in wealth




                                         (B) Short-run changes in wealth
  Notes: Panel A displays coefficients  from equation (2) for groups separated by observable characteristics.
  Ranges represent 95 percent confidence interval. Panel B displays coefficients D from equation (3) with a linear
  functional form for groups separated by observable characteristics. See text for more details.




                                                                                                               52
Figure A.7.: Heterogeneity in Long-run Changes in Wealth across Milestones by
Spousal Life Insurance Ownership




                                         (A) Long-run changes in wealth




                                         (B) Short-run changes in wealth
  Notes: Panel A displays coefficients  from equation (2) for groups separated by observable characteristics.
  Ranges represent 95 percent confidence interval. Panel B displays coefficients D from equation (3) with a linear
  functional form for groups separated by observable characteristics. See text for more details.




                                                                                                               53
