                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         WHAT MATTERS FOR ELECTRIFICATION?
                            EVIDENCE FROM 70 YEARS OF
                             U.S. HOME HEATING CHOICES

                                          Lucas W. Davis

                                       Working Paper 28324
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28324


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2021




I am grateful to seminar participants at UC Berkeley and the University of Wisconsin for helpful
comments and to Pengyu Wang for excellent research assistance. I have not received any
financial compensation for this project nor do I have any financial relationships that relate to this
research. The analysis relies entirely on publicly-available data and all data and code will be
posted on my website upon completion of the project. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Lucas W. Davis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
What Matters for Electrification? Evidence from 70 Years of U.S. Home Heating Choices
Lucas W. Davis
NBER Working Paper No. 28324
January 2021
JEL No. H23,L51,Q41,Q42,Q48,Q54

                                         ABSTRACT

The percentage of U.S. homes heated with electricity has increased steadily from 1% in 1950, to
8%in 1970, to 26% in 1990, to 39% in 2018. This paper investigates the key determinants of this
increase in electrification using data on heating choices from millions of U.S. households over a
70-year period. Energy prices, geography, climate, housing characteristics, and household income
are shown to collectively explain 90% of the increase, with changing energy prices by far the
most important single factor. This framework is then used to calculate the economic cost of an
electrification mandate for new homes. Households in warm states are close to indifferent
between electric and natural gas heating, so would be made worse off by less than $500 annually.
Household in cold states, however, tend to strongly prefer natural gas so would be made worse
off by $3000+ annually. These findings are directly relevant to a growing number of policies
aimed at reducing carbon dioxide emissions through electrification, and underscore the
importance of pricing energy efficiently.


Lucas W. Davis
Haas School of Business
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
ldavis@haas.berkeley.edu
1       Introduction

U.S. households burn vast amounts of fossil fuels on-site for space heating: 2.7 trillion
cubic feet of natural gas, 2.9 billion gallons of heating oil, and 2.5 billion gallons of
propane annually.1 This fossil fuel consumption is the carbon dioxide equivalent of
having 40 million cars on the road.2 Burning fossil fuels also contributes to local
particulate pollution and ozone, as well as to upstream externalities including water
contamination and methane leakage.3

Policymakers are increasingly turning to electrification in an effort to reduce these
externalities. The "electrify everything" movement recently gained attention when
Berkeley CA, became the first city in the United States to ban natural gas on all
new residential construction.4 More than thirty cities in California have now enacted
measures limiting or prohibiting natural gas in new homes, and cities in Washington,
New York, Massachusetts, and Rhode Island have introduced "electric-preferred"
building codes.5

Proponents argue that electrification is critical if the United States is to sharply re-
    1
     U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration, "Energy Consumption and
Expenditure Tables from Residential Energy Consumption Survey", "Table CE4.1 Annual House-
hold Site End-Use Consumption by Fuel in the U.S.--Totals", released May 2018.
   2
     U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration, "Carbon Dioxide Emissions
Coefficients" and U.S. Department of Transportation, "Highway Statistics", "Annual Vehicle Dis-
tance Traveled in Miles and Related Data by Highway Category and Vehicle Type, Table VM-1.
   3
     For water contamination impacts see, e.g. Olmstead et al. (2013) and Llewellyn et al. (2015).
For methane leakage see, e.g, McKain et al. (2015) and Alvarez et al. (2018).
   4
     See, e.g., "All-Electric Movement Picks Up Speed, Catching Some Off Guard," New York Times,
Jane Morgolies, February 4, 2020.
   5
     "To Cut Carbon Emissions, a Movement Grows to `Electrify Everything"', PBS News Hour,
April 17, 2020. "Banning Natural Gas is Out; Electrifying Buildings Is In", S&P Global, Tom
DiChristopher, July 8, 2020.



                                                1
duce carbon dioxide emissions from the building sector.6 The U.S. electricity sector
has become much less carbon-intensive, making this a more viable path to decar-
bonization than even just a few years ago (Holland et al., 2016, 2020). Critics argue
that electric heating costs more than natural gas per unit of heating, so electrification
mandates can be expensive and regressive.7

Mostly missing from this discussion, however, is that home electrification is nothing
new. As this paper documents, the percentage of U.S. homes heated with electricity
has increased steadily from 1% in 1950, to 8% in 1970, to 26% in 1990, to 39% in
2018. This paper uses data on heating choices from millions of U.S. households over
a 70-year period to investigate the key determinants of this increase. The paper
proposes five hypotheses, collects data on all five, and then designs an empirical
framework aimed at testing and quantifying each factor.

Overall, the five factors are shown to explain 90%+ of the increase in electrifica-
tion since 1950. By far, the single most important single factor is energy prices.
Average U.S. residential electricity prices have fallen 58% in real terms since 1950,
while average residential prices for natural gas and heating oil have increased 27%
   6
      A recent study commissioned by the California Energy Commission concluded that, "building
electrification is likely to be a lower-cost, lower-risk long-term strategy compared to renewable
natural gas [e.g. hydrogen]. Furthermore, electrification across all sectors, including in buildings,
leads to significant improvements in outdoor air quality and public health." (Aas et al., 2020). A
report commissioned for the California Air Resources Board includes building electrification among
the "least-regrets" approaches for the state to reach carbon neutrality by 2045, with a "significant
reduction" in residential consumption of natural gas in all scenarios (Mahone et al., 2020). An earlier
report by a sustainability-oriented research and consulting organization found that electrification
of space heating "presents a viable pathway to deep decarbonization" (Billimoria et al., 2018).
    7
      "Should Cities Phase Out Gas Appliances and Require New Buildings to Be All Electric?" Wall
Street Journal, November 19, 2019. "Natural Gas Bans Will Worsen California's Poverty Problem"
Real Clear Energy, Robert Bryce, August 9, 2020.



                                                  2
and 79%, respectively. Heating choices are shown to be highly sensitive to energy
prices such that the change in energy prices can explain 70%+ of the increase in
electrification.

Geography and climate matter too. Electric heating has lower initial capital costs
than other forms of heating, so is preferred by households in warmer climates. Over
this 70-year period there has been a pronounced shift in new housing construction
toward warmer states, and this changing geography can explain 11% of the increase
in electrification. In addition, climate change is making all parts of the United States
more conducive to electric heating, and this factor can explain 4% of the increase in
electrification.

Other factors have only a modest impact. Multi-unit homes are more likely to
use electric heating, so the increased prevalence of multi-unit homes since 1950 can
explain 4% of the increase in electrification. Other housing characteristics like the
number of bedrooms end up less quantitatively important. Finally, higher income
households are found to be slightly less likely to choose electric heating, but the effect
is so small in magnitude that rising incomes since 1950 have essentially zero effect
on electrification.

These data and framework are then used to calculate the economic cost of an elec-
trification mandate for new homes. A discrete choice model is used to calculate the
compensating variation, i.e. how much income households would need to receive to
make them indifferent between the current environment in which they can choose any
heating choice they would like, and an electrification mandate. Households in warm



                                            3
states are close to indifferent between electric and natural gas heating, so would be
made worse off by less than $500 annually. Household in cold states, however, tend
to strongly prefer natural gas so would be made worse off by $3000+ annually.

There are very few existing economic analyses of electrification. I am not aware of
any previous study documenting or attempting to understand this 70-year increase
in U.S. home electrification, nor am I aware of any studies calculating the economic
cost of an electrification mandate. Most previous economic analyses of home heating
were written well before this recent policy interest in electrification, and with quite
different research objectives (Dubin and McFadden, 1984; Dubin, 1985; Mansur et
al., 2008; Davis and Kilian, 2011).

Although there has been little economic analysis of electrification, there are parallels
which can be drawn from recent studies of energy-efficiency. See, e.g. Allcott and
Greenstone (2012), Gillingham and Palmer (2014) and Gerarden et al. (2017) and
references therein. With both electrification and energy-efficiency, supporters advo-
cate for particular investments in order to reduce carbon dioxide emissions and other
externalities from fossil fuels, and research is needed to quantify the cost-effectiveness
of these investments.

The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the data and presents descriptive
statistics on U.S. heating choices, energy prices, new home construction, and climate.
Section 3 presents regression estimates on the determinants of electric heating and
then performs a decomposition analysis, calculating how much of the increase in
electrification can be explained by various factors. Section 4 introduces the discrete



                                            4
choice model and then estimates reservation prices, heating demand, and compen-
sating variation. Section 5 concludes.



2       Data

2.1     Heating Choices

The core dataset for this analysis was compiled using five waves of the U.S. Census:
1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000, along with ten waves of the U.S. American Com-
munity Survey: 2000, 2002, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010, 2012, 2014, 2016, and 2018. All
of these surveys ask respondents about their primary form of home heating. The
key question asks "Which fuel is used most for heating this house?".8 These data
also provide information on the age of the home, household income, housing char-
acteristics, and the state of residence. Census and ACS sampling weights are used
throughout the analysis. See Ruggles et al. (2020) for details.

Figure 1 shows the growth in electric heating 1950-2018. Only 1% of U.S. households
in 1950 used electricity as their primary heating fuel.9 By 1960, this had increased
to 2%, led by Washington, Oregon, Nevada, and Tennessee, four states that had
access to cheap Federal electricity via the Bonneville Power Administration and the
Tennessee Valley Authority. By 1970, 8% of U.S. households used electricity as their
    8
      The home heating question is not asked to respondents in group quarters (e.g. correctional
facilities, nursing homes, college dormitories) so these individuals are excluded from all analyses.
    9
      The 1950 map is constructed somewhat differently from the map for subsequent years. The
home heating question was introduced with the 1960 Census. Therefore, the 1950 map was con-
structed using homes in the 1960 census which were at least ten years old. This is a bit less accurate
as it misses homes that were retrofitted with a new form of primary heating between 1950 and 1960.



                                                  5
primary form of heating. Electric heating became more common in southern states
like Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, and North Carolina, as well as in Western states
like Nevada, Arizona, Idaho, and Oregon.

Electric heating reached 18% in 1980, 26% in 1990, 30% in 2000, 35% in 2010, and
39% in 2018. There is a clear geographic pattern. Perhaps most strikingly, the
maps show how electricity has grown to become the dominant form of heating in the
Southeast, 50%+ throughout the region and 90%+ in Florida. Electric heating is
also prevalent throughout the West and Midwest, particularly in the Pacific North-
west where rich hydroelectric resources contribute to lower than average residential
electricity prices.

These heating choices have significant implications for energy consumption and car-
bon dioxide. The United States is a relatively cold country, so heating is by far
the most important component of total household energy consumption. Adding up
across all fuel types, U.S. households use annually an estimated 3.9 quadrillion Btus
for space heating, compared to 1.7 quadrillion Btus for water heating, 0.7 quadrillion
Btus for air conditioning, and 0.3 quadrillion Btus for refrigerators.10 Overall, space
heating is responsible for 43% of U.S. household energy consumption.11
  10
     U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration, "Energy Consumption and
Expenditure Tables from Residential Energy Consumption Survey", "Table CE2.1 Annual House-
hold Site End-Use Consumption in the U.S.--Totals", released May 2018.
  11
     Ibid.




                                            6
2.2    Energy Prices

Residential prices for electricity, natural gas, and heating oil by state and year were
compiled from various sources. Prices from 1950-1969 come from Edison Electric
Institute (1950-1969), American Gas Association (1950-1969), and Platts Oil (1950-
1969). Data from after 1970 come from U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Informa-
tion Administration (1970-2018). Prices are average annual revenue from residential
sales. Utilities and other retailers report energy sales and revenue by customer class,
and average residential prices are calculated by dividing total residential revenue by
total residential sales. Prices include all relevant taxes and, where appropriate, de-
livery charges. All prices throughout the paper have been normalized to reflect year
2020 dollars.

Figure 2 plots residential energy prices by state. Data series are labeled for the four
most populous U.S. states. As mentioned earlier, average residential electricity prices
have fallen 58% in real terms since 1950, while average residential prices for natural
gas and heating oil have increased 27% and 79%, respectively.

There is considerable variation in electricity and natural gas prices, both over time
and across states. For heating oil, there is considerable variation over time, but little
variation across states. See Appendix Figure 1 for maps of residential average energy
prices as of 2018. The model is identified using both forms of variation. Results are
reported from specifications with and without region- and division- fixed effects and
with and without year fixed effects to assess how parameter estimates differ using
alternative sources of identifying variation.



                                           7
Potential price endogeneity is mitigated in this context. Residential energy prices
tend to be driven by supply-side factors, for example, natural advantages in hydro-
electric and other forms of electricity generation, natural gas price regulation and
deregulation, and technological advances in oil and natural gas production like hy-
draulic fracturing. In addition, to the extent there are demand shocks to heating
system choices, only a small fraction of households make a heating system choice in a
given year, so such shocks would be unlikely to meaningfully impact total energy de-
mand or market prices. It is worth highlighting also that both electricity and natural
gas are delivered by regulated utilities so prices are determined using rate-of-return
regulation.


2.3     Heating Degree Days

Heating degree days (HDDs) by state and year since 1950 come from NOAA (2020).
HDDs are often used as a summary measure for heating demand as they reflect both
the number of cold days as well as the intensity of cold on those days.12 The HDDs
from NOAA are population weighted to reflect the within-state distribution of where
people live, and adjusted to account for artificial effects introduced into the climate
record by instrument changes, station relocation, and other factors.

Heating system choices are made based on expected long-run climatological condi-
tions, not year-to-year variation in HDDs. Therefore, rather than use these raw
data, the analyses which follow use fitted values from a linear time trend estimated
   HDDs are calculated as the sum of daily mean temperatures in Fahrenheit below 65 F. For
  12

example, a day with an average temperature of 55 F has ten HDDs, whereas a day with an average
temperature of 75 F has zero HDDs.


                                              8
separately by state. Figure 3 describes the change in annual HDDs between 1950
and 2019. On average, HDDs decreased by 10% between 1950 and 2019. In absolute
terms the HDD decreases are larger in the North. For example, Minnesota had 9,300
HDDs in 1950 and 8,400 HDDs in 2019, for a decrease of 900 HDDs. Florida, in
contrast, had 800 HDDs in 1950 and 600 HDDs in 2019, for a decrease of 200 HDDs.
See Appendix Figure 2 for maps showing average HDDs by decade.


2.4    Estimation Sample

The merged dataset is restructured to describe heating system choices at the time
each home was constructed. The rationale for the focus on relatively new homes is
that there is considerable inertia in these heating system choices. When a new home
is built, a choice must be made as to whether the home is heated with electricity
or some other heating fuel. Later on a home can be retrofitted, for example, from
heating oil to natural gas, but the timing of these retrofits is less clear and not
observed in our data. Most of the policy interventions currently being discussed
are primarily focused at new homes, providing further motivation for the focus on
choices at the time of construction.

In particular, the sample is restricted to homes built in the last 10 years as of the
time of each survey. For example, from the 1960 Census, the sample is restricted
to homes built during the 1950s. While the 1970 Census and later Censuses also
includes homes built in the 1950s, these observations are excluded because these
homes are more likely to have been retrofitted. Focusing on these initial heating
system choices makes it possible to to confidently match each observation to energy

                                         9
prices, climate, and other factors at the time the choice was made.

Recent waves of the ACS provide the exact age for newer homes. However, a limita-
tion of the early waves of the ACS and all waves of the census is that they instead
provide a discrete range for age. For homes built in the last 10 years, there are
typically three categories: 0-1 year, 2-5 years, and 6-10 years. These homes are as-
signed to specific construction years based approximately on the midpoint of each
age range. Specifically, homes 0-1 years old are assumed to be 1 year old, homes
2-5 years old are assumed to be 4 years old, and homes 6-10 years old are assumed
to be 8 years old. This assignment matters because it determines the energy prices
and heating degree days to which each observation is matched. For a given state,
energy prices and heating degree days change slowly year-to-year, however, so this
imperfect assignment introduces only a small amount of measurement error.


2.5    Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 reports descriptive statistics. The estimation sample includes 4.2 million
total observations. Panel (A) describes the dramatic increase in electric heating
over this time period. The overall pattern is similar to Figure 1, though the table
describes the "flow" (i.e. new homes built in each decade) rather than the "stock"
(i.e. all homes as of a particular year). The percentage of new homes heated with
electricity increases from 4% during the 1950s to 53% during the 2010s.

Panels (B) and (C) show residential energy prices and HDDs. Changes over time
in these averages reflect both time-series variation and changes in where new homes



                                        10
are being constructed. For example, HDDs in Panel (C) decrease more rapidly than
in Figure 3 because they reflect climate change as well as a relative increase in new
home construction in warmer states. See Panel (D). Finally, Panel (E) shows changes
in household demographics and housing characteristics. Perhaps most notably this
shows the large increase in average household income since the 1950s.

All five hypotheses are at least partly visible in Table 1: (1) changing energy prices,
(2) increased home construction in warmer states, (3) climate change, (4) changing
housing characteristics, and (5) rising household incomes. What descriptive statis-
tics cannot reveal however, is the relative contribution of these different factors to
U.S. home electrification. The following section therefore turns to regression and
decomposition analyses to quantify the relative magnitudes.



3     The Determinants of Electric Heating

3.1    Energy Prices

Table 2 reports coefficient estimates and standard errors from six separate least
squares regressions. In all six regressions the dependent variable is an indicator
variable for homes for which electricity is the primary form of heating. Later in
the paper, Section 4 introduces a discrete choice model, but for these regression
and decomposition analyses, the linear probability model is preferred because it is
particularly easy-to-interpret and makes fewer assumptions. Estimates are reported
for specifications with and without year fixed effects, and with and without region-,
and division- fixed effects.

                                          11
The most striking feature of Table 2 is the pronounced negative relationship between
electricity prices and electrification. In column (6), for example, a 10% increase in
electricity prices decreases electric heating by 4.2 percentage points. This is a large
effect. In 2018, residential electricity prices ranged from 9.6 cents in Louisiana to 21.6
cents in Massachusetts, a difference of 0.81 log points. The model implies that, ceteris
paribus, an increase in electricity prices of this magnitude would decrease electric
heating by 32 percentage points.13 The estimated coefficients on electricity prices are
similar across columns and statistically significant at the 1% level throughout.

Natural gas and heating oil prices matter too. These cross-price effects are expected
to be positive and the point estimates are indeed positive in most cases. In column
(6), for example, 10% increases in natural gas and heating oil prices increase electric
heating by 2.1 and 0.6 percentage points, respectively. The estimated coefficients
on natural gas prices are consistently positive and statistically significant at the 1%
level, ranging from 0.15 to 0.29. The estimated coefficients on heating oil prices are
smaller in magnitude and mostly not statistically significant.

These regressions are a reduced-form characterization of an intertemporal decision
in which households are making a tradeoff between capital and operating costs.
Economists have long pointed out that demand for energy is derived from demand
for household services (Hausman, 1979; Dubin and McFadden, 1984) with technology
  13
    In related work, several previous studies estimate the short-run price elasticity of demand for
electricity. See, e.g., Reiss and White (2005), Reiss and White (2008) and Ito (2014). The short-
run price elasticity of demand primarily reflects changes in the intensity of usage, not changes
in technology. Other studies have looked explicitly at technology changes. For example, Sahari
(2019) finds that when electricity prices rose in Finland 2006-2011, households substituted away
from electric heating and toward wood heating and ground source heat pumps.



                                                12
choices and demand for energy determined jointly as the solution to a household
production problem (Davis, 2008; Rapson, 2014).14 No utility is derived from a
heating system itself, but households value thermal comfort which is produced in
part with a heating system.

This specification assumes that what matters for heating system choices is current
energy prices. This assumption is natural when energy prices are well approximated
by a random walk and changes in energy prices are unpredictable. This is a rea-
sonable assumption in many contexts (Anderson et al., 2013), although a case could
be made that the steady decreases in real electricity prices during the 1950s and
1960s could have been anticipated by some households. Although the specifications
in Table 2 do not incorporate such expectations, it is worth noting that the estimates
are similar with- and without year fixed effects, implying that the estimates are not
unduly sensitive to controls for this year-to-year pattern.


3.2     Other Covariates

There are several other notable estimates in Table 2. First, income has only a very
small impact on adoption of electric heating. Higher income households are slightly
less likely to choose electric heating. Across all eight specifications the point estimate
is negative and statistically significant, but in all cases very small in magnitude.
  14
    A question which arises in this context is whether households are "myopic" when they make
technology investments. Early work by Hausman (1979) and Dubin and McFadden (1984) found
heating and cooling choices consistent with high implied discount rates, perhaps indicating infor-
mation problems or other market failures, but more recent work has tended to find lower discount
rates (Myers, 2019). There is also an analogous literature on automobile purchases (see, e.g. Busse
et al., 2013; Allcott and Wozny, 2014).



                                                13
For example, in column (6) the exact point estimate is -0.0002, indicating that an
additional $100,000 in annual household income decreases electric heating by only 2
percentage points.

The negative coefficient on income is a bit surprising. Electric heating is cleaner
than other forms of heating, with no on-site combustion or on-site emissions. Also
with electric heating there is no furnace repair, no storage tank, and no need to
schedule fuel deliveries as one must do with heating oil. But regardless of the exact
explanation, this lack of sensitivity to income implies that income growth over this
time period is unlikely to explain more than a very small amount of the increase in
electrification. Higher-income households appear to view these tradeoffs with electric
heating approximately in the same way as lower-income households.

Second, heating degree days have a strong negative effect. In column (6) an ad-
ditional 1000 HDDs decreases electric heating by 6 percentage points. This is a
large effect. For example, current HDDs in Minnesota and Florida are 8,400 and
600, respectively. Thus the coefficient on HDDs imply that, everything else equal,
households in Minnesota are 47 percentage points less likely to choose electric heat-
ing than households in Florida. Households in cold climates tend not to choose
electricity because of the high price per unit of heating.

Third, housing characteristics matter. Homes with 4- and 5- bedrooms are con-
siderably less likely to be electric ­ whereas mobile homes, attached homes, and,
multi-unit homes are more likely to be electric. This pattern makes sense because
of economies-of-scale in forced air heating. Many new multi-unit buildings use elec-



                                          14
tricity because it less capital-intensive and because shared walls imply lower overall
heating demand.

Finally, rented homes are more likely to have electric heat. This is consistent with
the "landlord-tenant problem". See, e.g. Gillingham et al. (2012). In particular,
landlords have an incentive to buy inexpensive inefficient appliances when their ten-
ants pay the utility bill. Although investments in more expensive technologies could,
in theory, be passed on in the form of higher rents, it may be difficult for landlords
to effectively convey this information to prospective tenants.


3.3     Decomposition Analysis

How much of the increase in electrification since 1950 can be explained by the five
different hypotheses? As documented earlier, there has been a steady increase in
the percentage of new homes heated with electricity. This section uses the estimates
from the linear probability model to perform a decomposition analysis. The results
from column (6) of Table 2 are used as the baseline specification, with results from
alternative specifications reported for robustness.

The decomposition is performed as follows: (1) Choose one hypothesis and set the
corresponding variables equal to 1950s levels. (2) Allow all other variables to evolve
as they actually did over the period 1950-2018. (3) Predict electrification over the
entire time period. (4) Compare predicted outcomes to actual outcomes. (5) Repeat
the process for the other hypotheses.15
  15
   A Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition probably does not make sense in this context. With Blinder-
Oaxaca, the difference in means between two groups is decomposed into the parts that are due to



                                              15
Figure 5 plots the results of this decomposition. There are five panels, one for each
hypothesis. The black line is the same in each panel ­ in each case plotting actual
outcomes, i.e. the percentage of new homes in each year heated with electricity. The
orange line differs across panels ­ in each case plotting predicted outcomes, holding
fixed a different set of variables. For both the actual and predicted outcomes, a
modest amount of smoothing has been applied to allow us to concentrate on the
main overall pattern rather than idiosyncratic year-to-year fluctuations.

The single most important factor is energy prices. As the first panel illustrates, when
energy prices are held fixed at 1950s levels, there is dramatically less adoption of
electric heating during this 70-year period. Residential electricity prices fell sharply
in real terms over this period, while residential natural gas and heating oil prices
increased significantly. Had these changes not occurred, the model predicts that
there would have been dramatically less electrification over this period.

Geography matters too. As shown earlier, there has been a pronounced shift in new
housing construction toward warmer states. If one instead holds the distribution of
population fixed at 1950s levels, the model predicts considerably less electrification
over this time period.

Housing characteristics, climate, and income all have smaller impacts. The increased
prevalence of multi-unit homes has worked to increase electrification, while the trend
differences in the mean values of the covariates, group differences in the effects of the covariates, and
an unexplained component. This approach is less well-suited to explaining electrification because
the groups are time periods so it would be necessary to somewhat arbitrarily select a "beginning"
and "end" rather then attempting to explain the entire 70-year trajectory. In addition, with Blinder-
Oaxaca the regressions are estimated separately by group, whereas for identification purposes it
makes more sense in the electrification context to estimate a single integrated regression.


                                                   16
toward larger homes works against electrification. Climate change has increased
electrification, but the magnitude of the effect is modest. Finally, the large increase
in average household income over this period is shown to have essentially zero effect
on the increase in electrification.

Table 3 summarizes the results of the decomposition. The five factors explain 100%
of the increase in electrification since 1950. Energy prices play a dominant role,
explaining 82% of the increase. The changing geographic distribution of new home
construction explains 11%. Housing characteristics, climate, and income all have
modest impacts.


3.4    Alternative Specifications

The results from the decomposition analysis are similar with alternative specifications
of the linear probability model. See Table 4. Alternatives that were considered
include using specifications from different columns in Table 2, more flexible functions
of household income and HDDs, and specification including a lag and a lead for
electricity prices. The latter specification is aimed at relaxing the assumption that
choices are made only on the basis of current prices. See Appendix Table 1 for
additional details. Overall, results are quite similar across specifications, with energy
prices explaining 70%+ of the increase in electrification throughout.

A couple of alternative specifications merit additional discussion. The instrumental
variables specification is motivated by potential concerns about price endogeneity. As
discussed earlier, there are several reasons why residential energy prices are unlikely



                                           17
to be driven by demand-side factors. Nonetheless, it is reassuring that the decompo-
sition results are largely unchanged when prices are instrumented using lagged prices,
crude oil prices, and wholesale-level natural gas and coal prices. See Appendix Table
2 for additional details.

Lastly, the specification excluding Northeastern states is motivated by potential con-
cerns about the availability of natural gas. Previous work has shown that natural
gas shortages from price controls were heavily concentrated in the Northeast (Davis,
2008). Between 1974 and 1978, for example, shortages precluded some households in
Massachusetts from installing natural gas heating systems (Myers, 2019). Nonethe-
less, results are quite similar when predictions are compared only for the other three
Census regions, implying that the results are not driven by the experience in the
Northeast.



4     The Cost of an Electrification Mandate

4.1    Background

In this section, these data and framework are used to calculate the economic cost of
an electrification mandate for new homes. As mentioned in the introduction, more
than thirty jurisdictions in California, Washington, New York, Massachusetts, and
Rhode Island have introduced natural gas bans, "electric-preferred" building codes,
and other mandates aimed at requiring or strongly encouraging households to use
electric heat.



                                         18
What would be the economic cost of an electrification mandate? The analysis in this
section uses compensating variation to measure the change in consumer welfare from
requiring households to choose electric heating. That is, how much income would
households need to receive to make them indifferent between the current environment
in which they can choose any heating system they would live and an electrification
mandate?

A discrete choice model of residential heating is used for this analysis. The data and
key variables are identical to the linear probability model described early. However,
the discrete choice model makes a functional form assumption about the error term
and other additional assumptions which make it possible to calculate the compen-
sating variation in dollars. The modeling choices in this section are informed by a
long history of economists using discrete choice models to describe household-level
energy decisions, whether it be for air conditioning (Hausman, 1979), space heating
(Dubin and McFadden, 1984; Dubin, 1985), or vehicles (Berry et al., 1995; Petrin,
2002; Bento et al., 2009).

In evaluating mandates for new homes, this analysis is also related to an existing
literature on building codes. This literature has primarily focused on measuring
the benefits of building codes, i.e. quantifying the energy savings from building
codes (Aroonruengsawat et al., 2012; Jacobsen and Kotchen, 2013; Levinson, 2016;
Kotchen, 2017). With electrification mandates the benefits can be relatively eas-
ily quantified using the carbon content of various fuels, but the costs are poorly
understood.



                                         19
4.2    Modeling Assumptions

Households are assumed to choose which heating system to purchase by evaluating
the following indirect utility function:


                           uij = 0j + 1j pij + 2j xi +     ij ,                   (1)


where uij is the utility for household i of heating system j . Since 2010, 90%+ of
households choose electricity or natural gas for their primary heating system so the
choice set is restricted to include only those two choices, j  {e, g } where e and g
denote electric and natural gas heating systems, respectively. Preferences for heating
system j depend on energy prices pij , and a function of household characteristics
xi .

Households choose electric heating if uie > uig . Only differences in utility matter,
so 0g and 2g are normalized to zero. Natural gas is thus selected as the baseline
category and coefficients 0e and 2e can be interpreted relative to natural gas.
Thus the indirect utility functions for electricity and natural gas can be expressed
as follows:
                           uie = 0e + 1e pie + 2e xi +     ie ,                   (2)

                                   uig = 1g pig +   ig .                          (3)


The parameter 0e reflects the relative desirability of electric heating system, incor-
porating heating-system specific factors such as purchase and installation costs as
well as preferences for particular heating systems that are common across house-

                                           20
holds. The parameters 1e and 1g reflect households' willingness to trade off the
price per unit of energy against other heating system characteristics, and the param-
eter vector 2e describes interactions between household characteristics and heating
system alternatives. This specification allows households living in cold climates to
prefer natural gas heating systems, for example. Finally, the error terms,   ie   and   ig ,

capture unobserved differences across households' preferences for particular heating
systems.

The error terms are assumed to be identically and independently distributed across
households and heating systems with a type 1 extreme value distribution. Under this
assumption, the probability that household i selects electricity e takes the well-known
conditional logit form,

                                 exp{0e + 1e pie + 2e xi }
                  P rie =                                                               (4)
                            exp{0e + 1e pie + 2e xi } + exp{1g pig }

and the heating-system choice model can be estimated using maximum likelihood.
In estimating the heating system choice model, the sample is restricted to homes
built within the last ten years of ACS samples 2000, 2002, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010,
2012, 2014, 2016, and 2018.


4.3    Heating System Choice Estimates

Table 5 reports coefficient estimates and standard errors from the heating system
choice model. As expected, the coefficient estimates on prices are both negative.
That is, higher electricity prices make electric heating less desirable, and higher


                                           21
natural gas prices make natural gas heating less desirable.

The overall tenor of the other estimates is very similar to the results from the linear
probability model. For example, household income continues to not matter much,
whereas heating degree days have a pronounced negative impact on the desirability
of electric heating. Similarly, electric heating is less desirable for four- and five-
bedroom homes, and more desirable for rental homes, mobile homes, and multi-unit
homes.

Figure 6 confirms that the predictions from the discrete choice model match closely
the geographic pattern of electric heating. Panels (A) and (B) plot the actual and
predicted proportions of households in each state selecting electric heating. Overall,
there is close correspondence with low proportions of electric heating throughout
the midwest and northeast, somewhat higher proportions throughout the west, and
considerably higher proportions in the southwest and, in particular, in Florida.


4.4       Calculating Reservation Prices

The reservation price pi is defined as the price of electricity which makes household

i indifferent between the two choices. Equating uie with uig and solving for pi

yields,
                              1g pig - 0e - 2e xi + (      ig   -   ie )
                       pi =                                                .          (5)
                                           1e

Thus the reservation price is a function of the price of natural gas pig , household
characteristics and heating degree days xi , model parameters 1e , 1g , 0e , and 2e ,
and the error terms,   ie   and   ig .   For each of the more than one million households

                                               22
in the sample, error terms   ie   and   ig   are drawn from the extreme value distribution.
These error terms are then used to calculate a reservation price for pi for each

household.

Figure 7 plots average reservation prices by state. A household with a reserva-
tion price above their actual electricity price chooses electric heat, whereas a house-
hold with a reservation price below their actual electricity price chooses natural gas.
Households in warm states tend to have high reservation prices so would prefer elec-
tric heat even when facing relatively high electricity prices. Households in cold states,
however, require much lower or even negative electricity prices to be induced to select
electric heating systems.


4.5    Heating Demand Function

U.S. households differ widely with regard to how much heat they consume. Climate
conditions play a central role in these differences but housing characteristics, house-
hold demographics, income, and other factors matter as well. This section describes
the approach used to estimate heating demand. The goal is to predict heating de-
mand (in kilowatt hours) for all households in the sample. These predictions are
then used in the following section to calculate compensating variation.

Both the Census and the ACS ask respondents how much they spend on electricity
and natural gas. Although electricity is used for a wide-array of end uses, natural gas
is used mostly for space and water heating. Accordingly, natural gas expenditures are
used to construct the dependent variable for the heating demand function.In partic-



                                                23
ular, natural gas consumption in MMBTU (millions of Btu) is calculated by dividing
natural gas expenditure by the price of natural gas in that state and year.

In estimating the heating demand function, the sample is restricted to homes built
within the last ten years of ACS samples 2000, 2002, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010, 2012,
2014, 2016, and 2018. This is the same restriction imposed for the heating system
choice model in 4.2. In addition, the sample is further restricted to include only
homes heated primarily with natural gas, to exclude homes reporting natural gas
expenditure only for water heating, for example.

Table 6 reports coefficient estimates and standard errors. As expected, heating
degree days are a strong determinant of heating demand. In addition, larger homes
tend to use more heat, and multi-unit homes tend to use less heat. Household size
and household income also influence heating demand. These estimates are used to
predict heating demand for all households in the broader sample, including homes
heated with natural gas as well as homes heated with electricity.

Appendix Figures 4 and 5 provide additional detail. Maps are presented showing
state-level averages for predicted annual heating demand in MMBTU, as well as
for predicted annual heating demand in kilowatt hours. This conversion is made
assuming 100% efficiency for electric heating, 60% efficiency for natural gas heating16 ,
and that each MMBTU is equal to 293 kilowatt hours. Finally, the figures also report
  16
     Typical efficiency for a natural gas furnace is around 80%. See e.g. Navigant Consulting
"Residential End Uses: Historical Efficiency Data" Prepared for U.S. Energy Information Admin-
istration, 2015. In addition, with a forced air heating system there are additional 10 to 30 percent
losses in the ducts which do not occur with electric resistance heating. See U.S. Energy Information
Administration, "Duct Insulation: Heating and Cooling System Improvements", Accessed online
December 2020.


                                                24
the implied annual expenditure for electric heating, based on electricity prices in each
state.


4.6      Compensating Variation

Finally, compensating variation in dollars is calculated for each household,


                 CVi = max{$0, (pie - pi )  Annual Consumptioni }.                   (6)


where Annual Consumption is predicted annual electricity consumption for heating
from the previous subsection.

Compensating variation is zero for households with a reservation price above their
actual electricity price, i.e. p > pie . These households are unaffected by an electrifi-
cation mandate because they already prefer electric heating. For households with a
reservation price below their actual electricity price, compensating variation depends
on pie , p , and AnnualConsumption. The higher the current electricity price faced
by a household, pie , the more that household must receive to be indifferent between
the current environment and an electrification mandate. Similarly, the lower the p ,
the more the household prefers natural gas, and thus the more that household must
receive. Finally, the higher the overall level of consumption, Annual Consumption,
the more the household must receive.

Figure 8 illustrates the geographic pattern of compensating variation. For each state,
the map describes the average annual income each household must receive to make
them indifferent between the current environment and an electrification mandate.

                                           25
Appendix Table 3 presents the same information in table form.

Households in warm states like Florida, Texas, and throughout the Southeast are
close to indifferent between electric and natural gas heating, so would be made worse
off by less than $500 annually on average. Households in Florida, for example, al-
ready tend to select electric heating so the average compensating variation is only
$85. Because it is more temperate, the west coast also tends to have lower lev-
els of compensating variation: $1100 in California, $1000 in Oregon, and $1200 in
Washington.

Household in cold states, however, tend to strongly prefer natural gas so would
be made worse off by $2000+ annually on average by an electrification mandate.
This includes relatively populous states like Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Illinois. In
particularly cold states like New York, Massachusetts, and Michigan, willingness-
to-pay is above $3000+ annually. Finally, in Maine, Vermont, and New Hampshire
average willingness-to-pay is above $4,000 on average.

These maps obscure considerably heterogeneity within states. For example, one of
the findings from the analysis is that multi-unit homes are considerably more likely to
use electricity. From a compensating variation perspective, these multi-unit homes
are low hanging fruit for electrification mandates because these housing units are
already good candidates for electricity. On the opposite end of the spectrum, larger
for homes (e.g. 4+ bedrooms) are considerably less likely to use electricity, and thus
households in these homes have a higher willingness-to-pay to avoid an electrification
mandate.



                                          26
4.7     Discussion

Before proceeding, it is important to note several caveats. First, these estimates
depend on the parametric assumptions of the model. The conditional logit model
makes strong assumptions about the functional form for the error term, for example.
In addition, the model makes strong parametric assumptions about uij being linear
in prices and other covariates. To the extent that these assumptions are violated,
the estimates of compensating variation will be biased.

Second, the model is estimated using historical data, and thus cannot speak to how
these tradeoffs will be affected in the future by technological change. Over this
time period, there has been relatively little technological innovation in natural gas
or conventional electric heating. However, electric heat pumps have become more
energy-efficient and are expected to continue becoming more energy-efficient in the
future.17 Proponents of electrification argue that heat pumps can be cost-effective
for many households, particularly in warmer parts of the United States where heat
pumps can operate more efficiently.

Third, no attempt has been made to explicitly model household demand for cooking,
hot water heating, or other end uses. In part, this reflects data limitations. Since
1980, neither the Census nor ACS collect data on fuels used for cooking or water
heating. That said, the focus on electrification of space heating makes sense given
  17
    Kaufman et al. (2019) assume a 30% increase in energy-efficiency (COP) for air source electric
heat pumps between now and mid 2030s. Whereas electric resistance heating converts electricity
into heat, a heat pump uses electricity to move heat from a cool space to a warm space, and thus
can be used for both heating and cooling. Heat pumps have become more energy-efficient along
with refrigerators and other compressor-based appliances.




                                               27
that this is by far the largest component of on-site fossil fuel consumption. Moreover,
many households view these as bundled choices, for example, selecting natural gas
for both space and water heating.18 To the extent that these decisions are bundled
or at least highly correlated choices then the model and estimates of compensating
variation can be viewed as measuring willingness-to-pay for the entire bundle.



5      Conclusion

Policymakers are increasingly turning to building electrification to reduce carbon
dioxide emissions and other negative externalities. Missing from this discussion,
however, is that electrification has already been happening in some sectors. This pa-
per focuses on an important sector where electrification has already been happening,
mostly without any policy intervention, over the last 70 years.

The core dataset for this analysis was compiled using household-level energy choices
from millions of U.S. households in the Census and American Community Sur-
vey. The paper documents dramatic growth in residential electric heating ­ from
only 1% of homes in 1950, to 8% in 1970, to 26% in 1990, to 39% in 2018. This
growth in electrification has received very little attention from economists or other
researchers.

This paper asked two research questions: (1) What explains the large increase in
electrification of U.S. residential heating since 1950? and (2) How much would U.S.
  18
   According to the author's calculations using the 2015 Residential Energy Consumption Survey,
among households who heat with natural gas, 86% also use natural gas for water heating. Moreover,
among households who heat with electricity, 82% also use electricity for water heating.


                                               28
households be willing-to-pay to avoid an electrification mandate?

The paper proposed and tested five hypotheses. Of the five possible explanations,
energy prices turn out to be by far the most important factor, explaining 70%+ of
the increase in electrification over this period. This finding underscores the impor-
tance of pricing energy efficiently, a central theme in the broader literature in energy
economics (Sherman and Visscher, 1982; Naughton, 1986; Davis and Muehlegger,
2010; Borenstein and Davis, 2012; Borenstein and Bushnell, 2018).

Geography, climate change, and housing characteristics are also shown to matter,
collectively explaining about 20% of the increase in electrification. Household income
growth, in contrast, is shown to have almost zero effect on electrification. This
last finding suggests that it will not be harder, nor will it be easier, for policies to
encourage electrification in lower-income communities.

Finally, a discrete choice model is estimated to measure household willingness-to-pay
to avoid an an electrification mandate for new homes. Households in warm states
are shown to be close to indifferent between electricity and natural gas, so would
be made worse off by less than $500 on average annually by being forced to use
electricity. Households in cold states, however, tend to strongly prefer natural gas
so would be made worse off by $2000 or more annually.

These results have direct implications for emerging policies aimed at electrification.
A substantial existing literature quantifies the economic benefits of fossil fuel abate-
ment. Those benefits can be compared to the costs estimated here to determine
where and when electrification mandates would pass a cost-benefit test.


                                          29
These measures of willingness-to-pay also shed light on how large a subsidy would be
required to induce households to choose electric heating. In general, much smaller
subsidies would be necessary in warmer states. In addition, the analysis highlights
smaller homes and multi-unit homes as considerable opportunities for relatively
lower-cost electrification.

One implication of the research is that, nationally, it may be a lot easier than is
generally believed to encourage electrification. While short of what the United States
would need for deep decarbonization, this steady historical trend over the last seven
decades means that millions of U.S. households have already electrified. Moreover,
the analysis identifies large numbers of additional households for whom adopting
electric heating would impose relatively modest costs.




                                         30
References
Aas, Dan, Amber Mahone, Zack Subin, Michael Mac Kinnon, Blake Lane,
 and Snuller Price, "The Challenge of Retail Gas in California's Low-Carbon Future:
 Technology Options, Customer Costs, and Public Health Benefits of Reducing Natural
 Gas Use," Prepared by Energy and Environmental Economics (E3) for the California
 Energy Commission, Energy Research and Development Division, Final Project Report,
 2020, CEC-500-2019-055-F.
Allcott, Hunt and Michael Greenstone, "Is There an Energy Efficiency Gap?," Jour-
  nal of Economic Perspectives, 2012, 26 (1), 3­28.
   and Nathan Wozny, "Gasoline Prices, Fuel Economy, and the Energy Paradox,"
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 2014, 96 (5), 779­795.
Alvarez, Ram´ on A, Daniel Zavala-Araiza, David R Lyon, David T Allen,
  Zachary R Barkley, Adam R Brandt, Kenneth J Davis, Scott C Herndon,
  Daniel J Jacob, Anna Karion et al., "Assessment of Methane Emissions from the
  US Oil and Gas Supply Chain," Science, 2018, 361 (6398), 186­188.
American Gas Association, "Gas Facts: A Statistical Record of the Gas Utility," Lex-
 ington, NY: American Gas Association, 1950-1969.
Anderson, Soren T, Ryan Kellogg, and James M Sallee, "What do Consumers
 Believe about Future Gasoline Prices?," Journal of Environmental Economics and Man-
 agement, 2013, 66 (3), 383­403.
Aroonruengsawat, Anin, Maximilian Auffhammer, and Alan H Sanstad, "The
 Impact of State Level Building Codes on Residential Electricity Consumption," Energy
 Journal, 2012, 33 (1), 31.
Bento, Antonio M, Lawrence H Goulder, Mark R Jacobsen, and Roger H Von
 Haefen, "Distributional and Efficiency Impacts of Increased U.S. Gasoline Taxes,"
 American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (3), 667­699.
Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes, "Automobile Prices in Market
 Equilibrium," Econometrica, 1995, 63 (4), 841­890.
Billimoria, Sherri, Mike Henchen, Leia Guccione, and Leah Louis-Prescott,
  "The Economics of Electrifying Buildings: How Electric Space and Water Heating
  Supports Decarbonization of Residential Buildings," Rocky Mountain Institute, 2018,
  insights/ reports/ economics-electrifying-buildings/ .
Borenstein, Severin and James B Bushnell, "Do Two Electricity Pricing Wrongs
 Make a Right? Cost Recovery, Externalities, and Efficiency," National Bureau of Eco-
 nomic Research Working Paper, 2018.

                                         31
  and Lucas W. Davis, "The Equity and Efficiency of Two-Part Tariffs in US Natural
  Gas Markets," Journal of Law and Economics, 2012, 55 (1), 75­128.
Busse, Meghan R, Christopher R Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer, "Are Con-
 sumers Myopic? Evidence from New and Used Car Purchases," American Economic
 Review, 2013, 103 (1), 220­56.
Davis, Lucas W, "Durable Goods and Residential Demand for Energy and Water: Evi-
 dence from a Field Trial," RAND Journal of Economics, 2008, 39 (2), 530­546.
   and Erich Muehlegger, "Do Americans Consume Too Little Natural Gas? An Em-
  pirical Test of Marginal Cost Pricing," RAND Journal of Economics, 2010, 41 (4),
  791­810.
   and Lutz Kilian, "The Allocative Cost of Price Ceilings in the U.S. Residential Market
  for Natural Gas," Journal of Political Economy, 2011, 119 (2), 212­241.
Dubin, Jeffrey A, Consumer Durable Choice and the Demand for Electricity, Amster-
 dam: North Holland, 1985.
  and Daniel L McFadden, "An Econometric Analysis of Residential Electric Appliance
  Holdings and Consumption," Econometrica, 1984, 52 (2), 345­362.
Edison Electric Institute, "Statistical Year Book of the Electric Utility Industry," New
 York: Edison Electric Institute, 1950-1969.
Gerarden, Todd D, Richard G Newell, and Robert N Stavins, "Assessing the
 Energy-Efficiency Gap," Journal of Economic Literature, 2017, 55 (4), 1486­1525.
Gillingham, Kenneth and Karen Palmer, "Bridging the Energy Efficiency Gap: Pol-
  icy Insights from Economic Theory and Empirical Evidence," Review of Environmental
  Economics and Policy, 2014, 8 (1), 18­38.
  , Matthew Harding, and David Rapson, "Split Incentives in Residential Energy
  Consumption," Energy Journal, 2012, 33 (2).
Hausman, Jerry A, "Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase and Utilization of
 Energy-using Durables," Bell Journal of Economics, 1979, 10 (1), 33­54.
Holland, Stephen P, Erin T Mansur, Nicholas Z Muller, and Andrew J Yates,
 "Are There Environmental Benefits from Driving Electric Vehicles? The Importance of
 Local Factors," American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (12), 3700­3729.
  , , , and , "Decompositions and Policy Consequences of an Extraordinary Decline
  in Air Pollution from Electricity Generation," American Economic Journal: Economic
  Policy, 2020, 12 (4), 244­274.



                                           32
Ito, Koichiro, "Do Consumers Respond to Marginal or Average Price? Evidence from
  Nonlinear Electricity Pricing," American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (2), 537­63.
Jacobsen, Grant D and Matthew J Kotchen, "Are Building Codes Effective at Saving
  Energy? Evidence from Residential Billing Data in Florida," Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 2013, 95 (1), 34­49.
Kaufman, Noah, David Sandalow, Clotilde Rossi Di Schio, and Jake Higdon,
 "Decarbonoizing Space Heating with Air Source Heat Pumps," Columbia SIPA Working
 Paper, 2019.
Kotchen, Matthew J, "Longer-Run Evidence on Whether Building Energy Codes Re-
 duce Residential Energy Consumption," Journal of the Association of Environmental
 and Resource Economists, 2017, 4 (1), 135­153.
Levinson, Arik, "How Much Energy do Building Energy Codes Save? Evidence from
  California houses," American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (10), 2867­2894.
Llewellyn, Garth T, Frank Dorman, JL Westland, D Yoxtheimer, Paul Grieve,
  Todd Sowers, E Humston-Fulmer, and Susan L Brantley, "Evaluating a Ground-
  water Supply Contamination Incident Attributed to Marcellus Shale Gas Development,"
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2015, 112 (20), 6325­6330.
Mahone, Amber, Zachary Subin, Gabe Mantegna, Rawley Loken, Clea Kol-
 ster, and Niki Lintmeijer, "Achieving Carbon Neutrality in California: PATHWAYS
 Scenarios Developed for the California Air Resources Board," Prepared by Energy and
 Environmental Economics (E3) for the California Air Resources Board, 2020.
Mansur, Erin T, Robert Mendelsohn, and Wendy Morrison, "Climate Change
 Adaptation: A Study of Fuel Choice and Consumption in the U.S. Energy Sector,"
 Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 2008, 55 (2), 175­193.
McKain, Kathryn, Adrian Down, Steve M Raciti, John Budney, Lucy R
 Hutyra, Cody Floerchinger, Scott C Herndon, Thomas Nehrkorn, Mark S
 Zahniser, Robert B Jackson et al., "Methane Emissions from Natural Gas Infras-
 tructure and Use in the Urban Region of Boston, Massachusetts," Proceedings of the
 National Academy of Sciences, 2015, 112 (7), 1941­1946.
Myers, Erica, "Are Home Buyers Inattentive? Evidence from Capitalization of Energy
 Costs," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2019, 11 (2), 165­88.
Naughton, Michael C, "The Efficiency and Equity Consequences of Two-Part Tariffs in
 Electricity Pricing," Review of Economics and Statistics, 1986, 68 (3), 406­414.
NOAA National Centers for Environmental information, "Climate at a Glance:
 Statewide Time Series," https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/cag/, 2020.

                                         33
Olmstead, Sheila M, Lucija A Muehlenbachs, Jhih-Shyang Shih, Ziyan Chu,
  and Alan J Krupnick, "Shale Gas Development Impacts on Surface Water Quality in
  Pennsylvania," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2013, 110 (13), 4962­
  4967.
Petrin, Amil, "Quantifying the Benefits of New products: The Case of the Minivan,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 2002, 110 (4), 705­729.
Platts Oil, "Platt's Oil Price Handbook and Oilmanac," New York, NY: Platts Oil, 1950-
  1969.
Rapson, David, "Durable Goods and Long-Run Electricity Demand: Evidence from Air
 Conditioner Purchase Behavior," Journal of Environmental Economics and Manage-
 ment, 2014, 68 (1), 141­160.
Reiss, Peter C and Matthew W White, "Household Electricity Demand, Revisited,"
 Review of Economic Studies, 2005, 72 (3), 853­883.
   and , "What Changes Energy Consumption? Prices and Public Pressures," RAND
  Journal of Economics, 2008, 39 (3), 636­663.
Ruggles, Steven, Sarah Flood, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, Erin Meyer,
 Jose Pacas, and Matthew Sobek, "IPUMS USA: Version 10.0," Minneapolis, MN:
 IPUMS, 2020.
Sahari, Anna, "Electricity Prices and Consumers' Long-term Technology Choices: Evi-
  dence from Heating Investments," European Economic Review, 2019, 114, 19­53.
Sherman, Roger and Michael Visscher, "Rate-of-Return Regulation and Two-Part
  Tariffs," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1982, 97 (1), 27­42.
U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration, "State Energy
  Data System (SEDS)," Residential Sector Energy Price Estimates, 1970-2018.




                                          34
       Figure 1: Growth in Electric Heating
1950                                          1960




                  Electric Heat                      Electric Heat
                   0.50+                              0.50+
                   0.40 - 0.50                        0.40 - 0.50
                   0.30 - 0.40                        0.30 - 0.40
                   0.20 - 0.30                        0.20 - 0.30
                   0.10 - 0.20                        0.10 - 0.20
                   <0.10                              <0.10

1970                                          1980




                  Electric Heat                      Electric Heat
                   0.50+                              0.50+
                   0.40 - 0.50                        0.40 - 0.50
                   0.30 - 0.40                        0.30 - 0.40
                   0.20 - 0.30                        0.20 - 0.30
                   0.10 - 0.20                        0.10 - 0.20
                   <0.10                              <0.10

1990                                          2000




                  Electric Heat                      Electric Heat
                   0.50+                              0.50+
                   0.40 - 0.50                        0.40 - 0.50
                   0.30 - 0.40                        0.30 - 0.40
                   0.20 - 0.30                        0.20 - 0.30
                   0.10 - 0.20                        0.10 - 0.20
                   <0.10                              <0.10

2010                                          2018




                  Electric Heat                      Electric Heat
                   0.50+                              0.50+
                   0.40 - 0.50                        0.40 - 0.50
                   0.30 - 0.40                        0.30 - 0.40
                   0.20 - 0.30                        0.20 - 0.30
                   0.10 - 0.20                        0.10 - 0.20
                   <0.10                              <0.10




                                  35
                           Figure 2: U.S. Residential Energy Prices By State Since 1950
                                                                         Electricity
         40 30
Cents Per kWh
    20   10




                                                                                              California      Florida   New York   Texas
         0




                   1950         1960            1970             1980                  1990            2000             2010          2020

                                                                        Natural Gas
         25     20
Dollars Per MMBTU
    10   5  15




                                                                                              California      Florida   New York   Texas
                   1950         1960            1970             1980                  1990            2000             2010          2020

                                                                        Heating Oil
         5         4
Dollars Per Gallon
     2   1  3




                                                                                              California      Florida   New York   Texas
                   1950         1960            1970             1980                  1990            2000             2010          2020

                Notes: This figure plots average residential prices by state for electricity, natural gas, and heating oil. Prices are
                calculated as average annual revenue from residential sales and are plotted for all U.S. states except for Alaska
                and Hawaii. Data series are labeled for the four largest U.S. states by population (California, Texas, Florida,
                and New York). Data before 1970 come from Edison Electric Institute (1950-1969), American Gas Association
                (1950-1969), and Platts Oil (1950-1969), respectively. Data after 1970 come from U.S. Department of Energy,
                Energy Information Administration (1970-2018). Prices have been normalized to reflect year 2020 dollars.




                                                                        36
               Figure 3: Decrease in Heating Degree Days Since 1950




                                                                                           Decrease in HDDs
                                                                                                800+
                                                                                                700 - 800
                                                                                                600 - 700
                                                                                                500 - 600
                                                                                                400 - 500
                                                                                                300 - 400
                                                                                                <300
Notes: This figure describes the change in annual heating degree days (HDDs) between 1950 and 2019. For
example, Minnesota had 9,300 HDDs in 1950 and 8,400 HDDs in 2019, for a decrease of 900 HDDs. Florida, in
contrast, had 800 HDDs in 1950 and 600 HDDs in 2019, for a decrease of 200 HDDs. This is based on annual
state-level data from NOAA National Centers for Environmental information (2020). However, rather than use
the raw data which reflect a large amount of year-to-year variation, these calculates are based on fitted values
from a linear time trend estimated separately by state. See Appendix Figure 2 for maps showing HDDs for each
decade separately.




                                                    37
            Figure 4: Change in New Home Construction Since 1950s




                                                                                      Percentage Change
                                                                                           100%+
                                                                                           50 - 100
                                                                                           0 - 50
                                                                                           -50 - 0
                                                                                           <-50%
Notes: This figure describes how new home construction has changed at the state level between the 1950s and
the 2010s. Specifically, the figure reports the percentage change in the percentage of new homes constructed
in each state. For example, Texas had 7% of new home construction in the 1950s, but 16% of new home
construction in the 2010s, for a percentage increase of 130%. California in contrast, had 14% of new home
construction in the 1950s, and 7% of new home construction in the 2010s, for a percentage decrease of 49%. By
this measure Rhode Island had the largest decrease -70% while Nevada had the largest increase +270%. See
Appendix Figure 3 for maps showing the distribution of new home construction for each decade separately.




                                                  38
Figure 5: Percentage of New Homes Heated with Electricity, Decomposition


        10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60%
                                     Actual
                                     Predicted Based on 1950 Energy Prices


        0%




                              1950               1960               1970               1980            1990   2000   2010   2020
        10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60%




                                     Actual
                                     Predicted Based on 1950 Geography of New Home Construction
        0%




                              1950               1960               1970               1980            1990   2000   2010   2020
        10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60%




                                     Actual
                                     Predicted Based on 1950 Housing Characteristics
        0%




                              1950               1960               1970               1980            1990   2000   2010   2020
        10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60%




                                     Actual
                                     Predicted Based on 1950 Heating Degree Days
        0%




                              1950               1960               1970               1980            1990   2000   2010   2020
        10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60%




                                     Actual
                                     Predicted Based on 1950 Distribution of Household Income Levels
        0%




                              1950               1960               1970               1980            1990   2000   2010   2020




                                                                                               39
Figure 6: Evaluating the Fit of the Discrete Choice Model

           A. Actual Heating System Choices




                                                Proportion Electric
                                                    >0.75
                                                    0.65 - 0.75
                                                    0.55 - 0.65
                                                    0.45 - 0.55
                                                    0.35 - 0.45
                                                    0.25 - 0.35
                                                    <0.25



          B. Predicted Heating System Choices




                                                Proportion Electric
                                                    >0.75
                                                    0.65 - 0.75
                                                    0.55 - 0.65
                                                    0.45 - 0.55
                                                    0.35 - 0.45
                                                    0.25 - 0.35
                                                    <0.25




                           40
         Figure 7: Average Reservation Price By State




                                                      Cents Per kWh
                                                        14.9 - 25.0
                                                        11.6 - 14.9
                                                        5.7 - 11.6
                                                        2.9 - 5.7
                                                        -1.2 - 2.9
                                                        -5.5 - -1.2




Figure 8: Willingness-to-Pay to Avoid an Electrification Mandate




                                                   Annual Average ($)
                                                      >3,500
                                                      2,500 - 3,500
                                                      1,500 - 2,500
                                                      1,000 - 1,500
                                                      600 - 1,000
                                                      <600




                              41
                           Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

                                   1950s   1960s      1970s   1980s   1990s   2000s   2010s

                     A. Primary Energy Source for Heating (percent)
Electricity                          4      18      41      47      42          45      53
Natural Gas                         53      56      40      37      44          45      39
Heating Oil                         32      17       8       4       3           2       1
Other                               12       8      11      11      10           8       7

                                B. Residential Energy Prices
Electricity (cents per kWh)          25.8    18.7    15.3    17.6      13.7    12.2    13.0
Natural Gas ($ per 1000 cuft)         8.9      8.7    8.3    13.4      10.6    14.1    12.5
Heating Oil ($ per gallon)            1.6      1.3    1.5     2.4       1.6     2.2     3.5

                                         C. Climate
Heating Degree Days, 1000s            4.9      4.7      4.5     4.1     4.2     4.0     3.9

                         D. Percentage of New Homes By Region
Northeast                            19      17    13     13            10       9      10
Midwest                              25      24    22     17            20      19      17
South                                34      38    42     47            47      48      52
West                                 22      21    23     24            23      23      21

                E. Household Demographics and Housing Characteristics
Household Income (1000s)         61.0    73.9   65.8   79.9    97.9            99.3   106.4
Home Ownership (percent)           78      67     68     63       74             71      62
Multi-Unit (percent)               19      27     29     30       20             22      31
Number of Bedrooms                2.5     2.6    2.6    2.5      2.9            3.0     2.9

Number of Observations (1000s)        144     159    1025     895     989     806       146
Note: This table reports descriptive statistics by decade of home construction. The es-
timation sample is restricted to homes built within 10 years of each Census or American
Community Survey. For example, homes built during the 1950s are from the 1960 Census,
and homes built during the 1960s are from the 1970 Census. Heating oil includes kerosene
and other liquid fuels. "Other" energy sources for heating include propane, coal, wood, as
well as homes with no heating. Prices and incomes have been normalized to reflect year 2020
dollars. The sample sizes are smaller in the 1960 and 1970 censuses because only a random
subsample were asked about home heating. Observations are weighted using Census and
ACS sampling weights.




                                            42
                      Table 2: Linear Probability Model, Estimates

                                   (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)

Electricity Price, in logs      -0.40**      -0.43**     -0.38**     -0.40**      -0.40**      -0.42**
                                 (0.03)       (0.04)      (0.03)      (0.05)       (0.04)       (0.06)
Natural Gas Price, in logs       0.21**       0.29**      0.18**      0.24**       0.15**       0.21**
                                 (0.06)       (0.08)      (0.05)      (0.07)       (0.05)       (0.07)
Heating Oil Price, in logs         0.04        -0.08       0.08*       0.08       0.09**         0.06
                                 (0.04)       (0.15)      (0.03)      (0.10)       (0.03)       (0.10)
Household Income, 1000s         -0.00**      -0.00**     -0.00**     -0.00**      -0.00**      -0.00**
                                 (0.00)       (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)       (0.00)       (0.00)
Heating Degree Days, 1000s      -0.06**      -0.06**     -0.09**      -0.04*      -0.05**      -0.06**
                                 (0.01)       (0.01)      (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.01)       (0.01)
Four Bedroom Home               -0.05**      -0.05**     -0.05**     -0.04**      -0.05**      -0.05**
                                 (0.01)       (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.01)       (0.01)
Five+ Bedroom Home              -0.10**      -0.08**     -0.10**     -0.08**      -0.10**      -0.08**
                                 (0.01)       (0.01)      (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.01)       (0.02)
Rented, i.e. not owned            0.01         0.01         0.01      0.02*        0.02*        0.02**
                                 (0.01)       (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.01)       (0.01)
Mobile Home                       0.04         0.02         0.03       0.02         0.03         0.02
                                 (0.03)       (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.03)       (0.03)       (0.03)
Single Family, Attached           0.04*       0.04**     0.04**       0.04**       0.04**       0.03**
                                 (0.02)       (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.01)       (0.01)
Multi-Unit Home, 2-4 Units       0.12**       0.12**      0.13**     0.12**       0.12**        0.12**
                                 (0.01)       (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.01)       (0.01)
Multi-Unit Home, 5+ Units        0.25**       0.24**      0.25**      0.24**       0.25**       0.24**
                                 (0.02)       (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.02)       (0.02)
Year Fixed Effects                  No          Yes          No        Yes           No          Yes
Geographic Fixed Effects            No          No       Regions     Regions     Divisions    Divisions

Observations                   4,163,308    4,163,308   4,163,308    4,163,308   4,163,308   4,163,308
R-squared                         0.26         0.28        0.27         0.28        0.27        0.29
Note: This table reports coefficient estimates and standard errors from six separate least squares
regressions. In all regressions the dependent variable is an indicator variable for homes for which
electricity is the primary form of space heating. Region and division fixed effects refer to the four
Census regions and nine Census divisions. Year fixed effects are indicator variables for the year
the home was constructed. All regressions are estimated using Census and ACS sampling weights.
Standard errors are clustered by state. ** Significant at the 1% level, *Significant at the 5% level.




                                                43
Table 3: What Explains the Increase in Electrification?

    Energy Prices                                      82%
                                                      (6%)

    Geography                                          11%
                                                      (4%)

    Housing                                             4%
                                                      (1%)

    Climate                                             4%
                                                      (1%)

    Household Income                                   -1%
                                                      (1%)

    Note: This table reports the percentage explained by
    the five hypotheses. This decomposition uses the re-
    gression estimates from Table 2, column 6. See Figure
    5 for figures corresponding to these five counterfactual
    analyses. Standard errors in parentheses were estimated
    using a block bootstrap by state with 100 replications.




                              44
                   Table 4: Alternative Specifications For Decomposition

                                      Prices      Geography        Housing        Climate        Income            Total


1. Baseline Specification              82%            11%            4%             4%             -1%             100%

2. Census Region FEs                   84%            7%             4%             3%             -2%             96%

3. Without Year FEs                    73%            11%            4%             4%             -2%             90%

4. Cubics in Income and HDDs           74%            11%            4%             4%             -1%             92%

5. Including Lag and Lead              80%            11%            5%             4%             -1%             98%

6. Instrumental Variables              73%            11%            5%             4%             -2%             91%

7. Excluding the Northeast             79%            10%            3%             4%             -1%             95%

Note: This table reports the percentage explained by the five hypotheses in the baseline specification and six alternative
specifications. The results in row (1) use the regression estimates from Table 2, column 6. Rows (2) and (3) use the
specifications reported in Table 2, columns 4 and 5, respectively. Row (4) adds third-order polynomials in household
income and heating degree days. Row (5) adds a one-year lag and a one-year lead for electricity prices. Row (6) uses the
instrumental variables specification with the full set of instruments. Finally, row (7) excludes the Northeast when comparing
predicted outcomes to actual outcomes.




                                                       45
         Table 5: Heating System Choice Model

Electric Heating System x                       -0.15**
Electricity Price (cents per kWh)                (0.03)
Natural Gas Heating System x                    -0.07**
Natural Gas Price ($ per 1000 cuft)              (0.01)


Electric Heating System x
 Household Income, 1000s                        -0.00**
                                                 (0.00)
 Heating Degree Days, 1000s                     -0.36**
                                                 (0.06)
 Four Bedroom Home                              -0.32**
                                                 (0.04)
 Five+ Bedroom Home                             -0.53**
                                                 (0.10)
 Rented, i.e. not owner-occupied                 0.40**
                                                 (0.05)
 Mobile Home                                     0.90**
                                                 (0.12)
 Single Family Home, Attached                     -0.05
                                                 (0.10)
 Multi-Unit Home, 2-4 Units                      0.71**
                                                 (0.07)
 Multi-Unit Home, 5+ Units                       1.31**
                                                 (0.09)
 Constant                                         1.40
                                                 (0.73)

Note: This table reports coefficient estimates and standard errors
from a conditional logit model estimated using maximum likeli-
hood with 1,076,014 observations. In addition to the variables
listed the model includes dummy variables for the nine Census
divisions. See the paper for details. The model is estimated using
ACS sampling weights. Standard errors are clustered by state. **
Significant at the 1% level, *Significant at the 5% level.




                               46
                           Table 6: Heating Demand Function

Heating Degree Days, 1000s                       23.56**                (3.15)
Heating Degree Days Squared                      -1.40**                (0.35)
Four Bedroom Home                                11.39**                (1.49)
Five+ Bedroom Home                              21.28**                 (1.97)
Rented, i.e. not owner-occupied                   -0.43                 (1.49)
Mobile Home                                      -8.00**                (2.45)
Single Family Home, Attached                    -19.19**                (1.74)
Multi-Unit Home, 2-4 Units                      -16.96**                (2.49)
Multi-Unit Home, 5+ Units                       -36.30**                (3.43)
Two Household Members                            3.48**                 (0.49)
Three Household Members                         10.15**                 (0.94)
Four Household Members                           14.60**                (1.08)
Five Household Members                           17.80**                (1.68)
Six or More Members                              20.11**                (2.34)
Household Income, 1000s                          0.09**                 (0.01)

Census Division Fixed Effects                       Yes

Observations                                    408,765
R-squared                                        0.13

Note: This table reports coefficient estimates and standard errors from a single least
squares regression. The dependent variable is annual heating demand in millions of
Btu, mean = 95.2. The sample includes homes ten years old or less in the Ameri-
can Community Survey since 2000 heated primarily with natural gas. The model is
estimated using ACS sampling weights. Standard errors are clustered by state. **
Significant at the 1% level, *Significant at the 5% level.




                                               47
Appendix Figure 1: U.S. Residential Energy Prices in 2018
                          Electricity




                                              Cents Per kWh
                                                  18+
                                                  16 - 18
                                                  14 - 16
                                                  12 - 14
                                                  10 - 12
                                                  <10

                         Natural Gas




                                          Dollars Per MMBTU
                                                16+
                                                14 - 16
                                                12 - 14
                                                10 - 12
                                                8 - 10
                                                <8

                         Heating Oil




                                           Dollars Per Gallon
                                               >3.00
                                               2.90 - 3.00
                                               2.80 - 2.90
                                               2.70 - 2.80
                                               2.60 - 2.70
                                               <2.60




                             48
Appendix Figure 2: Heating Degree Days, By Decade
    1950                                                1960




                   HDDs                                          HDDs
                 9,000+                                        9,000+
                 8,000 - 9,000                                 8,000 - 9,000
                 7,000 - 8,000                                 7,000 - 8,000
                 6,000 - 7,000                                 6,000 - 7,000
                 5,000 - 6,000                                 5,000 - 6,000
                 4,000 - 5,000                                 4,000 - 5,000
                 3,000 - 4,000                                 3,000 - 4,000
                 2,000 - 3,000                                 2,000 - 3,000
                 1,000 - 2,000                                 1,000 - 2,000
                 <1,000                                        <1,000

    1970                                                1980




                   HDDs                                          HDDs
                 9,000+                                        9,000+
                 8,000 - 9,000                                 8,000 - 9,000
                 7,000 - 8,000                                 7,000 - 8,000
                 6,000 - 7,000                                 6,000 - 7,000
                 5,000 - 6,000                                 5,000 - 6,000
                 4,000 - 5,000                                 4,000 - 5,000
                 3,000 - 4,000                                 3,000 - 4,000
                 2,000 - 3,000                                 2,000 - 3,000
                 1,000 - 2,000                                 1,000 - 2,000
                 <1,000                                        <1,000

    1990                                                2000




                   HDDs                                          HDDs
                 9,000+                                        9,000+
                 8,000 - 9,000                                 8,000 - 9,000
                 7,000 - 8,000                                 7,000 - 8,000
                 6,000 - 7,000                                 6,000 - 7,000
                 5,000 - 6,000                                 5,000 - 6,000
                 4,000 - 5,000                                 4,000 - 5,000
                 3,000 - 4,000                                 3,000 - 4,000
                 2,000 - 3,000                                 2,000 - 3,000
                 1,000 - 2,000                                 1,000 - 2,000
                 <1,000                                        <1,000

                                 2010




                                          HDDs
                                        9,000+
                                        8,000 - 9,000
                                        7,000 - 8,000
                                        6,000 - 7,000
                                        5,000 - 6,000
                                        4,000 - 5,000
                                        3,000 - 4,000
                                        2,000 - 3,000
                                        1,000 - 2,000
                                        <1,000




                                 49
Appendix Figure 3: Percentage of New Homes in Each State, By Decade
             1950s                                       1960s




                            Percent                               Percent
                              9%+                                     9%+
                              8-9                                     8-9
                              7-8                                     7-8
                              6-7                                     6-7
                              5-6                                     5-6
                              4-5                                     4-5
                              3-4                                     3-4
                              2-3                                     2-3
                              1-2                                     1-2
                              <1%                                     <1%

             1970s                                       1980s




                            Percent                               Percent
                              9%+                                     9%+
                              8-9                                     8-9
                              7-8                                     7-8
                              6-7                                     6-7
                              5-6                                     5-6
                              4-5                                     4-5
                              3-4                                     3-4
                              2-3                                     2-3
                              1-2                                     1-2
                              <1%                                     <1%

             1990s                                       2000s




                            Percent                               Percent
                              9%+                                     9%+
                              8-9                                     8-9
                              7-8                                     7-8
                              6-7                                     6-7
                              5-6                                     5-6
                              4-5                                     4-5
                              3-4                                     3-4
                              2-3                                     2-3
                              1-2                                     1-2
                              <1%                                     <1%

                                      2010s




                                               Percent
                                                 9%+
                                                 8-9
                                                 7-8
                                                 6-7
                                                 5-6
                                                 4-5
                                                 3-4
                                                 2-3
                                                 1-2
                                                 <1%




                                      50
 Appendix Figure 4: Calculating Compensating Variation, Intermediate Steps
A. Annual Average Natural Gas Expenditure For Homes with Natural Gas Heat




                                                          Dollars ($)
                                                          1,391 - 1,724
                                                          1,220 - 1,391
                                                          1,110 - 1,220
                                                          1,010 - 1,110
                                                          903 - 1,010
                                                          754 - 903



             B. Predicted Annual Heating Demand in MMBTU




                                                           MMBTU
                                                          114.0 - 123.8
                                                          104.4 - 114.0
                                                          100.0 - 104.4
                                                          88.9 - 100.0
                                                          72.2 - 88.9
                                                          29.5 - 72.2




                                   51
Appendix Figure 5: Calculating Compensating Variation, Intermediate Steps (Con-
tinued)
                 C. Predicted Annual Heating Demand in kWh




                                                           Kilowatt Hours
                                                           20,047 - 21,774
                                                           18,352 - 20,047
                                                           17,580 - 18,352
                                                           15,641 - 17,580
                                                           12,699 - 15,641
                                                           5,196 - 12,699



              D. Implied Annual Expenditure for Electric Heating




                                                              Dollars ($)
                                                              3,081 - 4,156
                                                              2,160 - 3,081
                                                              1,870 - 2,160
                                                              1,620 - 1,870
                                                              1,426 - 1,620
                                                              649 - 1,426




                                      52
         Appendix Table 1: Alternative Specifications for Electricity Price

                                               (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)

Current Price                                -0.42**                                -0.57*
                                              (0.06)                                (0.21)
One Year Lag                                             -0.40**                     0.20
                                                          (0.06)                    (0.20)
One Year Lead                                                         -0.42**        -0.05
                                                                       (0.06)       (0.12)

Observations                                4,163,308   4,163,308    4,161,805    4,161,805
R-squared                                      0.29        0.28         0.28         0.29

Cumulative Effect                            -0.42**     -0.40**      -0.42**       -0.42**
                                              (0.06)      (0.06)       (0.06)        (0.06)

Other Energy Prices, Household Income          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
HDDs, Housing Characteristics                  Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
Year Fixed Effects                             Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
Census Division Fixed Effects                  Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes

Note: This table reports coefficient estimates and standard errors from four separate least
squares regressions. Column (1) is the baseline specification, identical to the results in the
final column of Table 2. Other specifications substitute a one-year lead or one-year lag or
both as indicated. All regressions are estimated using Census and ACS sampling weights.
Standard errors are clustered by state. ** Significant at the 1% level, *Significant at the 5%
level.




                                               53
Appendix Table 2: Instrumental Variables Specification for Linear Probability Model

                                      (1)            (2)       (3)           (4)            (5)

                                     OLS       IV (Lags)    IV (Lags)   IV (Prices)     IV (Both)


 Electricity Price, in logs         -0.42**     -0.39**      -0.41**      -0.42**        -0.39**
                                     (0.06)      (0.06)       (0.04)       (0.03)         (0.04)
 Natural Gas Price, in logs         0.21**      0.25**         0.09         0.02          0.14**
                                     (0.07)      (0.08)       (0.06)       (0.06)         (0.05)
 Heating Oil Price, in logs           0.06        0.26        0.15**       0.17**         0.10**
                                     (0.10)      (0.23)       (0.04)       (0.02)         (0.03)

 Observations                      4,163,308   4,163,308    4,163,308    4,163,308      4,163,308
 R-squared                            0.29        0.28         0.27         0.26           0.27

 Year Fixed Effects                   Yes            Yes       No           No             No
 Household Income                     Yes            Yes       Yes          Yes            Yes
 HDDs, Housing Characteristics        Yes            Yes       Yes          Yes            Yes
 Census Division Fixed Effects        Yes            Yes       Yes          Yes            Yes

 Note: This table reports coefficient estimates and standard errors from five separate regressions.
 Column (1) is the baseline specification estimated using least squares, identical to the results in
 the final column of Table 2. The remaining columns instrument for residential electricity, natural
 gas, and heating oil prices. Columns (2) and (3) instrument using the one-year lag of residential
 prices. Column (4) instruments using crude oil prices, U.S. natural gas wholesale prices, and U.S.
 coal prices (bituminous, subbituminous, lignite, and anthracite). Column (5) uses both sets of
 instruments. All regressions are estimated using Census and ACS sampling weights. Standard
 errors are clustered by state. ** Significant at the 1% level, *Significant at the 5% level.




                                                54
             Appendix Table 3: Willingness-to-Pay By State
Florida                                                                                  85
Louisiana                                                                               259
South Carolina                                                                          346
Alabama                                                                                 346
Mississippi                                                                             355
Georgia                                                                                 414
Texas                                                                                   435
Arizona                                                                                 486
North Carolina                                                                          533
Tennessee                                                                               586
Arkansas                                                                                592
Kentucky                                                                                670
Oklahoma                                                                                688
West Virginia                                                                           811
Virginia                                                                                832
Nevada                                                                                1,032
Oregon                                                                                1,037
Missouri                                                                              1,060
Maryland                                                                              1,082
California                                                                            1,102
Delaware                                                                              1,126
Washington                                                                            1,163
Kansas                                                                                1,210
Nebraska                                                                              1,561
New Mexico                                                                            1,570
Iowa                                                                                  2,004
South Dakota                                                                          2,085
Indiana                                                                               2,092
North Dakota                                                                          2,297
Idaho                                                                                 2,301
Ohio                                                                                  2,421
Pennsylvania                                                                          2,662
Minnesota                                                                             2,708
Colorado                                                                              2,789
New Jersey                                                                            2,799
Illinois                                                                              2,845
Utah                                                                                  2,883
Rhode Island                                                                          2,909
Wyoming                                                                               3,093
Massachusetts                                                                         3,125
Wisconsin                                                                             3,137
Montana                                                                               3,159
New York                                                                              3,183
Michigan                                                                              3,191
Connecticut                                                                           3,347
Vermont                                                                               4,081
Maine                                                                                 4,219
New Hampshire                                                                         4,232

Note: This table reports the average annual willingness-to-pay per household in dollars to
avoid an electrification mandate. See the paper for details.




                                            55
