                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      ESTIMATING PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS IN DIFFERENTIATED-PRODUCT
   INDUSTRIES WITH QUANTITY INFORMATION AND EXTERNAL INSTRUMENTS

                                        Nicolás de Roux
                                        Marcela Eslava
                                        Santiago Franco
                                        Eric Verhoogen

                                      Working Paper 28323
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28323


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2021




We would like to thank Mons Chan, Rafael Dix-Carneiro, Dave Donaldson, Garth Frazer, Pete
Klenow, Sebastian Kripfganz, Jeanne LaFortune, Suresh Naidu, José Tessada, Reed Walker,
Frederic Warzynski, and participants in several seminars for helpful comments, and Nathalie
González and Cristhian Acosta for excellent research assistance. We are grateful to DANE staff
for facilitating data access and for advice on the proper use of the data. The views expressed in
this document are not those of DANE or DANE staff. All analysis using confidential data was
carried out in accordance with Colombian confidentiality laws. All errors are our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Nicolás de Roux, Marcela Eslava, Santiago Franco, and Eric Verhoogen. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Estimating Production Functions in Differentiated-Product Industries with Quantity Information
and External Instruments
Nicolás de Roux, Marcela Eslava, Santiago Franco, and Eric Verhoogen
NBER Working Paper No. 28323
January 2021
JEL No. D24,L1,L65,O14

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper develops a new method for estimating production-function parameters that can be
applied in differentiated-product industries with endogenous quality and variety choice. We take
advantage of data on physical quantities of outputs and inputs from the Colombian manufacturing
survey, focusing on producers of rubber and plastic products. Assuming constant elasticities of
substitution of outputs and inputs within firms, we aggregate from the firm-product to the firm
level and show how quality and variety choices may bias standard estimators. Using real
exchange rates and variation in the "bite" of the national minimum wage, we construct external
instruments for materials and labor choices. We implement a simple two-step instrumental-
variables method, first estimating a difference equation to recover the materials and labor
coefficients and then estimating a levels equation to recover the capital coefficient. Under the
assumption that the instruments are uncorrelated with firms' quality and variety choices, this
method yields consistent estimates, free of the quality and variety biases we have identified. Our
point estimates differ from those of existing methods and changes in our preferred productivity
estimator perform relatively well in predicting future export growth.

Nicolás de Roux                                 Santiago Franco
Department of Economics                         Kenneth C. Griffin Department of Economics
Universidad de los Andes                        University of Chicago
Calle 19A No 1-37 Este, W 823                   1126 E. 59th St.
Bogotá, Colombia                                Chicago, IL 60637
nicolas.de.roux@uniandes.edu.co                 sfranco@uchicago.edu

Marcela Eslava                                  Eric Verhoogen
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
Universidad de los Andes                        School of International & Public Affairs
Calle 19A # 1-37 Este. Bloque W of. 810         Columbia University
Bogotá, Colombia                                420 W. 118th Street
meslava@uniandes.edu.co                         New York, NY 10027
                                                and IZA
                                                and also NBER
                                                eric.verhoogen@columbia.edu



A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28323
1    Introduction

A central challenge in estimating production functions is to estimate the elasticities of real output
with respect to real inputs, unconfounded by differences in prices across firms. Estimates of
these elasticities are key to constructing standard measures of total factor productivity (TFP),
the most commonly used metric of firm performance. They are also important for estimating
markups in the influential method of Hall (1986) and De Loecker and Warzynski (2012). As
recently emphasized by Bond et al. (2020), that method requires an elasticity of real output, not
of sales or value-added, in order to generate informative estimates of markups.
    Two difficulties in estimating such elasticities have received particular attention. First, prices
and physical quantities of outputs and inputs are usually not observed at the firm (or plant) level.
The most common solution is to regress sales (or value-added), deflated by a sector-level price
index, on material expenditures and other inputs, similarly deflated. It has long been recognized
that the resulting estimates may reflect idiosyncratic variation in market power at the firm level
(Klette and Griliches, 1996; Foster et al., 2008, 2016; De Loecker and Goldberg, 2014). Second,
firms may choose variable inputs after observing shocks to their own productivity in a given period,
generating a positive correlation between unobserved productivity shocks and the input choices
-- the familiar "transmission bias" problem, first noted by Marschak and Andrews (1944).1
    Information on prices and quantities at the firm-product level, while still uncommon, is in-
creasingly available and has enabled researchers to make progress on the first issue. Focusing
on eleven homogeneous products in the US Census of Manufactures, Foster et al. (2008) esti-
mate regressions with physical output quantities on the left-hand side, yielding output elasticities
arguably purged of demand-side influences. Although Foster et al. (2008) do not use physical
quantities of inputs, in cases where inputs are homogeneous and quantities are observed it is
straightforward to extend their approach and put physical quantities of inputs on the right-hand
side (Atalay, 2014).
    But as suggested by Katayama et al. (2009), Grieco and McDevitt (2016), Atkin et al.
(2019), Jaumandreu and Yin (2018) and others, using physical quantities may be misleading
in differentiated-product industries where the quality and variety of outputs and inputs vary
across firms and over time. If consumers value product quality and variety, then they should be
   1
     For reviews, see Griliches and Mairesse (1998), Bartelsman and Doms (2000), Ackerberg et al. (2007), Van
Biesebroeck (2008), Syverson (2011), De Loecker and Goldberg (2014), Section 2 of Ackerberg et al. (2015), and
Section 2.2.1 of Verhoogen (2020).


                                                      1
incorporated in our notion of real output; similarly, if input quality and variety matter for real
output, then they should be incorporated in real inputs. But once one accepts these propositions,
estimates using only physical units may be subject to what we call quality and variety biases.
For instance, a firm may take advantage of an increase in capability to produce fewer physical
units of higher-quality goods (for a given set of inputs), generating a negative bias in output
elasticities estimated using only physical output quantities. If more-productive firms tend to use
higher-quality inputs and this choice is correlated with the physical quantity of inputs used, then
another form of bias arises, with the direction depending on the sign of the input quality-quantity
correlation. Similar biases can also result from the endogenous choice of variety by firms, or from
exogenous shocks to product appeal or input quality, if firms' choices of physical units of inputs
respond.
      In this paper, we develop a new approach to estimating output elasticities that takes advan-
tage of quantity information, that is arguably not subject to quality or variety biases, and that
also addresses the transmission-bias problem. The method can be applied in horizontally and
vertically differentiated industries with multi-product firms and requires relatively weak theoret-
ical assumptions on the nature of demand and market competition. We implement it in data
from the Colombian manufacturing survey, which contains information on prices and quantities
of both inputs and outputs, focusing (for reasons discussed below) on producers of rubber and
plastic products.
      The paper makes three main contributions. The first is to highlight conceptually how estimates
of output elasticities based on physical quantities may be misleading in industries where quality
and variety vary differentially by firm over time. As in almost all similar datasets, the mapping
between specific inputs and specific outputs within the firm is unobserved.2 Our approach is to
aggregate from the firm-product to the firm level. It is not possible to do this aggregation in a
theory-free way; any aggregation embeds assumptions, implicit or explicit, about consumer and
firm behavior. Here we assume that outputs and inputs, respectively, have constant elasticities of
substitution (CES) within firms. We place minimal constraints on substitution elasticities across
firms. Following common practice, we assume that (firm-level aggregate) materials, labor, and
capital combine in Cobb-Douglas fashion. Although restrictive, the within-firm CES structure is
convenient in that it allows us to express the change in each aggregate as the sum of an observ-
  2
    We are aware of only two exceptions with a substantial number of firms, a dataset on Bangladeshi garment
firms used by Cajal Grossi et al. (2019) and one on Chinese steel firms used by Brandt et al. (2018).


                                                     2
able quantity index and unobservable terms capturing quality and variety. This in turn makes
transparent how differences in quality and variety may bias standard estimates. Empirically, we
will show that our estimates are robust to using other common aggregators at the firm level.
    Our second contribution is to address transmission bias by introducing "external" instruments
capturing exogenous variation in input prices at the firm level. The idea that external instruments
in general, and input prices in particular, would be an attractive solution to the transmission-bias
problem has been "in the air" for many years, at least since the landmark review by Griliches and
Mairesse (1998).3 Several recent papers have acknowledged that factor prices would be natural
instruments, but have argued that it would be difficult to find truly exogenous variation at the firm
level.4 In the absence of credible external instruments, two approaches have dominated the recent
literature. One has been to construct a proxy for unobserved productivity by inverting either
an investment-demand or a materials-demand equation, which requires a monotonic relationship
between the productivity term (assumed to be scalar) and investment or materials, conditional
on other observables (Olley and Pakes, 1996; Levinsohn and Petrin, 2003; Wooldridge, 2009; De
Loecker, 2011; Doraszelski and Jaumandreu, 2013, 2018; Ackerberg et al., 2015; Gandhi et al.,
2020). Another approach has been to construct "internal" instruments using lagged values of
inputs (Chamberlain, 1982; Anderson and Hsiao, 1982; Arellano and Bond, 1991; Arellano and
Bover, 1995; Blundell and Bond, 1998, 2000).5 In this panel-data approach, the most successful
strategy has been the "System GMM" estimator of Arellano and Bover (1995) and Blundell and
Bond (1998, 2000), which supplements an equation in first differences, using lagged levels as
instruments, with an equation in levels, using lagged differences as instruments.
    Our aggregation strategy requires firm-specific normalizations, which we absorb with a firm
effect in our main estimating equation. As a consequence, the proxy-variable strategy is not an
attractive option, because the firm effect would violate the required monotonicity assumption
    3
      Griliches and Mairesse (1998) write that the "future" of production-function estimation lies in "find[ing] (in-
strumental) variables that have genuine information about factors which affect firms differentially as they choose
their input levels" (p. 198) and describe using "factor prices ... as instrumental variables to identify the parameters
of interest" as an "obvious" solution. Nerlove (1963) is an early paper using an external instrument -- electricity
prices -- in production-function estimation.
    4
      For instance, Ackerberg et al. (2015, p, 2418, fn 3) write: "if one observed exogenous, across-firm-variation
in all input prices, estimating the production function using input price based IV methods might be preferred to
OP/LP [Olley-Pakes/Levinsohn-Petrin] related methodology (due to fewer auxiliary assumptions)." But they also
note that "the premise of most of this [proxy-variable] literature is that such variables are either not available or
not believed to be exogenous." See also Ackerberg et al. (2007, p. 4208) and Gandhi et al. (2020, Sec. 6.1).
    5
      The two dominant approaches are themselves related, since the proxy-variable methods often use lagged levels
as instruments, as discussed in Ackerberg et al. (2015, Sec. 4.3.3).



                                                          3
(Ackerberg et al., 2015). We instead build on the panel-data approach, which more easily accom-
modates the firm effect. But rather than include further and further lags as instruments, which
is commonly done but may raise concerns about instrument strength, we include a parsimonious
set of lags and two external instruments capturing exogenous variation in input prices. To con-
struct the materials-price instrument, we first use exchange rates to predict import-price changes
at the product level, omitting one firm at a time in making the predictions. We then use the
lagged product composition of a firm's imports, in conjunction with the "leave one out" predicted
import-price changes, to construct a firm-specific predicted import price index. To construct the
wage instrument, we interact changes in the national minimum wage, which saw large increases
in real terms over our study period, with an indicator for how binding the change was likely to be
on particular firms (the "bite" of the minimum wage), defined as the lagged ratio of the minimum
wage to the average wage for permanent employees in the firm. We will see that the external
instruments are helpful in alleviating (if not completely removing) weak-instrument concerns.
      In estimating the coefficient on capital, we face a well-known difficulty: methods with trans-
formations to remove firm effects -- either first-differencing or deviating from firm means -- tend
to yield implausibly low estimates.6 The most common explanation is that transformations to
remove the firm effect exacerbate the attenuation bias due to measurement error; other expla-
nations, discussed below, are also possible (Griliches and Mairesse, 1998). Others have found
that this problem persists when instrumenting the change in capital with lagged levels (see e.g.
Ornaghi (2006)). Fundamentally, the issue is that much of the genuine variation in capital stock
is cross-sectional; the within-firm evolution of capital stock -- and, in particular, of utilized cap-
ital -- is very difficult to measure well. The main existing approaches, proxy-variable methods
and System GMM, both rely to some extent on cross-sectional variation to estimate the capital
coefficient.
      Our third contribution is an approach to estimation that allows us both to absorb the firm
effect when estimating the materials and labor coefficients and to take advantage of cross-sectional
variation to estimate the capital coefficient. In the broad spirit of System GMM, we combine
a difference equation, using lagged levels as instruments, with a levels equation, using lagged
differences as instruments. But rather than estimating the equations simultaneously using GMM,
we estimate them separately in what we call a two-step instrumental-variables (TSIV) procedure.
  6
      See e.g. Griliches and Mairesse (1998), Ackerberg et al. (2007), and Ackerberg et al. (2015).



                                                          4
In the first step, we first-difference and use the external instruments described above, together
with a parsimonious set of lagged levels, to recover the coefficients on materials and labor. In
the second step, we use the first-step estimates of the materials and labor coefficients and impose
an additional assumption that ensures orthogonality between the lagged difference in log capital
and the firm effect; this allows us to use the lagged difference of capital as an instrument in an
IV model in levels.7 If the model is correctly specified, the TSIV estimator is less efficient than
simultaneous GMM estimation of the difference and levels equations, but it has the advantage that
the materials and labor coefficient estimates are robust to misspecification of the levels equation
(Kripfganz and Schwarz, 2019).
       The TSIV procedure yields plausible point estimates: we find materials and labor coefficients
of approximately .4, and a capital coefficient of approximately .2. The fact that constant returns
to scale approximately hold is reassuring. Although the standard errors are large enough that the
differences with standard estimators are generally not statistically significant, the point estimates
display some interesting patterns. The materials coefficient is lower than, and the labor coefficient
larger than, the coefficients from (a) naive OLS estimation using revenues for output and materials
expenditures for material input, (b) the Olley and Pakes (1996) and Levinsohn and Petrin (2003)
proxy-variable methods, and (c) standard System GMM.8 Somewhat surprisingly, our estimates
(including for capital) are similar to those from OLS in levels using our constructed quantity
aggregates.
       The main goal of this paper is to provide a new approach to estimating output elasticities,
which are useful for several purposes, including calculating markups. But it is natural to ask how
TFP measures constructed from our estimates perform relative to other TFP measures commonly
used in the literature. We face a choice between a revenue-based TFP and a quantity-based TFP
measure based on our quantity indexes. We note that even with our improved estimates of output
elasticities, neither measure corresponds directly to technical efficiency. Our revenue-based TFP
may reflect pure output or input price differences, and our quantity-based TFP may be biased
by quality and variety choices (even if the output-elasticity estimates are not). We favor using
revenue-based TFP, and keeping in mind that it may capture price differences as well as technical
efficiency. To compare with TFP estimates from other methods, we examine the extent to which
   7
    The second-step approach is akin to that of Collard-Wexler and De Loecker (2016).
   8
    Our materials estimate is quite similar to the one we obtain by applying Gandhi et al. (2020) in our data, and
our labor coefficient is somewhat smaller.



                                                        5
estimated changes in revenue-based TFP predict future changes in export performance, and we
find that our estimates compare well to standard methods.
       In addition to the studies cited above, this paper is related to several branches of literature.
It is perhaps most closely related to a small number of studies on production-function estimation
in multi-product firms using information at the firm-product level. This literature has dealt in
different ways with the lack of an observed mapping between inputs and outputs in multi-product
firms. One strategy has been to focus on single-product firms, for which the mapping is clear,
and (in some cases) to do a selection correction for the fact that they may not be representative
(Foster et al., 2008; De Loecker et al., 2016; Garcia-Marin and Voigtl¨
                                                                      ander, 2019; Balat et al.,
2018; Blum et al., 2018).9 Recent work by Dhyne et al. (2020a,b) develops an alternative strategy
of estimating simultaneous equations relating output of each good to firm-level input usage and
the output levels of other goods. This strategy requires as many proxies as products and a multi-
dimensional generalization of the monotonicity condition, and it tends to reject the hypothesis
that single-product production is a good approximation for multi-product production. Another
approach has been to use estimates of demand elasticities and profit-maximization conditions to
infer the allocation of inputs to outputs that would be implemented by optimizing firms (Orr, 2020;
Valmari, 2016).10 Our strategy, by contrast, is to aggregate both outputs and inputs to the firm
level. Previous papers that have aggregated from the firm-product to the firm level include Eslava
et al. (2004, 2013), Ornaghi (2006), Doraszelski and Jaumandreu (2013), Smeets and Warzynski
(2013) and Bas and Paunov (2020).11 These papers do not use CES aggregators, nor do they
show how explicitly how quality or variety differences enter firm-level price or quantity indexes.
Our approach builds on an extensive literature using CES functions in addressing other questions,
including Feenstra (1994), Hsieh and Klenow (2009), Hottman et al. (2016), and Redding and
Weinstein (2020).
       This paper is also related to studies that explicitly consider differences in the quality of outputs
or inputs in a production-function context. Melitz (2000), Katayama et al. (2009), and Grieco et
   9
     Foster et al. (2008) include in their sample only firms in which one product makes up more than 50% of
revenues, thus essentially focusing on single-product firms. De Loecker et al. (2016) implement a modified version
of the Ackerberg et al. (2015) proxy-variable method and focus on calculating mark-ups at the firm-product level
in Indian data. In Chilean data, Garcia-Marin and Voigtl¨   ander (2019) use firm-product-level markups calculated
along the same lines to infer marginal costs and to relate them to firms' export behavior.
  10
     See also Gong and Sickles (2019) and Forlani et al. (2016).
  11
     Dhyne et al. (2020a) and Garcia-Marin and Voigtl¨   ander (2019) employ similar aggregations in parts of their
analyses.




                                                        6
al. (2016) propose estimators that take quality differences into account in settings where product-
level information is not observed; the lack of direct price and quantity data means that they must
rely on more restrictive theoretical assumptions than we do here. Fox and Smeets (2011) show
that including detailed indicators of labor quality significantly reduces the dispersion of estimated
productivities across firms in Denmark, but they do not have product-level information on outputs
or inputs. For the most part, the literature exploiting information at the firm-product level does
not explicitly take into account quality or variety differences. Exceptions include De Loecker et
al. (2016) and Eslava and Haltiwanger (2020), who use control-function approaches to address
potential quality and variety biases.12 Two recent papers take advantage of detailed product
characteristics in particular sectors. Focusing on outpatient dialysis centers in the US, Grieco and
McDevitt (2016) find that firms trade off quality and quantity of care, suggesting that measures
of performance based solely on quantity can be misleading. In an Egyptian rug cluster, Atkin
et al. (2019) collect direct measures of rug quality and producer performance under laboratory
conditions and also find that purely quantity-based measures of performance are misleading. Such
direct measures of product quality are clearly very valuable for estimating firm performance, but
unfortunately they are rarely available. We view our method as being most useful in settings
where product prices and quantities are available but detailed product characteristics are not.
    Relative to the existing literature, our approach has costs and benefits. On one hand, some of
our assumptions are stronger than those of other methods. We impose an unusually strong (but
testable) restriction on the evolution of unobserved productivity, discussed below. We require
exclusion restrictions for our instruments. We do not consider firms' endogenous investments in
raising productivity, as do for instance Doraszelski and Jaumandreu (2013, 2018). The within-
firm CES assumptions are restrictive (although the empirical patterns are robust to using other
aggregators). On the other hand, we are able to avoid some strong assumptions required by other
methods. We do not need a scalar monotonicity condition to ensure invertibility of an investment
or materials-demand function as in proxy-variable methods. Although we presume some maxi-
  12
     De Loecker et al. (2016) describe their approach as addressing "input price bias" and "output price bias" and
do not explicitly address what we call quality and variety biases. They put flexible functions of output prices and
market shares in a control function for input demand and put physical quantities of output on the left-hand side.
Arguably, this approach completely removes quality biases only in the special case where input and output quality
are perfectly correlated, which is unlikely to hold exactly in practice, and does not address what we call variety
biases. Eslava and Haltiwanger (2020) also use CES aggregation, but they do so in the context of joint GMM
estimation of production and demand functions, which requires CES across as well as within firms, while here we
do not need to impose a particular demand structure across firms.




                                                        7
mizing behavior on the part of firms to justify the CES aggregation, we do not need first-order
conditions for aggregate materials or labor to hold exactly as in Doraszelski and Jaumandreu
(2013, 2018) and Gandhi et al. (2020). We can remain agnostic about cross-firm demand elastic-
ities. Relative to the panel-data literature, we are able to reduce the reliance on lagged internal
instruments. We can also relax the assumptions required for the levels equation in System GMM,
and do not need them at all if we are only interested in the output elasticities with respect to
materials and labor. We explicitly consider output and input quality and variety differences, as
relatively few other papers have done. While there are trade-offs, we believe that, on balance,
our method represents an attractive alternative to existing methods in differentiated-product
industries where quantity information and external instruments are available.
    The next section develops our econometric strategy. Section 3 describes the data we use and
our motivation for focusing on producers of rubber and plastic products. Section 4 presents our
baseline estimates of output elasticities, and Section 5 conducts several robustness checks. Section
6 compares our coefficient estimates to those of other common estimation methods. Section 7
constructs productivity measures using our coefficient estimates and examines how well they do,
relative to existing measures, in predicting future export performance. Section 8 concludes.


2     Econometric Strategy

This section first presents the theoretical framework that underpins our firm-level aggregation
and estimating equations. We begin on the demand side (Subsection 2.1) and then turn to the
production side (Subsection 2.2) and rewrite the production function using decompositions of
our output and input aggregates, which makes clear how endogenous quality and variety choices
may bias standard estimates (Subsection 2.3). We then present our two-step IV (TSIV) strategy
(Subsection 2.4). Full derivations are in Appendix A.


2.1   Demand

The first task is to construct a measure of real output at the firm level -- firm-level sales deflated
by an appropriate firm-specific price index. In differentiated-good industries, any price index
necessarily embeds assumptions about how a firm's products enter consumers' utility. Here we
follow Hottman et al. (2016) and others in imposing constant elasticity of substitution of products



                                                  8
within firms. This is restrictive, but unlike much of the existing literature we do not need to make
strong assumptions about the elasticity of substitution of products across firms. (We will also show
(in Section 5.1 below) that the empirical patterns are robust to using other common aggregators.)
       We assume that a representative consumer has the following utility function:

                                                                                     y
                                                                                   
                                                                                     i
                                                                          y        y
                                                                           -1       -1
                                                                          i        i
                                                                            y
                                                                          
         Ut = U (Y1t , Y2t , ..., YIt ) where Yit =         (ijt Yijt )     i                                  (1)
                                                     j y
                                                       it



Here i, j and t index firms, products (outputs), and periods (years), I is the total number of firms,
                                     y
Yijt is physical quantity of output, i is the elasticity of substitution between outputs, specific to
firm i, and y
            it is the set of products sold by the firm. The ijt terms are demand shifters that

can be interpreted as product appeal or quality, which may reflect endogenous choices of the firm
(e.g. physical attributes of goods) or external factors (e.g. exogenous fashion trends). We assume
that U (·) is quasi-concave and weakly separable in its arguments. We follow common practice and
            y
assume that i > 1. Although the consumer optimization problem would remain well-behaved
           y                     y
as long as i > 0,13 the stronger i > 1 ensures that the representative consumer will purchase
more units of a good that increases in appeal, which seems realistic in our context.14
       The assumption of weak separability and the homotheticity of Yit imply that the consumer's
optimization problem can be solved in two stages, first choosing the quantity of each variety from
firm i, Yijt , to minimize the cost of acquiring each unit of Yit and second choosing Yit to maximize
utility. Assuming the consumer optimizes in the first stage, the price required to purchase one
unit of Yit is:

                                           1
                                  y          y
                                1-i      1-
                                             i
                         Pijt
         Pit =                                                                                                 (2)
                         ijt
                  j y
                    it



This is the price index that sets Pit Yit = Rit , where Rit is the consumer's total expenditures on
goods of firm i, which are also the firm's revenues. Note that it is quality-adjusted: conditional
  13                                                                y
      See Appendix A.1. For the knife-edge Cobb-Douglas case of i     = 1, we would need an additional condition to
ensure that the optimization problem remains well-behaved.
   14                                              y
      As noted by Redding and Weinstein (2020), i    > 1 is sufficient to ensure that products are "connected sub-
stitutes" in the sense of Berry et al. (2013) and hence that the demand system is invertible. This is a sufficient
condition, not a necessary one, and our method could be implemented in settings with a greater degree of comple-
mentarity between products, but for reasons of realism and convenience we maintain the standard assumption.




                                                        9
on the price of a given output, higher output quality reduces the value of the index.
       An attractive feature of our approach is that we do not need to impose further assumptions
on demand. The assumption of quasi-concavity implies that there is a unique demanded bundle,
given by:


         Yit = Dit (P1t , ..., PIt , Ct ) for i = 1, 2, ..., I                                                                              (3)


where Ct is total consumption in period t. The demand for the output aggregate of a given firm
depends only on the firm's own aggregate price index, the price indexes of other firms, and total
consumption. We can leave the D(·) function unspecified.
       The within-firm CES assumption allows us to decompose changes in the firm-specific price
                                              
index in a particularly convenient way. Let y
                                            it be firm i's common outputs between t - 1 and

t (i.e. y     y      
        it-1  it ), Rit be the consumer's expenditures on common goods (i.e. common-goods
                          and Y  be the price and quantity indexes for common goods analogous
revenue for the firm), Pit     it
                  y
to Pit and Yit , Sijt be the consumer's expenditure share on product j among all products produced
                y
by firm i, and Sijt be the corresponding share among common goods.15 Following Sato (1976),
Vartia (1976), Feenstra (1994) and Redding and Weinstein (2020), it is straightforward to show
(see Appendix A.1) that the log change in the firm-specific price level can be expressed as:

                Pit                                 Pijt                                ijt                 1            y
                                                                                                                         it-1,t
         ln              =           ijt ln                     -            ijt ln                     - y    ln                           (4)
               Pit-1             
                                                   Pijt-1               
                                                                                        ijt-1            i - 1           y
                                                                                                                         it,t-1
                             j y
                               it                                   j y
                                                                      it

                                                                 P
                                                       =ln         it
                                                                P
                                                                 it-1



where:

                            y      y
                           Sijt -Sijt -1
                            y        y
                        ln Sijt -ln Sijt-1
         ijt =                 y      y
                                                     , y
                                                       it,t-1 =
                                                                                y
                                                                               Sijt , y
                                                                                      it-1,t =
                                                                                                                 y
                                                                                                                Sijt-1                      (5)
                              Sijt -Sijt -1                                                                  
                               y        y                               j y
                                                                          it                             j y
                                                                                                           it
                           ln Sijt -ln Sijt -1
                 j y
                   it



The first term on the right-hand side of (4) is (the log of) the familiar Sato-Vartia index (Sato,
1976; Vartia, 1976); it is an observable weighted average of product-specific price changes for
                                                                                        1                                           1
                                                                                 y        y                                   y       y
  15             
       That is, Rit =    it
                           y
                                            
                               Pijt Yijt , Pit =      j it
                                                            y   (Pijt /ijt )1-i       1-
                                                                                          i       
                                                                                              , Yit =        y
                                                                                                          j it   (ijt Yijt )1-i   1-
                                                                                                                                      i
                                                                                                                                           y
                                                                                                                                          Sijt =
Pijt Yijt                              Pijt Yijt
    
  Rit
            for j  y         y
                   it , and Sijt =       Rit
                                                 .



                                                                        10
common goods, with the "Sato-Vartia weights" ijt . The second term is a weighted average
of changes in (unobservable) product quality, again using the Sato-Vartia weights. Intuitively,
increases in product quality tend to reduce the price index, other things equal.16 Together, the
                                                                                       . The
first and second terms are equal to the log change in the common-goods price index, Pit
third term is an adjustment for entry and exit of products, first introduced by Feenstra (1994).
                                                                                 y
Increases in product variety also tend to reduce the price index.17 Although the i term is
unobservable, the y          y
                  it-1,t and it,t-1 terms (which capture the common-goods shares of total firm

revenues in periods t - 1 and t) are observable.
       Appendix A.1 further shows that the log change in the quantity index, Yit , can also be ex-
pressed in a simple decomposition:

               Yit                         Yijt                         ijt        y           y
                                                                                               it-1,t
         ln           =          ijt ln             +          ijt ln           + y i ln                         (6)
              Yit-1           
                                          Yijt-1            
                                                                        ijt-1    i - 1         y
                                                                                               it,t-1
                          j y
                            it                          j y
                                                          it

                                                     Y
                                              =ln      it
                                                    Y
                                                     it-1



         is the quantity index for common goods. The first term is again the log of a Sato-Vartia
where Yit
index, this time for quantities, the second term captures improvements in product quality, and
the third term captures increases in product variety.
       It is worth noting that this within-firm CES approach nests the common approach of using
                                                                               y
firm revenues deflated by a sector-level price index to measure real ouput, as i  .18 In that
sense, our aggregation method is strictly more general than the most commonly used one.
  16
     Redding and Weinstein (2020), in a very different exercise, deal with the quality terms by assuming that the
geometric average of product quality across products is time-invariant; our approach, by contrast, is to assume that
they are orthogonal to the instruments we construct, as will be made clear below.
  17
     For example, if no goods are dropped from t - 1 to t but new goods are introduced, then y                y
                                                                                                it-1,t = 1 > it,t-1 ,
                y
which, since i    > 1 by assumption, implies a reduction in the price index. This reflects the fact that the utility
function (1) embeds a taste for variety in the goods from a given firm.
  18                       y
     Put another way, as i     our approach would provide theoretical justification for the standard approach
of deflating firm revenues by a sector-level price index. From (1) and (2), limy  Yit =           j  ijt Yijt and
                                                                                                       y
                                                                                    i                 it
limy  Pit = minj y (Pijt /ijt ). All goods purchased by the consumer have the same quality-adjusted price,
     i                 it
call it Pt = Pijt /ijt  j  y ; goods with higher quality-adjusted prices are not purchased. Then Rit =
                                it
                                                                     y                  
   j it Pijt Yijt = j it (Pijt /ijt )ijt Yijt = Pt Yit . Hence as i  , deflating Rit by Pt yields real output.
       y                  y
                                                                            y
Our approach is more general in that it is theoretically justified also for i < .




                                                            11
2.2      Production

On the production side, we assume that real output, as defined above, is a function of capital,
labor, and a firm-level CES materials aggregate, combining in Cobb-Douglas fashion:

                                                                                              im
                                                                                          
                                                                                   m -1       m -1
                                                                                   i         i
                m       k it +i +t +                                               m
         Yit = Mit Lit Kit e             it
                                              where Mit =            (iht Miht )     i                      (7)
                                                               hm
                                                                it



Here h indexes material inputs, m
                                it is the set of inputs purchased by the firm, Miht is the quantity

of each material input purchased, Lit is labor, and Kit is capital. We refer to iht as input quality,
recognizing that it may reflect physical attributes of the inputs or characteristics of the technology
used to combine them in production. It captures any differences across inputs in how much one
physical unit of the input contributes to the input aggregate. The assumption that the production
function is Cobb-Douglas in capital, labor, and materials is standard in the literature. In principle,
our approach could be extended to other functional forms (e.g. translog), although other forms
would require additional instruments. As on the output side, we assume the the firm-specific
                                                                 m > 1, which ensures that a
elasticity of substitution between inputs is greater than unity, i
firm consumes more of an input that increases in quality. In addition to being standard, this
assumption is consistent with recent evidence at the micro level that intermediate inputs are
typically substitutes (Dhyne et al., 2020b; Peter and Ruane, 2020); also, as discussed below, we
believe that the assumption that inputs are subsitutes is particularly plausible in the subsectors
we focus on.19
       In the error term, it is a firm-specific "ex ante" productivity shock that firms observe before
choosing inputs but that is unobservable to the econometrician; i is a time-invariant firm effect;
t is a sector- or economy-level shock; and         it   is an "ex post" shock that is revealed after firms
have chosen inputs (and hence is not "transmitted" to input choices). (We may also think of it as
reflecting measurement error.) As is standard, we allow material inputs and labor to be adjustable
in the short run and hence potentially correlated with the ex ante shock, it , but assume that
capital can be adjusted only with a lag of one period. We assume that the ex ante and ex post
productivity shocks are uncorrelated with past values of inputs, but we allow for feedback from
current shocks to future input choices (and from the ex ante shock to current choices). In the
  19
    As on the output side, our method remains applicable, although with somewhat less intuitive implications, as
        m
long as i  > 0. See Appendix A.2.


                                                        12
language of Wooldridge (2010), we assume that the input choices are sequentially but not strictly
exogenous. In addition, we assume that both it and                  it   are serially uncorrelated. This assumption
on it is stronger than usually imposed, but it can be tested with standard methods (Arellano
and Bond, 1991), and we will not reject the null of no serial correlation. Formally, we assume:


             E (it |i , Kit , Kit-1 Mit-1 , Lit-1 , it-1 ,     it-1 ..., Ki1 , Mi1 , Li1 , i1 , i1 )   =0                (8)

             E ( it |i , Kit , Mit , Lit , Kit-1 , Mit-1 , Lit-1 , it-1 ,   it-1 ..., Ki1 , Mi1 , Li1 , i1 , i1 )   =0


where the conditioning on past values of the shocks implies a lack of serial correlation in the
shocks. Here we assume that the firm effect, i , arguably captures within-firm persistence that
might show up as serial correlation in models without fixed effects.20
       It is important to note that the quality and variety of both outputs and inputs, represented
by the quality terms ijt and iht and the variety sets y      m
                                                      it and it , may be chosen endogenously

by firms. Researchers have proposed a number of frameworks to analyze such choices; see for
instance Kugler and Verhoogen (2012) on quality, and Eckel and Neary (2010), Bernard et al.
(2011) and Mayer et al. (2014) on variety. Here we do not adopt a particular model of how firms
make these choices, nor do we assume that the firm behaves optimally in making them. We need
only that the choices are uncorrelated with our internal and external instruments, discussed in
Subsection 2.4 below.
       The derivations of the price and quantity indexes on the input side are analogous to those on
the output (i.e. demand) side. Given the production function (7) (which is also weakly separable,
with homothetic aggregate Mit ), the firm can be thought of as first choosing values of Miht
to minimize the cost of acquiring a given level of the aggregate input, Mit , and then choosing
optimal values of Mit , Lit and Kit , given the demand function, (3). Firms are assumed to be
price-takers on input markets. As discussed below, we believe that this assumption is reasonable
in the subsectors we focus on.21 Optimization in the first stage implies that the cost of purchasing
  20
      Proxy-variable methods typically assume that it follows a Markov process, which allows for flexible patterns
of serial correlation, but they do not allow for a firm effect, as discussed below.
   21
      Estimation of production functions when producers have oligopsony power in input markets has recently been
considered by Rubens (2020). Although market power in input markets could potentially be accommodated in our
framework, we leave this extension to future work.




                                                            13
one unit of the materials aggregate, Mit , is:

                                                  1
                                      m         1- m
                                    1-i             i
                            Wiht
        Wit =                                                                                                                       (9)
                            iht
                   hm
                    it



                                             m , where E m is the firm's total expenditures on
This is the price index that sets Wit Mit = Eit         it

material inputs.
      As on the output side, the CES assumption allows us to decompose input-price changes in a
convenient way. Let m                                                      m     m       
                    it be firm i's common inputs between t - 1 and t (i.e. it-1  it ), Wit
      be the price and quantity indexes for common inputs, E m be the firm's expenditures on
and Mit                                                     it
                m be the firm's expenditure share on input h, among all inputs purchased by
common inputs, Siht
             m the corresponding share among common inputs.22 Appendix A.2 shows that the
firm i, and Siht
log change in the firm-specific input price level can be expressed as:

             Wit                                 Wiht                                iht               1            m
                                                                                                                    it-1,t
       ln               =          iht ln                       -          iht ln                -   m     ln                      (10)
             Wit-1              
                                                Wiht-1                  
                                                                                     iht-1           i - 1          m
                                                                                                                    it,t-1
                            hm
                             it                                     hm
                                                                     it

                                                              W
                                                        ln      it
                                                             W
                                                              it-1



where:
                            m - S m
                           Siht  iht-1
                            m -ln S m
                        ln Siht
        iht =                  Siht
                                    iht-1
                                m -S m              , m
                                                      it,t-1 =
                                                                              m
                                                                             Siht , m
                                                                                    it-1,t =
                                                                                                            m
                                                                                                           Siht-1                  (11)
                                     iht-1
                                m -ln S m                             hm                          hm  
                       
                            ln Siht     iht-1                          it                          it
                   hm
                    it



As for output prices, the first term is the log Sato-Vartia observable price change index for common
goods; the second term is a weighted average of changes in input quality; and the third term is
an adjustment for entry and exit of inputs.
      As for output quantities, the change in the CES materials quantity aggregate can again be
written as the sum of an observable Sato-Vartia quantity change index and unobservable terms
                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                             m   1- m
 22
      That   is,       m
                      Eit   =        hm       Wiht Miht ,        
                                                                Wit      =          hm       (Wiht /iht )1-i         i   ,    
                                                                                                                             Mit     =
                                      it                                             t,t-1
                                   1
                             m   1- m
   hm        (iht Miht )1-i          i      m
                                         , Siht =   Wiht Miht
                                                       m
                                                      Eit
                                                                for h  m         m
                                                                       it , and Siht =
                                                                                             Wiht Miht
                                                                                                 m
                                                                                               Eit
                                                                                                       .
    t,t-1




                                                                    14
capturing increases in variety and quality:

           Mit                                   Miht                               iht           m
                                                                                                  i              m
                                                                                                                 it-1,t
      ln                =            iht ln                    +           iht ln           +   m - 1 ln                  (12)
           Mit-1                 
                                                Miht-1                 
                                                                                    iht-1       i                m
                                                                                                                 it,t-1
                             hm
                              it                                   hm
                                                                    it

                                                               M
                                                         ln      it
                                                              M
                                                               it-1



        is the quantity index for common inputs. This approach again nests the standard
where Mit
                                                                               m  ; see
approach of using expenditures deflated by a sector-level input price index as i
footnote 18.


2.3    Deriving Estimating Equation

To integrate the CES output and input quantity decompositions (6) and (12) into the production
function, (7), it is convenient to restate the decompositions in levels. Let lower-case letters
represent logs and            a change from t - 1 to t. Summing the differences in (6) and (12) over time
within firms, with firm-specific normalizations yi0 and mi0 , we have:

                    t                               t
                                                                           ij             y
                                                                                          i
                                                                                                   t
                                                                                                                 y
                                                                                                                 i -1,
yit = yi0 +                        ij      yij +                ij ln               +   y               ln                (13)
                                                             
                                                                           ij -1        i -1                     y
                                                                                                                 i, -1
                    =1      j y
                              i
                                                    =1   j y
                                                           i
                                                                                                   =1
                                                                                                      y
                               SV                                     y                            =:vit
                            =:yit                                  =:qit
                        t                                 t                                                  t
                                                                                ih            m
                                                                                              i                       m
                                                                                                                      i -1,
mit = mi0 +                         ih        wih +                   ih ln             +   m-1                  ln
                                                               
                                                                                ih -1       i                         m
                                                                                                                      i, -1
                    =1 hm
                        i
                                                         =1 hm
                                                             i
                                                                                                            =1
                                                                                                                m
                                                                                                             =:vit
                                                                           m
                                                                        =:qit
                             =:mSV
                                it


                                                          SV , q y , v y , mSV , q m , and v m , to be
where we define the new variables under the underbraces, yit    it    it    it    it        it

equal to the indicated summations. Note that in defining variables in this way, we set the quality
                   y     y     m , and v m to zero in the initial year and include the firm-specific
and variety terms qit , vit , qit       it
                                                             SV and mSV .
normalizations as part of the "Sato-Vartia" quantity terms, yit      it

   Plugging these expressions into the production function, (7), and rearranging, we have:

        SV
       yit = m mSV
                it +                 it   + k kit + i + t + uit                                                           (14)




                                                                   15
where:

                  m     y          m     y
        uit = (m vit - vit ) + (m qit - qit ) + it +        it                                                  (15)


This equation relates the Sato-Vartia output quantity index to the Sato-Vartia input quantity
index (both observable, modulo the firm-specific normalizations), log capital, log labor, a firm
effect, a year effect, and an error term that reflects variety and quality of outputs and inputs as
well as the "ex ante" and "ex post" productivity shocks.
      Writing the production function in this way helps to clarify two issues. The first is that simply
using physical quantities for output and input may be problematic in a setting where quality or
variety vary differently by firm over time, on the output side or the input side. The input choices
mSV                                                                                        m, qy , vm,
 it ,     it ,   and kit may be correlated with the unobserved quality and variety terms, qit  it   it
     y
and vit , generating what we call output- or input-quality bias, or output- or input-variety bias. To
fix ideas, suppose that firms produce a single product using a single material input, in which case
 SV and mSV simplify to the physical quantities of output and input and the variety terms drop
yit      it

out. If producing one unit of a higher-quality output requires more physical units of labor, with
                                                                                          y
all else equal, then there will be a positive correlation between           it   and the qit (and hence a negative
                                          y
correlation between        it   and the -qit in the error term), generating a negative output-quality bias
in the OLS estimate of  . Biases may also arise from purely exogenous shocks to product appeal
or input quality, if such shocks affect firms' input choices -- for instance, if a firm's product
becomes fashionable for reasons unrelated to the firm's actions but it expands production to take
advantage of the increased demand, or if a supplier improves the quality of a purchased input
without changing the price and this induces the firm to increase output.
      Among multi-product, multi-input firms, biases could arise from changes in variety. For
instance, if import-tariff reductions increase the set of input varieties available and induce firms
to increase the variety of inputs purchased, the variety of outputs produced, and total output,
as suggested by Goldberg et al. (2010) and Bas and Paunov (2020), one would expect a positive
                                                                             y
correlation between mSV      m                                      SV
                     it and vit and a negative correlation between mit and -vit , generating

offsetting biases with ambiguous net effects. It is important to note that these quality and variety
biases are distinct from transmission bias, and might be present even if one had a perfect proxy
for the ex ante productivity term, it .23
 23
      Note also that including a proxy for input quality alone, as in De Loecker et al. (2016), does not solve all of


                                                          16
    The second issue that equation (14) clarifies is why the scalar monotonicity assumption re-
quired by standard proxy-variable approaches is incompatible with our approach to aggregation.
The leading proxy-variable approaches require a one-to-one relationship between a firm's under-
lying productivity and either investment or materials demand, conditional on other observables
(Olley and Pakes, 1996; Levinsohn and Petrin, 2003; De Loecker, 2011; Doraszelski and Jauman-
dreu, 2013, 2018; Ackerberg et al., 2015; Gandhi et al., 2020) As noted by Ackerberg et al. (2015),
in models with a firm effect (here i ) in addition to the ex ante productivity term (here it ), this
assumption is unlikely to hold, since the firm effect introduces a second dimension of heterogene-
ity between firms.24 In our case, we assumed the presence of a firm effect at the outset, in the
production function, (7). But even if we had not, we would have to deal with the firm-specific
normalizations yi0 and mi0 in (13), which we have folded into the levels of the observable Sato-
                             SV and mSV . We impose a particular normalization in the second
Vartia quantity aggregates, yit      it

step of our estimation procedure below, but we feel that a strength of our approach is that we
do not need to impose such an assumption in the first step when estimating the coefficients on
materials and labor. We will pursue an approach more in the spirit of the panel-data literature,
in part because it can more easily accommodate the fixed effect.


2.4    Two-Step IV Estimation Procedure

To estimate the production function, (14), we proceed in two steps, each implementing an IV
model. In the first step, we first-difference to remove the firm effect and use lagged levels and
external drivers of input price changes as instruments. We recover estimates of m and  from
this step, but we treat k as a nuisance parameter, in part because we do not believe there is
sufficient signal in the within-firm changes in capital to estimate k credibly. In the second step,
we incorporate the first-step estimates of m and  in the levels equation and use the lagged
difference of capital as an instrument for the level, in the spirit of the System GMM approach
(Arellano and Bover, 1995; Blundell and Bond, 1998, 2000). To be clear about terminology: we
refer the first step as the "differences" step and the second as the "levels" step; in each step, there
is an IV model that has two stages.
the potential problems; there may still be correlation of physical input choices with output quality or with output
or input variety.
  24
     This issue is separate from the concern that firms may face heterogeneous constraints in input markets, which
might break the monotonic relationship between productivity and materials or investment demand (Shenoy, forth-
coming).



                                                        17
2.4.1     Differences (Step 1)

A common approach to estimating an equation with a firm effect would be to implement a "within"
estimator in which all variables are deviated from firm-specific means. But the within estimator
would require the time-varying firm-specific productivity terms, it and                  it ,   to be uncorrelated with
all past and future values of the covariates -- strict exogeneity in Wooldridge (2010)'s terminology
-- which would be violated if productivity shocks affect future input choices. Instead, we first-
difference to remove the firm effect, yielding an estimator that remains consistent under sequential
exogeneity (which we have assumed in (8)). From (14),

          SV
         yit = m         mSV
                          it +             it   + k     kit +        t +   uit                                            (16)


where:

                          m         y                  m        y
         uit = (m        vit -     vit ) + ( m        qit -    qit )+      it +   it



Note that in addition to removing the firm effect, i , the first-differencing eliminates the firm-
                                                                            SV and mSV . We refer
specific normalizations in (13), yi0 and mi0 , from the Sato-Vartia terms, yit      it

to (16) as our difference equation.
    Ordinary least squares (OLS) estimation of (16) would be subject to the quality and variety
biases discussed above as well as the familiar transmission bias (i.e. firms observe it before
choosing the flexible inputs, inducing a positive correlation between                   it and             mSV
                                                                                                            it and         it ).

Additionally, in first differences even pre-determined variables will in general be correlated with
the error term: kit , which appears in           kit , may be correlated with it-1 or             it-1 ,   which appear in
  uit . To address these concerns, we seek instruments that are correlated with                            mSV
                                                                                                            it ,     it   and
  kit and uncorrelated with the error term,                   uit . If uit is serially uncorrelated in levels, as we
have assumed, then uit-2 and further lags are uncorrelated with                   uit and input levels in t - 2 and
further back are valid instruments for            mSV
                                                   it ,         it   and   kit . Below we will implement standard
tests for serial correlation from Arellano and Bond (1991) and find that we do not reject the null
hypothesis of no serial correlation.25
  25
     Note that our approach differs from standard System GMM in the assumption on the productivity shocks.
Blundell and Bond (1998, 2000) assume that the ex ante productivity shocks follow an AR(1) process and quasi-
difference to purge the serial correlation prior to estimation. Under the (testable) assumption of no serial correlation,
this quasi-differencing is not necessary.



                                                              18
       A widely recognized concern with using lagged levels as instruments, however, is that they
may be only weakly correlated with current differences (Griliches and Mairesse, 1998; Blundell
and Bond, 1998, 2000; Bun and Windmeijer, 2010; Hayakawa and Qi, 2020).26 Including further
and further lags may exacerbate the weak-instrument problem. Testing for weak instruments is
complicated here by the presence of multiple endogenous covariates and the potential for het-
eroskedastic errors (which we would not feel justified in assuming away). This is a frontier area
of econometric theory and there is no consensus in the literature on the right diagnostic tests to
use in such cases.27 Two tests are commonly reported in practice. Sanderson and Windmeijer
(2016) propose an improved version of a test first suggested by Angrist and Pischke (2009), which
is appropriate for estimation and inference on each of multiple endogenous regressors, as we are
interested in here.28 Also commonly reported is the Kleibergen and Paap (2006) Wald statistic,
an analogue of the Cragg and Donald (1993) statistic applicable in non-homoskedastic settings.29
We will report both the Sanderson-Windmeijer and Kleibergen-Paap Wald statistics below. The
statistics will give reason to be concerned about the weakness of the internal instruments.
       Our strategy for strengthening the instrument set is to incorporate external instruments cap-
turing exogenous variation in the prices of materials and labor. To construct the materials-price
instrument, we proceed in two steps, taking advantage of detailed Colombian trade-transactions
data merged with the Colombian manufacturing survey. We first use real-exchange-rate move-
ments to predict import-price movements at the product-year level.30 We then use information
on the product composition of each firm's imports to aggregate the predictions to the firm-year
level. To ensure that the predicted import index is uncorrelated with uit-1 , which appears in
  uit in (16), we run "leave one out" regressions (one for each firm, omitting that firm's imports)
to predict import-price changes and we use import product composition from t - 2 to do the
  26
     In the setting of cross-country growth regressions, Bazzi and Clemens (2013) and Kraay (2015) show that the
instruments used in difference and system GMM estimators are weak and can suggest misleading inferences. See
also the review by Bun and Sarafidis (2015).
  27
     In a recent state-of-the-art review, Andrews et al. (2019) recommend the test of Montiel Olea and Pflueger
(2013) in cases with a single endogenous regressor, but have no recommendation in cases with multiple endogenous
regressors; see their footnote 4.
  28
     The Sanderson-Windmeijer statistic adjusts for the fact that the endogenous covariates may themselves be
highly correlated. The theoretical justification for it relies on an assumption of homoskedastic errors, but it is
commonly reported even in non-homoskedastic settings.
  29
     Although the Kleibergen and Paap (2006) Wald statistic is sometimes compared to the Stock and Yogo (2005)
critical values (see e.g. Baum et al. (2007)), the validity of this comparison is unclear in the non-homoskedastic
case, since the critical values are calculated under the assumption of homoskedasticity.
  30
     Exchange-rate movements have previously been used as a source of identification in production-function esti-
mation by Park et al. (2010), who use them as a source of variation in demand from export markets.



                                                       19
aggregation.
       To be precise, we begin by defining real exchange rates (RERs) as:

                                CP Iot
         RERot = N ERot                                                                                         (17)
                               CP ICol,t

where o indexes import origins, N ERot is the nominal exchange rate (Colombian pesos/foreign
currency), CP Iot is the consumer price index (CPI) in the origin, and CP ICol,t is the CPI of
Colombia. Defined in this way, a real appreciation in country o is reflected in an increase in
RERot . We consider the top 100 origins by Colombian import volume and label this set O. We
use n to index products defined at the 8-digit trade classification level, which do not map cleanly
to products in the Colombian industrial classification, indexed by j and h above. We exclude
machinery and equipment, which could arguably be considered capital rather than material im-
ports; we also exclude petroleum and other mineral fuels.31 For a particular imported input n, we
calculate an average log RER change separately for each firm in our data, weighting by imports
but leaving out the firm's own imports:

                                                                                  Iont-1,-i
           rernt,-i =        ont-1,-i   ln(RERot ), where ont-1,-i =                                            (18)
                        oO                                                       oO Iont-1,-i


Here Iont-1,-i is the "leave-one-out" value of imports of product n from origin o in period t - 1 for
all firms except i. We then use these product-level average real-exchange-rate changes to predict
import price changes at the product-year level, using the regression:

            imp
           wnt,-i = st       rernt,-i + st + nt                                                                 (19)

            imp
where      wnt,-i is the change in import n's log import price (averaged across origins using import

weights) for imports of all firms except i,32 and st is a sector-year effect. In our preferred
specification, s indexes two digit trade sectors and we allow the coefficient on the exchange-
rate term to vary by two-digit trade sector and year.33 We run this leave-one-out regression
  31
      That is, we exclude Harmonized System 2-digit categories 27, 84 and 85.
  32               imp                         imp
      That is, wnt,  -i =    oO ont-1,-i      wont, -i , where ont-1,-i is defined as in (18).
   33
      In principle, we could include lags of the average real-exchange-rate changes in (19). But consistent with the
literature on exchange-rate pass-through (see e.g. Campa and Goldberg (2005)), we have found that the effect of
RER changes on import prices decays relatively quickly, within one year, and including further lags has little effect
on the strength of our instrument, so we do not include them here.




                                                         20
separately for each firm i (using data from all firms in the customs data that can be linked to the
manufacturing survey, not just those in the rubber and plastics sectors) and recover the predicted
             imp
values,     wnt, -i .

       We then use firm i's product-level import shares as weights in constructing the average pre-
dicted import price change at the firm level:

            imp                     imp                         Iint-2
           wit    =        int-2   wnt, -i , where int-2 =                                                 (20)
                      nN                                       nN Iint-2


Here Iint-2 is imports by firm i of product n in period t - 2 and N is the set of all imported
                                                                         imp
products. For firms that did not import in t - 2, we set              wit      = 0. This average predicted
                                                imp
import price change at the firm level,        wit , is our external instrument for           mSV
                                                                                              it in (16).
                                                                                                          34


       To construct an external instrument for labor, we exploit the fact that the minimum wage
in Colombia is high relative to the wage distribution and that it rose sharply over our sample
period, especially in 1994-1999 and 2003-2009. (See Subsection 3.3 for institutional background.)
We first construct a measure of the "bite" of the minimum wage -- how binding it is expected to
be on a particular firm -- defined as:

                 M Wt
         Bit =                                                                                             (21)
                 Wit

where M Wt is the national minimum wage (defined for monthly earnings and annualized multi-
plying by 12) and Wit is firm-level average annual earnings per worker for permanent workers,
calculated as the firm-level annual wage bill divided by average employment. Defined in this way,
Bit < 1 and the closer the firm average wage is to the national minimum wage, the larger is Bit .
We interact this measure of bite with the change in the national minimum wage, using bite from
t - 2 (again to avoid correlation with uit-1 , which appears in          uit in (16)):


           zit = Bit-2       ln(M Wt )                                                                     (22)


This predicted wage change,          zit , serves as an instrument for         it   in (16). Other studies that
have followed this strategy of interacting minimum wage changes with differences in their bite
include Card (1992), Stewart (2002), and Cengiz et al. (2019).
  34
    Exchange-rate movements may also affect export prices. We address this concern by constructing an analogous
predicted export price index and including it as an additional covariate; see Section 5.2 below.


                                                      21
   It is well known that the estimation of the coefficient on capital is problematic in first-
differenced models, and indeed in any model that includes a firm effect. For example, in a
first-differenced model using lagged levels as instruments, Ornaghi (2006) finds a negative co-
efficient on capital. Using a within estimator, S¨
                                                 oderbom and Teal (2004) also find a negative
relationship. It is common to attribute low estimates of the capital coefficient to measurement
error in capital, the effect of which is exacerbated by transformations to remove the firm effect
(Griliches and Mairesse, 1998; Ackerberg et al., 2015). In the Colombian manufacturing census,
we do not observe capital utilization, and it seems likely that the capital measure we are able
to construct, while standard, is a very noisy measure of capital in use. It may also be that in
the presence of adjustment costs for capital, with firms investing in a lumpy way and the returns
to capital accruing over long periods, changes in capital are not likely to show up immediately
in changes in output (Griliches and Mairesse, 1998). Griliches and Mairesse (1998) recommend
looking at longer differences, to reduce the role of noisy year-to-year fluctuations. But as noted
above (footnote 33), the real-exchange-rate fluctuations that are the main source of exogenous
variation in our predicted-import-price instrument have an effect on prices only in the relatively
short term, typically 1-2 quarters, and the instrument has little explanatory power over longer pe-
riods. If we had an external instrument that generated large changes in capital on a year-by-year
basis, it would help to improve the estimation of the capital coefficient, but we have not found
such an instrument. In light of these issues, we conclude that we do not have sufficient signal in
year-on-year capital changes to estimate k well in first-differences. In the first step, we focus on
estimating m and  and treat k as a nuisance parameter. In the next subsection, we present
a different strategy for estimating k , in levels, incorporating "between" variation.
   The key identifying assumptions for this first step, in differences, are that the instruments --
                              imp
the external instruments,    wit    and   zit , and the internal instruments, mSV
                                                                               it-2 ,   it-2 ,   and kit-2
-- are uncorrelated with the error term in (16),      uit . Under these assumptions, we can recover
consistent estimates of output elasticities with respect to materials and labor, m and  . If one
is only interested in m and/or  , for instance to use in constructing markups in the method of
Hall (1986) and De Loecker and Warzynski (2012), then one can stop at this step.




                                                 22
2.4.2     Levels (Step 2)

In the second step, we proceed in the broad spirit of System GMM (Arellano and Bover, 1995;
Blundell and Bond, 1998, 2000) in using lagged differences as instruments in a levels equation.35
The System GMM assumption that lagged differences are uncorrelated with the firm effect is
equivalent to assuming that the correlation of the level of the inputs and the firm effect is constant
over time, which Bun and Sarafidis (2015) refer to as the "constant correlated effects" assumption.
Here, because of the availability of the external instruments in Step 1, we need this assumption
only for capital, not for materials or labor. That is, we assume:


        E (kit i ) = ci                                                                                         (23)


for some (potentially firm-specific) constant ci . This assumption rules out correlation between a
firm's time-invariant productivity and the evolution of its capital stock over time and is clearly
restrictive. But we believe that it is plausible in our setting, where much of the within-firm
variation appears to be due to measurement error.36
    To proceed, we also need to take a stand on the firm-specific normalizations, mi0 and yi0 , in
(13). This amounts to choosing a base year for the firm-specific output and input price indexes,
Pit and Wit . Here we assume that these indexes are equal to unity in the first year that a firm
appears in our data. In logs, since rit = yit + pit in every period, setting pi0 = 0 implies yi0 = ri0 ;
that is, the log output quantity index in a firm's first year in the panel is set equal to log revenues.
Similarly, on the input side, setting wi0 = 0 implies mi0 = ei0 ; the log input quantity index is
set equal to log expenditures. These choices for the firm-specific normalizations preserve the
cross-sectional variation in sales and expenditures present in the initial year for each firm.
    Using m and  from Step 1 and recalling that yi0 and mi0 are included in the definitions of
 SV and mSV , equation (14) can be rewritten as:
yit      it


         SV
        yit - m mSV
                 it -          it   = k kit + t + u
                                                  it                                                            (24)
   35
      Despite this similarity, our approach differs from Blundell and Bond (2000) in that we use a different set of
instruments, we do not allow for for serial correlation in ex ante productivity (and hence do not quasi-difference to
eliminate it), and we do not estimate the difference and levels equations simultaneously by GMM. See also Section
6.
   36
      Assumption (23) would also be justified if current investment were a function of current and past innovations
in productivity, i.e. it , it-1 , ..., i0 , but not the fixed effect, i .




                                                         23
where the error term now includes the firm effect, i , and terms arising from estimation error in
the first-step estimates:

                                                                             y                y
           it = i + (m - m )mSV
           u                 it + ( -  )                    it
                                                                       m
                                                                 + (m vit - vit         m
                                                                                ) + (m qit - qit ) + it +       it



We assume that the lagged difference in capital,                        kit-1 , is uncorrelated with the quality and
                m , q y , v m and v y . Under this assumption and the constant correlated effects
variety terms, qit   it    it      it

assumption, (23),             kit-1 is a valid instrument for kit in (24).37 Although the first-step estimation
errors in m and  show up in u
                            it , the consistency of the first-step estimates implies that they
will not render the second-step estimates inconsistent.38 They may, however, need to be taken
into account in estimating the standard error on ^k . As explained in more detail in Appendix

A.3, if there is no correlation between               kit-1 and mSV
                                                                 it or            it ,   then no correction of the standard
errors is required, but if there is correlation, then a correction needs to be applied. Below we
report both the uncorrected and the corrected standard errors.
         If the model is specified correctly, then estimating it in two steps potentially involves a loss
of efficiency relative to simultaneous GMM estimation. But as recently pointed out by Kripfganz
and Schwarz (2019) in a related context, an advantage of the two-step approach is that our first-
step estimates of m and  are robust to mis-specification in the second stage, and in particular
to violations of the constant-correlated-effects assumption, (23).


3         Data, Institutional Background, and Descriptive Statistics

This section describes the main datasets we use, reviews the institutional background on the
minimum wage in Colombia, explains the motivation for our choice of subsectors, and presents
descriptive statistics for our sample. Additional details are in Appendix B.
    37
         We also present results using    kit-2 as the instrument for kit .
    38
         This   follows    from     the    facts    that     plimI      1
                                                                        I     i   kit-1 (m - m )mSV
                                                                                                 it + ( -  )         it   =
       1
plimI  I (        kit-1 mSV
                        ) · plimI  (m - m ) +
                         it
                                                                  1
                                                                  kit-1 it ) · plimI  ( -  ) (where I is the total
                                                           plimI  I (
number of firms) and, if the first-step estimates are consistent, then plimI  (m - m ) = plimI  ( -  ) = 0.
See Section 4 of Kripfganz and Schwarz (2019) and in particular their footnote 19.




                                                                  24
3.1      Annual Manufacturing Survey

We use information on sales, employment, wages, capital stock, inputs and outputs from the En-
cuesta Anual Manufacturera (EAM, Annual Manufacturing Survey), collected by the Colombian
statistical agency, DANE. Data are reported at the plant level, and we aggregate them to the firm
level -- the level at which we observe imports and exports from trade transactions records (see
below). In the sectors we focus on, nearly all firms have just one plant. We focus on data from
the period 1994-2009.39 Given that we will need at least two lags in our baseline specifications,
our main period of analysis is 1996-2009.
       The survey contains information on the values and physical quantities of all outputs produced
and inputs consumed by each plant at the level of eight-digit product categories.40 Because the
survey is used to construct producer price indexes, DANE pays careful attention to the physical
units of measurement for each product, and a given product is always reported using the same
units. We calculate product prices at the firm level as unit values: Pijt = Rijt /Yijt , where Rijt is
the value of product k produced by firm i in year t and Yijt the corresponding quantity. Input
prices are calculated analogously. Further details, including on the construction of capital stock,
which uses a standard perpetual-inventory method, are in Appendix B.1. The fact that the survey
contains, in principle, information on all material inputs is important because it responds to a
criticism of IV methods, for instance by Ackerberg et al. (2015), that the exclusion restrictions
for input-price instruments are likely to be violated if one observes only a subset of inputs.


3.2      Customs Records and Exchange Rates

The customs data contain information from the administrative records filled out by every Colom-
bian importer or exporter for each international transaction, collected by the Colombian customs
agency, DIAN. Information is available at the level of the firm, product code (8 digit), year, and
country of origin (for imports) or destination (for exports). Imports and exports by the firm
are merged with the EAM manufacturing data using firm identifiers according to the procedures
established by DANE. Further details are in Appendix B.2.
  39
      Prior to 1994, the EAM used different plant identifiers and it is often difficult to track plants over time.
Although we use data from 1992-1993 when available in constructing firm-level capital stock, we do not focus on
these years in the main analysis. Using procedures established by DANE to protect the confidentiality of the data,
it is possible to link the customs data (see below) to the EAM only until 2009.
   40
      The survey also reports information on outputs sold and inputs purchased, but we use the information on
production and consumption to avoid timing issues that arise because firms hold inventories.



                                                       25
      To calculate real exchange rates (RERs) by trading partner, we use nominal exchange rates
and consumer price indexes (CPIs) from the International Financial Statistics (IFS) of the Inter-
national Monetary Fund.41 Appendix Figure A1 depicts the movements in real exchange rates
(defined such that an increase reflects a real appreciation in the trading partner) for the 12 coun-
tries from which rubber and plastics producers purchased the most imports during the period
of our analysis. We see that several of the most important import origins had significant RER
fluctuations. Venezuela and Mexico, both major oil producers, had large real appreciations in
1995-2000 and large real depreciations subsequently. Indonesia suffered a major crisis accompa-
nied by sharp real devaluation in 1997 (as did Argentina (not pictured) in 2001). Even the US
and Eurozone countries, which were less volatile overall, experienced non-trivial variation in the
RER relative to Colombia.


3.3      Minimum Wage

Despite wide variation in local labor market conditions, Colombia has a single national minimum
wage. Over our study period, it was one of the highest in Latin America as a share of the
median wage, and it increased significantly in real terms (Maloney and Nu~
                                                                         nez Mendez, 2004;
Mondrag´
       on-V´
           elez et al., 2010). As required by the Colombian constitution, increases for the
coming year are negotiated in December by a tripartite commission including representatives
from government, employer associations, and labor organizations. Prior to 1999, the target was
commonly understood to be predicted inflation plus predicted productivity growth (Maloney and
Nu~
  nez Mendez, 2004; Hofstetter, 2006). In 1999, because of a recession, predicted inflation greatly
exceeded actual inflation and the real value of the minimum wage increased by 7%. In addition,
the Constitutional Court in Colombia ruled in 1999 that the minimum wage increase could not
be lower than the previous year's inflation. As a result, the real value of the minimum wage
continued to rise after 2000, remaining above 90% of the median wage through the end of our
study period (Mondrag´
                     on-V´
                         elez et al., 2010). Appendix Figure A2 shows the steady increase
of the real minimum wage over our study period. To illustrate the bite of the minimum wage,
Appendix Figure A3 plots a histogram of real wages in 1998 for individuals who report working in
firms with 10 or more employees in manufacturing in a Colombian household survey, the Encuesta
Nacional de Hogares. The solid and dashed vertical lines represent the 1998 and 1999 minimum
 41
      For a few countries with no information in the IFS, we gathered data directly from their central banks.



                                                         26
wages, respectively. We see that there was extensive bunching of wages at the minimum in 1998,
and that a large share of manufacturing workers was directly affected by the 1999 minimum wage
increase. The minimum wage is often used to index the wages of employees who earn above the
minimum; as a consequence, increases in the real minimum wage are likely to have an effect on
wages throughout the distribution (Mondrag´
                                          on-V´
                                              elez et al., 2010). Researchers have previously
found disemployment effects of the minimum wage in Colombia, in contrast to several other
countries in the region (Bell, 1997; Maloney and Nu~
                                                   nez Mendez, 2004); below we will also find
negative employment effects.


3.4   Choice of Subsectors and Descriptive Statistics

Our method is most applicable in industries that meet several criteria. First, the ability to
accommodate endogenous quality and variety choices is most valuable in sectors producing dif-
ferentiated products, particularly those with substantial quality variation. Second, given that we
assume that firms are price-takers in input markets, our method is most applicable in industries in
which inputs, although they may differ in quality, are relatively non-specialized and substitutable
within quality categories. Third, for our instrument for materials to be relevant, a substantial
share of inputs in the industry must be imported, such that real-exchange-rate fluctuations have
a significant effect on the input prices faced by firms.
   In choosing subsectors that fit these criteria, we face a familiar trade-off. On one hand, we
would like sample sizes to be as large as possible in order to increase the precision of our estimates.
This clearly matters in our setting where the weakness of instruments is a concern. On the other
hand, the wider the net that we cast, the more heterogeneous the included firms are likely to be.
This trade-off is well recognized in the literature; see for instance the discussion in Dhyne et al.
(2020a, Sec. 4.3). The issue is particularly salient because, as is standard in the literature, we
will treat all firms in a single broad sector as having the same production-function coefficients.
   Our approach in this paper is to focus on firms producing rubber and plastic products. These
subsectors are adjacent in the ISIC revision 2 classification (with 3-digit codes 355 and 356,
respectively) and are often classified together in a 2-digit sector, as for instance in Sector 36
("Rubber and Plastic Products") of the U.N. Central Product Classification (CPC). Table 1
reports their main 8-digit outputs. For rubber, the main product is tires of different sorts. These
can be understood to be differentiated products: they are sold under brand names -- Goodyear


                                                  27
and Michelin tires are produced in Colombia, for instance -- and often for fairly specialized uses.
For plastics, there is less concentration on a single type of product; output is distributed across
various types of tubing, bags, sheets, films, and containers. But again, the products of the sector
are typically differentiated and often targeted for specialized uses.
       By contrast, the inputs of both subsectors can be viewed as commodities, or at least commodity-
like -- highly substitutable across suppliers even if they have quality differences. Table 2 reports
the main 8-digit inputs. For rubber, the most important input is natural latex, from the bark
of rubber trees. The second-most important input category is "rare metals in primary forms"
(CPC product code 3423112) which includes carbon black, a form of carbon used as a filler in
tires.42 For the plastics subsector, the most important inputs are raw forms of different common
plastics -- polyethylene (PET), polypropylene (PP), polyvinyl chloride (PVC), polystyrene, and
others -- often purchased in the form of pellets. Although the pellets may vary in their chemical
properties, these differences are typically noted on the packaging. Within a given chemical speci-
fication, pellets from different producers and origin countries are typically considered to be highly
substitutable. There may be other dimensions of supply relationships that cannot be observed ex
ante, for instance timeliness of delivery or willingness of supplier to extend trade credit. But to
a first approximation we believe it is reasonable to treat the main inputs in rubber and plastics
as highly substitutable, with observable quality differences.
       As is evident in Table 2, a large share of inputs in both subsectors is imported. In rubber
products, almost all natural latex is imported, as is a substantial share of carbon black and other
inputs. In plastics, a majority of PET and 20-25% of PVC and polystyrene are imported. These
import shares are from the EAM data and hence represent shares of inputs imported directly
by firms. To the extent that firms purchase imported goods from local intermediaries, they
understate the true import shares of the inputs. Both rubber and plastics are among the more
import-intensive 3-digit subsectors in the EAM data.
       In short, because both rubber and plastics products producers use highly substitutable inputs,
a large share of which are imported, to produce horizontally and vertically differentiated products,
we believe that they are well-suited to our method.
       In selecting the estimation sample, we require that a firm have complete data on capital,
  42
     The 5-digit product code 32431, harmonized at the international level, includes "inorganic oxygen compounds
of boron, silicon and carbon." The final two digits of the CPC product code are Colombia-specific. We have
confirmed in the firm-level imports data (using an alternative 8-digit product classification) that the main input in
this category is carbon black and other forms of carbon.


                                                         28
labor, materials, and outputs for at least six consecutive years. This requirement is helpful to
ensure that the perpetual-inventory method generates a sensible measure of capital stock. It
also ensures that our sample of firms does not change as we modify the number of lags required
in different specifications. Given that the EAM data are available beginning in 1994 and that
in all specifications we will need at least two lags, our sample covers the years 1996-2009. We
are left with 362 firms in an unbalanced panel, with 11.73 observations per firm on average.
Table 3 presents summary statistics on this baseline sample. We see that the two subsectors are
comparable on many dimensions. Rubber firms spend a large share of expenditures on imports
and earn a larger share of revenues from exports, but employment averages about 100 in both
subsectors and wages and output are similar.
    To explore the robustness of our results to the definition of the subsectors of interest, in
the appendix we will report results for two alternative samples. In the first, we remove rubber
products and focus exclusively on plastics, the larger of the two subsectors. In the second, we keep
both rubber and plastics and add glass products (ISIC rev. 2 subsector 362), a subsector that
also arguably satisfies the criteria of relatively substitutable inputs, high imported input share,
and differentiated outputs. Descriptive statistics on the glass products subsector are reported in
Appendix Tables A1-A2.


4     Baseline Results

This section reports the results of the estimation strategy laid out in Section 2. For comparison
purposes, we begin by presenting the "naive" OLS and first-difference (FD) results, and then
move on to our two-step IV (TSIV) method.


4.1   "Naive" OLS and FD Models

Panel A of Table 4 presents estimates using sales as the measure of output and material expendi-
tures as the measure of input use, with both deflated by sector-level deflators. The OLS estimates
in Columns 1 and 2, without and with year effects respectively, appear to be reasonable, and are
roughly consistent with constant returns to scale, as is typically expected (see e.g. Bartelsman
and Doms (2000)). Columns 3 and 4 report first-difference (FD) estimates, corresponding to
equation (16) without instruments. Relative to the OLS estimates, the materials coefficients are



                                                29
significantly lower, the labor coefficients remain roughly unchanged, and, strikingly, the capital
coefficients drop almost to zero. The latter fact illustrates a point made above, that transforma-
tions to remove firm effects lead to severe attenuation of the capital coefficient; this problem is
not specific to our TSIV method.
    Panel B of Table 4 again report OLS and FD estimates, but using the Sato-Vartia quantity
aggregates for output and materials. In Columns 1 and 2, we have imposed the firm-specific
normalizations for yi0 and mi0 discussed in Section 2.4.2 above, effectively using each firm's first
year in the unbalanced panel as the base year for the firm-specific output and input deflators.
Overall, we see significant differences in the OLS estimates -- in particular, deflating at the
firm level reduces the OLS materials coefficient and raises the capital coefficient -- but the FD
estimates in Columns 3 and 4 are quite similar to those using sales and expenditures in Panel A.


4.2    Differences (Step 1) Results

In this step, we estimate our difference equation (16) using instruments for the changes in input
choices. Table 5 reports the first stage for different sets of instruments. Columns 1-3 use only
internal instruments, and in particular only lagged levels of inputs from period t-2. The coefficient
estimates are plausible, with lagged levels negatively associated with current changes. But the
instruments are weak: the Sanderson and Windmeijer (2016) (SW) F-statistics are below the rule-
of-thumb level of 10 (as are the conventional F-statistics for materials and labor), and although the
Kleibergen-Paap (KP) LM test easily rejects the null of underidentification, the KP Wald statistic
for weak instruments is below 1. In Appendix Table A3, we show that this weak instrument issue
is not resolved by including further lags as instruments in a GMM model.43
    To improve the explanatory power of the first stage of this step, we turn instead to our
external instruments. As described in Subsection 2.4.1 above, the first step in the construction
                                                             imp
of the firm-level predicted import-price index,           wit      from (20), is to estimate the relationship
between RER movements and import prices given by (19), leaving out the data from one firm at
a time. (In running these regressions, we include all firms in the DIAN imports data that can
  43
     Appendix Table A3 reports results from GMM estimation of our difference equation (16), where further lags
have been added "GMM-style" (Holtz-Eakin et al., 1988; Roodman, 2009), using available lags and allowing separate
coefficients in each period. Lags are included just to t - 2 in Column 1, to t - 3 in Column 2, and to the firm's
initial year in Column 3. The Kleibergen-Paap Wald statistic remains below 2 and the Sanderson-Windmeijer F
statistics are all below 3.5. However, the materials and labor coefficient estimates are similar to those using our
TSIV procedure presented below.




                                                        30
be linked to the EAM manufacturing data, not just those in the rubber and plastics subsectors.)
This generates 362 sets of coefficient estimates, one for each firm in our sample, where each set
contains a separate coefficient for each sector-year. In Appendix Figure A4, we report sector-level
average coefficients, averaging across firms and across years (with standard errors also averaged
across firms and years). Although there is some heterogeneity, in the majority of sectors (and on
average across sectors) import prices are positively related to RER movements, as expected.
   Columns 4-6 of Table 5 report the first-stage estimates including the two external instruments
                                              imp
-- the predicted change in import price,     wint from (20), and the predicted wage change instru-
ment,   zit from (22) -- and one internal instrument, the lagged level of capital from t - 2. The
coefficient estimates broadly conform to our expectations. In particular, the predicted import
price change is significantly negatively related to the change in the material quantity aggregate
and the predicted wage change is significantly negatively related to the change in employment. In
the latter case, the predicted wage change is also negatively related to the materials and capital
changes. The instruments are somewhat stronger than in the internal-instruments-only model
in Columns 1-3, but both the SW F-statistic for materials and labor and the KP Wald statistic
continue to warrant concern about the weakness of the instruments.
   Our preferred specification combines the three internal instruments from t - 2 and the external
instruments. The corresponding first stage is reported in Columns 7-9 of Table 5. The coefficient
estimates are similar to those in the other columns but the strength of the instrument set has
improved. The SW F-statistic is above the rule-of-thumb level of 10 for labor and capital and
the KP Wald statistic, while still somewhat low at 3.363, is noticeably larger than in the other
columns. The concern about the weakness of instruments remains, but it has been mitigated by
the inclusion of the external instruments.
   Table 6 presents the second-stage estimates for the three instrument sets in Table 5. In the
first two columns, the coefficients on materials and labor are imprecisely estimated and change
markedly across columns, as one might expect given the weakness of the instruments in these
specifications. In our preferred specification in Column 3, by contrast, the materials and labor
coefficients are more precisely estimated and are of plausible magnitudes, .38 and .40 respectively.
The labor coefficient is substantially larger than, and the materials coefficient very similar to,
the corresponding FD estimates in Table 4, Panel B, Columns 3-4. The difference in the labor
coefficient is consistent with the presence of an output-quality bias discussed above: if producing


                                                 31
higher-quality output requires more labor, then we would expect a positive correlation between
               y
   it   and   qit in (16), generating a negative bias in OLS and FD estimates of  , which our
approach would correct.44
    As previewed above, the capital coefficient is implausibly low in this specification. The point
estimate is in fact negative, although the confidence interval allows for positive values of roughly
the magnitude of the OLS estimate in Columns 3-4 of Table 4, Panel A. We believe that the
reason for the erratic estimate is that most of the genuine variation in capital stock is between
rather than within firms, and that once first-differencing removes the firm effect, much of the
remaining within-firm variation is due to measurement error. In Step 2 below, using the levels
equation, we will use the variation between firms to arrive at a more plausible point estimate for
the capital coefficient.
    Given that the SW F-statistic for materials and the KP Wald statistic are still somewhat low
in our preferred specification, we explore the robustness of the estimates in two ways. First, we
report weak-instrument-robust confidence intervals. The econometric literature has not reached
consensus on the best method for estimating these intervals, especially in the non-homoskedastic
case. Here we follow the approach of Andrews (2016, 2018), which uses a statistic based on a linear
combination (LC) of the K statistic of Kleibergen (2005) and the S statistic of Stock and Wright
(2000).45 We treat k as a nuisance parameter (without assuming it is strongly identified); the
confidence intervals for m and  are calculated using a projection method due to Chaudhuri and
Zivot (2011). These intervals are reported in Column 3 of Table 5. The intervals are centered at
the reported point estimates and allow us to reject the nulls that m = 0 and  = 0 comfortably at
the 95% level. Second, to further probe robustness, we estimate the Column 3 specification using
limited-information maximum likelihood (LIML), which has been found to be more robust to weak
instruments than IV (Stock et al., 2002; Angrist and Pischke, 2009). The Andrews LC robust
confidence intervals, reported in Column 4, are somewhat larger, but the coefficient estimates are
nearly identical to those in Column 3, which is reassuring. While it would be preferable to have
stronger instruments, we interpret these results as indicating that our first-step IV estimates of
  44
     Another possibility is that measurement error in labor generated attenuation bias in the FD estimate, which
our procedure removes.
  45
     In practice, the confidence region is found by using this linear combination (referred to as the LC statistic)
to test the null hypothesis at each point on a grid roughly spanning the parameter space; the confidence region is
then the set of points at which the null cannot be rejected. The LC statistic provides more powerful tests than
the K or S statistics alone under some circumstances. Conveniently, this procedure is implemented in Stata by the
twostepweakiv command (Sun, 2018).



                                                        32
m and  are robust to weak-instrument concerns.


4.3      Levels (Step 2) Results

We now turn to the second step of our TSIV procedure. We consider the levels equation, (24),
where we plug in the difference equation (Step 1) estimates, m and  , on the left-hand side.
       Panel A of Table 7 reports the first stage of the IV procedure for this step. Our preferred
specification, using     kit-1 as the instrument for kit appears in Column 1. To check robustness,
we also report results using      kit-2 as the instrument in Column 2. In neither case is there a weak-
instrument concern: the Kleibergen-Papp Wald statistic is above 36 in both cases.46 Although
the R-squared of the first-stage regression is low, the first-stage coefficient is .67 in both columns
and highly significant.
       Panel B of Table 7 reports the corresponding second stage. Columns 1 and 2 correspond to the
same Columns in Panel A, with           kit-1 and     kit-2 as instruments, respectively. For comparison
purposes, Column 3 reports the OLS estimate, without instrumenting kit . Below each estimate,
we report the uncorrected standard errors in parentheses and the corrected standard errors in
brackets. As noted in Subsection 2.4.2, the uncorrected standard errors are appropriate in the
special case that the instrument is uncorrelated with mSV
                                                       it and                  it .   Otherwise, the corrected
standard errors are the appropriate ones. It is important to acknowledge that with the corrected
standard errors, the confidence intervals in both columns are wide and we cannot reject the null
that k = 0 at conventional levels.
       Despite the large standard errors following the correction, we consider these results to be
reassuring. The point estimate in our preferred (Column 1) specification, .20, is plausible, and
(together with the first-step estimates of m and  , .38 and .40) indicates that that returns to
scale are very nearly constant, as is generally expected (Bartelsman and Doms, 2000).47 While
one would of course prefer to have a more precise estimate of k , we have more confidence in the
estimate than in the close-to-zero estimates from the naive first-differences models in Columns
3-4 of Panels A and B of Table 4 or the negative estimates from the Step 1 difference equation in
Table 6.
  46
     The Kleibergen-Papp Wald statistic and the Sanderson-Windmeijer F statistic coincide in cases with a single
endogenous covariate.
  47
     If we instead use the Column 2 estimate of .29, the materials, labor and capital coefficients sum to 1.07 but
this is not statistically significantly different from 1.




                                                       33
    It is notable that our TSIV estimates of .38, .40, and .20 for m ,  , and k are, in the end,
quite similar to (and not statistically different from) the naive OLS results using our input and
output quantity aggregates in Columns 1-2 of Table 4, Panel B. One might reasonably ask what
has been gained by going through our new procedure. We note that it was by no means obvious
at the beginning that the TSIV estimates would be so similar to the OLS-in-levels estimates. The
labor and capital coefficients drop after first-differencing to remove the firm effect, and then rise
again with our procedure. Although many explanations are possible, this pattern is consistent
with the hypothesis that there are two offsetting biases in the naive OLS results: a transmission
bias due to the firm effect, i , and a quality bias due to greater use of labor for higher-quality
outputs. While these two biases may offset in the current setting, they may not always, and
it is potentially quite useful to have a method that can address both. Comparing to the naive
OLS estimates using sales and purchases in Columns 1-2 of Table 4, the fact that the materials
coefficient is significantly smaller when using the quantity aggregates, both in the OLS estimates
in Columns 5-6 of Table 4 and our TSIV estimates, underlines the importance of having access
to quantity information on inputs and outputs.


5     Robustness

5.1   Alternative Aggregators

Our within-firm CES assumptions are convenient for showing theoretically how quality and va-
riety differences may bias estimates of output elasticities, but they are admittedly restrictive. It
is natural to ask whether our particular functional-form assumptions are driving our results. It
turns out that the empirical patterns are robust to using other common aggregators to aggregate
from the firm-product to the firm level: a Tornqvist index, a Paasche index, and a Laspeyres
index. Appendix Tables A4-A6 report estimates analogous to Tables 5-7 using these alternative
aggregators and the combination of external and internal instruments. The results are qualita-
tively similar. The point estimates display small differences from our baseline estimates -- the
Tornqvist materials coefficient is larger, the Paasche labor coefficient is smaller, and the Laspeyres
capital coefficient is smaller -- but these differences are not statistically significant. Using the
weak-instrument-robust confidence intervals, we see that the Laspeyres materials coefficient is not
significantly different from zero at the 95% level, but it is significant at the 90% level. Overall,


                                                 34
these results suggest that the empirical patterns are not particularly sensitive to the functional
form of the aggregator that we use.


5.2      Adding Predicted Export Price Index

Changes in real exchange rates in export destinations may affect export prices and how much
firms sell in those destinations, in addition to the prices of imports. If export destinations are
correlated with import origins at the market level and individual-firm level in Colombia, that
                                                                                        imp
could generate a correlation between our predicted import price index,              wit , and the error term,
                                                                                               exp
  uit . To address this concern, we construct a predicted export price index,                 wit , analogous
to the predicted import price index, and include it as a covariate. We follow the same steps as
for constructing the predicted import price index: we generate leave-one-out estimates of export
price changes and then average these using the composition of firms' export baskets. In Appendix
Tables A7-A8, this predicted export price index is included as an additional covariate. The results
are very similar to our baseline estimates. The 95% weak-instrument-robust confidence interval
for the materials coefficient includes zero, but we can still reject the null that m = 0 at 90%
confidence. The basic patterns are robust to including the export price control.


5.3      Alternative Samples

As discussed in Subsection 3.4, in choosing which subsectors to focus on we have faced a trade-off
between increasing sample size and reducing cross-firm heterogeneity. To explore this trade-off
further, we present estimates for two additional samples. In the first, we include only producers
of plastic products (ISIC rev. 2 code 356). In the second, we add another subsector that also,
arguably, uses relatively homogeneous inputs, produces differentiated outputs, and imports a
substantial share of inputs: producers of glass products (ISIC rev. 2 code 362).48 Appendix
Tables A9-A11 report the estimates for the alternative samples. Unsurprisingly, the precision of
the estimates is increasing in sample size. The weak-instrument statistics signal greater reason for
concern in the plastics-only sample, and somewhat less reason in the combined rubber, plastics,
and glass sample. But overall, the patterns are similar to the sample with rubber and plastics
producers in our baseline estimates.
 48
      Recall that Appendix Tables A1-A2 report summary statistics for glass products.




                                                        35
6         Comparison to Output Elasticities from Other Methods

This section compares our output-elasticity estimates to those of other commonly used methods
applied in our sample, using log sales and log expenditures rather than our Sato-Vartia quantity
indexes. As noted above, our approach is perhaps closest in spirit to System GMM (Arellano and
Bover, 1995; Blundell and Bond, 1998, 2000). The standard System GMM set-up has a Cobb-
Douglas production function and a firm effect, as we do, but it assumes the ex ante component
of productivity (here it ) follows an AR(1) process. After quasi-differencing to remove the serial
correlation in the error, the main estimating equation contains a lagged dependent variable as
well as lags of covariates. Difference and levels equations are then estimated simultaneously.
         Table 8 presents the results from applying standard System GMM in our baseline sample. We
include time fixed effects and use the "two-step" procedure described in Roodman (2009), using
the initial weighting matrix defined in Doornik et al. (2012) and implementing the Windmeijer
(2005) finite-sample correction for the resulting covariance matrix.49 The coefficients on contem-
poraneous log expenditures, log labor, and log capital are estimates of the Cobb-Douglas output
elasticities, corresponding to our m ,  , and k .50 The columns differ in the number of lags of
the covariates in levels that are included in the difference equation, with lags just from t - 2 in
Column 1, from t - 2 and t - 3 in Column 2, and from all available periods starting from t - 2 in
Column 3. The instruments are included "GMM-style," effectively interacted with year dummies
(Holtz-Eakin et al., 1988; Roodman, 2009). In the corresponding levels equations, we include
the first lags of the first-differenced covariates as instruments.51 To gauge the strength of the
instruments, we follow Bazzi and Clemens (2013) and Kraay (2015) in reporting weak-instrument
diagnostics separately for the differences and levels equations in Appendix Table A12. In the
differences equation, the number of instruments the rises quickly (given that lags from different
years are considered different instruments), from 56 in Column 1 to 420 in Column 3. The set of
instruments appears to be weak, with the Kleibergen-Paap Wald test statistic below 2 and the
Sanderson-Windmeijer F-statistics below 2 for contemporaneous labor and capital, and below 3
    49
     In particular, we use the Stata xtabond2 command of Roodman (2009) with options h(2), twostep, and robust.
Following Roodman's replication of Blundell and Bond (1998), we include time fixed effects as instruments only in
the levels equation, since they are asymptotically redundant in the difference equation.
  50
     The model implies additional restrictions on the relationship between the coefficients on the contemporaneous
and lagged terms, which we do not test here.
  51
     Further lags of differences in the levels equation are redundant (Arellano and Bover, 1995; Blundell and Bond,
2000).




                                                        36
for contemporaneous materials expenditures.52 That said, it is worth noting that the resulting
coefficient estimates are not very far from our baseline estimates: focusing on the specification in
Column 3 (using all available instruments), the point estimate of .48 for materials is larger than
    T SIV of .38, the point estimate of .26 for labor is smaller than our  T SIV of .40, but these
our m                                                                     l

differences are not statistically significant. The point estimate for capital of .03 is significantly
                 T SIV of .20.53
smaller than our k
    Table 9 reports estimates from four leading proxy-variable methods: those of Olley and Pakes
(1996) (OP), Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) (LP), Wooldridge (2009) (using materials as the proxy),
and Gandhi, Navarro and Rivers (2020) (GNR).54 The method of Ackerberg, Caves and Frazer
(2015) (ACF) is also commonly used, but the authors recommend that it only be used with value-
added production functions, not gross output functions, and hence their coefficient estimates
are not directly comparable to ours. For OP, LP and Wooldridge in Columns 1-3, the point
estimates for materials are consistently higher than our baseline estimate, and fall outside our
weak-instrument-robust confidence interval.55 The point estimate for labor is consistently lower
than our baseline estimate, although not significantly so. The GNR estimate of the materials
coefficient in Column 4 is very similar to ours, and the labor coefficient is somewhat larger
although not significantly so.56 Overall, although the differences in estimates are generally not
statistically significant, it is worth emphasizing that they will be of consequence when the point
estimates are used to estimate markups or productivity, as we will see in the next section.


7     Measures of Productivity

Our main objective in this paper is to estimate the output elasticities consistently, without price,
quality, or variety biases, and we have argued that our method achieves this goal. But once we
   52
      The Hansen test of over-identifying restrictions is appropriate in the non-homoskedastic case and does not reject
the hypothesis that the instruments are jointly valid. But it should be interpreted with caution, as it is weakened
by the presence of many instruments (Roodman, 2009).
   53
      In Appendix Table A13, we report the results of System GMM estimation with our quantity aggregates in place
of revenues and expenditures. The results are broadly similar, with slighly lower estimates of the materials and
labor elasticities, and somewhat higher estimate of the capital elasticity.
   54
      For OP, LP and Wooldridge, we use the Stata command prodest (Rovigatti and Mollisi, 2018); for GNR, we
have coded the estimation ourselves. For all specifications we obtain standard errors by using a bootstrap with 50
replications.
   55
      Note that for OP a large number of firms report zero investment in capital for some years and are dropped
from the estimation.
   56
      In implementing GNR, given the Cobb-Douglas structure of the the production function, we use a polynomial
of degree zero for the materials expenditure elasticity, a polynomial of degree one in capital and labor for the
integration constant, and a polynomial of degree three for the AR(1) process of it (i.e. it = 3              a
                                                                                                     a=1 a it-1 ).



                                                          37
have the elasticity estimates in hand, it is natural to ask whether we can use them to construct
a measure of productivity. In this section, we define and discuss productivity measures using
our estimates (Subsection 7.1) and compare our preferred measure to other common methods in
predicting export performance (Subsection 7.2).


7.1      Definitions

Our output-elasticity estimates can be used to construct two different TFP measures, depending
on whether we use our Sato-Vartia quantity indexes or revenues and expenditures. We refer to
these two measures as T F P Q and T F P R . Neither measure captures only technical efficiency,
but their shortcomings differ, in ways that are useful to examine. In this subsection we focus on
changes in productivity rather than levels, because in changes we can avoid taking a stand on the
firm-specific normalizations, yi0 and mi0 .
       To define                                                                  SV and mSV :57
                   T F P Q , we use the observable Sato-Vartia quantity indexes, yit      it


                          SV
           T F P Qit =   yit - m         mSV
                                          it - k        kit -          it                                         (25)


In our model, technical efficiency is represented by             it +          it   +   t .58 But referring to (16),
we see that:

                                                                m            y              m       y
         plim   T F P Qit =    t +     it +      it   + (m     vit -        vit ) + (m     qit -   qit )          (26)
         I 


That is, changes in quality and variety of both outputs and inputs are captured in                         T F P Q . If
we can can be confident that output and input quality and variety are roughly constant over time
-- as for instance for single-product, single-input firms in homogeneous-good industries -- then
  T F P Q is a consistent estimator for technical efficiency. But to the extent that a firm increases
output quality or variety,        T F P Q will understate increases in technical efficiency, and to the
extent that it increases input quality or variety, it will overstate them. This may explain, for
instance, why the Egyptian rug producers randomly allocated an initial export contract in Atkin
et al. (2017, 2019) saw increases in output quality, profitability, and productivity measured under
  57                                                                SV
      Note that in the case of single-product, single-input firms, yit and mSV
                                                                            it reduce to the physical quantity of the
single output and input.
   58
      There is some difference in practice in whether to include the year effect, t , in the definition of TFP. Here
we do, but note that it can be removed by deviating from year means.



                                                         38
laboratory conditions, but a decrease in physical-quantity-based TFP.
      To define      T F P R , we use firm revenues and expenditures, rit and eit , in place of the output
                             SV and mSV :
and input quantity indexes, yit      it



           T F P Rit =        rit - m   eit - k        kit -     it                                      (27)


Given rit = yit + pit , eit = mit + wit , and the relationships in (13)-(14), it follows that:


        plim     T F P Rit =      t +   it +      it   +   pit - m     wit
        I 


Relative to        TFPQ ,        T F P R has the advantage that changes in quality and variety are ab-
sorbed in the revenues and expenditure terms. But it has the disadvantage that it captures pure
price changes, reflected in the price index changes,                 pit and   wit . Abstracting from variety
changes, if there are no changes in quality-adjusted prices (e.g. if both quality and prices are con-
stant, or if price changes fully reflect quality changes and not other factors), then         pit =   wit = 0
and      T F P R reflects changes in technical efficiency only. On the other hand, if quality-adjusted
prices of outputs or inputs change, they show up in              TFPR .
      Whether       T F P Q or     T F P R is the more appropriate measure thus depends to some extent
on the setting and analytical objective, with              T F P Q better suited in homogeneous industries
and      T F P R arguably more informative in industries with greater vertical differentiation and/or
output and input specialization. In the case of the rubber and plastics industries in Colombia,
in which quality differences are likely to be important, we believe that                 T F P R is the more
appropriate measure. At the same time, it is important to remain aware that it may reflect price
changes as well as changes in technical efficiency.


7.2      Comparison with Other TFP Measures

How does our preferred measure of productivity compare to other standard measures? As a first
illustration, Appendix Table A14 reports pairwise correlation coefficients between the levels of
TFP calculated using different methods.59 To the methods in Tables 8, 9 and A13 mentioned
above, we add estimates from the Ackerberg et al. (2015) method, using a value-added production
 59
      In levels, we define:

        T F P R = rit - m eit - k kit -    it                                                            (28)



                                                           39
function, and from the OLS estimation with quantity aggregates from Table 4. Overall, the
different measures are reasonably highly correlated with one another, an observation that has
been made for instance by Van Biesebroeck (2008) and Eslava et al. (2009) for different sets of
methods, but the correlations are far from perfect. Our measure is most highly correlated with
the System GMM estimates, LP and Wooldridge, and least correlated with OP and ACF.
    One way to begin to evaluate the performance of different estimators is to examine how well
they predict outcomes that one can be fairly confident are related to firms' technical efficiency.
Here, as a first step, we relate estimated changes in productivity to future changes in export
performance. Although there is little agreement in the literature about whether exporting itself
increases productivity, there is a broader consensus that productivity increases are likely to predict
future expansions of exports (Bernard and Jensen, 1999; Alvarez and L´
                                                                     opez, 2005; Costantini
and Melitz, 2008; Aw et al., 2011). Relating productivity to future export growth also avoids
concerns about how changes in markups or product composition due to exporting might affect
contemporaneous productivity estimates.
    Table 10 reports correlations between changes in the various productivity measures from period
t - s to t and changes in the inverse hyperbolic sine of the value of exports from t to t + s, where
s  {1, 2, 3}. We standardize all measures so that they have standard deviation 1 (pooling years)
and we include year effects.60 In all specifications, the R2 is quite small, and for the single-period
differences (s = 1), none of the TFP measures are significant predictors of future exports. But
for longer differences, we find that all of the productivity measures are significant predictors of
future export growth. Given that the measures have been standardized, the magnitude of the
coefficients can be interpreted as an indicator of the strength of the relationship, and we see that
our measure is a stronger predictor of future export growth than the other measures we have
considered. Although the explanatory power of all of the measures is quite low, our measure has
the largest R2 among the set. These results are by no means definitive, but we view them as
suggestive that our measure represents a modest improvement in measuring technical efficiency
in our setting.
using the notation from above, where rit and eit is material expenditures. For the other methods, TFP is defined
analogously, using log revenues.
  60
     Note that the longer the differences we use, the fewer observations we are able to include in the sample, since
we lose observations either at the beginning or the end of the spell in the sample for each firm.




                                                        40
8    Conclusion

This paper has developed a method for estimating production-function parameters that can be
applied in differentiated-product industries. We believe that three contributions stand out. First,
we have highlighted the pitfalls of using physical quantities to estimate output elasticities or
TFP in industries where quality and variety vary by firm and over time. Using within-firm CES
aggregators for outputs and material inputs, we have shown theoretically how standard estimates
of output elasticities are likely to be biased by quality and variety differences. Second, we have
used external drivers of input prices as instruments to estimate the elasticities of output with
respect to materials and labor. The idea of using external instruments is not new (Griliches and
Mairesse, 1998), but previous authors have not had access to the combination of datasets and
naturally occurring variation that we have been able to take advantage of here. Third, we have
developed an approach to improving estimates of the output elasticity with respect to capital. It is
well known that models in first-differences yield unsatisfactory estimates of the capital coefficient,
and our first-step model is not an exception. In the spirit of System GMM, we have added a levels
equation, using a lagged difference as an instrument. Our two-step IV (TSIV) approach has the
advantage that the estimates of the materials and labor coefficients are robust to misspecification
of the second step, which requires stronger assumptions. Our method addresses the quality and
variety biases we have identified, in addition to transmission bias, and measures of productivity
changes constructed using our estimates do well in comparison to other standard measures in
predicting future export growth at the firm level.
    Two important questions remain open. The first is what to do if one does not have the
combination of rich data and naturally occurring variation that we have in our setting. Data
on physical quantities of both inputs and outputs are becoming increasingly available, including
in Spain (Doraszelski and Jaumandreu, 2013, 2018), Portugal (Bastos et al., 2018), the United
States (Roberts and Supina, 1996; Foster et al., 2008; Atalay, 2014), Chile (Garcia-Marin and
Voigtl¨
      ander, 2019), Ecuador (Bas and Paunov, 2020), Bangladesh (Cajal Grossi et al., 2019),
Japan in the Meiji period (Braguinsky et al., 2015), China (Brandt et al., forthcoming) and
India (Gupta, 2020). But it may be difficult to find credible external instruments and internal
instruments may be weak. One potential way forward would be to construct proxies for the quality
and variety terms that appear in estimating equations such as (14)-(15) above. The approach
of De Loecker et al. (2016) of including a flexible function of output price and market share on

                                                 41
the right-hand-side is a promising step in this direction. One could also consider constructing
explicit measures of quality, as for instance Khandelwal et al. (2013) do for output quality; such a
strategy would require imposing more structure on consumer demand than we have been willing to
do here, but may be warranted in some circumstances. To proxy for variety, one could include the
observable components of the variety terms derived above and allow for firm-specific coefficients
on them.61 It is also worth noting that in our setting, OLS in levels using the firm-level output
and input quantity aggregates yield estimates very similar to our TSIV procedure; the biases due
to unobserved quality and variety changes and the biases deriving from correlations between input
choices and time-invariant firm effects appear to offset. More research is required to determine
if this generalizes to other contexts; if it does, such OLS estimates may prove to be very useful
measures in settings where quantity data are available but credible external instruments are not.
       The second big open question is how to arrive at a measure of changes in technical efficiency
that excludes both pure price changes and changes in unobserved quality and variety. We believe
that our method yields an improved set of output elasticity estimates. But even with these
improved estimates, neither quantity-based TFP nor revenue-based TFP is an ideal measure
of technical efficiency, as discussed above in Section 7. The proxy strategies mentioned in the
previous paragraph represent one way forward, as they would provide direct measures of the
quality and variety terms that could be used to correct quantity-based TFP. Another approach
would be to use revenue-based TFP but to estimate markups explicitly in order to purge them
from the productivity estimate. Garcia-Marin and Voigtl¨
                                                       ander (2019) and Blum et al. (2018)
have recently pursued a strategy in this spirit, using the method of De Loecker et al. (2016) to
estimate markups. We believe that our method for estimating output elasticities will help to
improve estimates of markups in the approaches of De Loecker and Warzynski (2012) and De
Loecker et al. (2016) and hence could help to improve revenue-based TFP measures along these
lines.




References
Ackerberg, Daniel A., Kevin Caves, and Garth Frazer, "Identification Properties of Recent Product
 Function Estimators," Econometrica, 2015, 83 (6), 2411­2451.
  61
    Note that the variety terms in (14)-(15) depend on observables (the  terms) and time-invariant constants (the
                              y      m
elasticities of substitution, i and i  ).



                                                       42
Ackerberg, Daniel, C. Lanier Benkard, Steven Berry, and Ariel Pakes, "Econometric Tools for
  Analyzing Market Outcomes," in James Heckman and Edward Leamer, eds., Handbook of Econometrics,
  vol. 6A, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2007, chapter 63, pp. 4172­4276.
Alvarez, Roberto and Ricardo A. L´        opez, "Exporting and Performance: Evidence from Chilean
  Plants," Canadian Journal of Economics, 2005, 38 (4).
Anderson, T. W. and Cheng Hsiao, "Formulation and Estimation of Dynamic Models Using Panel
  Data," Journal of Econometrics, 1982, 18 (1), 47 ­ 82.
Andrews, Isaiah, "Conditional Linear Combination Tests for Weakly Identified Models," Econometrica,
  2016, 84 (6), 2155­2182.
  , "Valid Two-Step Identification-Robust Confidence Sets for GMM," Review of Economics and Statistics,
  2018, 100 (2), 337­348.
  , James H Stock, and Liyang Sun, "Weak Instruments in Instrumental Variables Regression: Theory
  and Practice," Annual Review of Economics, 2019, 11, 727­753.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Jorn-Steffen Pischke, Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist's Com-
  panion, Princeton University Press, 2009.
Arellano, Manuel and Olympia Bover, "Another Look at the Instrumental Variable Estimation of
  Error-Components Models," Journal of Econometrics, 1995, 68 (1), 29­51.
    and Stephen Bond, "Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data: Monte Carlo Evidence and an
  Application to Employment Equations," Review of Economic Studies, 1991, 58 (2), 277 ­ 297.
Atalay, Enghin, "Materials Prices and Productivity," Journal of the European Economic Association,
  2014, 12 (3), 575­611.
Atkin, David, Amit K. Khandelwal, and Adam Osman, "Exporting and Firm Performance: Evi-
  dence from a Randomized Trial," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (2), 551­615.
  ,    , and    , "Measuring Productivity: Lessons from Tailored Surveys and Productivity Benchmark-
  ing," AEA Papers and Proceedings, 2019, 109, 444­49.
Aw, Bee Yan, Mark J. Roberts, and Daniel Xu, "R&D Investment, Exporting and Productivity
  Dynamics," American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (4), 1312­1344.
Balat, Jorge, Irene Brambilla, and Yuya Sasaki, "Heterogeneous Firms, Skilled-Labor Productivity
  and the Destination of Exports," 2018. Unpub. paper, UT Austin.
Bartelsman, Eric J. and Mark Doms, "Understanding Productivity: Lessons from Longitudinal Mi-
  crodata," Journal of Economic Literature, September 2000, 38 (3), 569­594.
Bas, Maria and Caroline Paunov, "The Role of Productivity and Markups in Determining Trade
  Liberalization's Impact on Firm Product Scope and Innovation," 2020. Unpub. paper.
Bastos, Paulo, Joana Silva, and Eric Verhoogen, "Export Destinations and Input Prices: Evidence
  from Portugal," American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (2), 353­392.
Baum, Christopher F., Mark E. Schaffer, and Steven Stillman, "Enhanced Routines for Instru-
  mental Variables/Generalized Method of Moments Estimation and Testing," Stata Journal, 2007, 7 (4),
  465­506.
Bazzi, Samuel and Michael A Clemens, "Blunt instruments: Avoiding common pitfalls in identifying
  the causes of economic growth," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2013, 5 (2), 152­86.
Bell, Linda, "The Impact of Minimum Wages in Mexico and Colombia," Journal of Labor Economics,
  1997, 15, s102­s123.
Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen, "Exceptional Exporter Performance: Cause, Effect,
  or Both?," Journal of International Economics, Feb. 1999, 47, 1­25.
  , Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott, "Multi-Product Firms and Trade Liberalization,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (3), 1271­1318.
Berry, Steven, Amit Gandhi, and Philip Haile, "Connected Substitutes and Invertibility of Demand,"
  Econometrica, 2013, 81 (5), 2087­2111.
Blum, Bernardo S, Sebastian Claro, Ignatius Horstmann, and David A Rivers, "The ABCs of
  Firm Heterogeneity: The Effects of Demand and Cost Differences on Exporting," 2018. Unpub. paper,
  University of Toronto.


                                                  43
Blundell, Richard and Stephen Bond, "Initial Conditions and Moment Restrictions in Dynamic Panel
  Data Models," Journal of Econometrics, 1998, 87 (1), 115­143.
    and    , "GMM Estimation with Persistent Panel Data: An Application to Production Functions,"
  Econometric Reviews, 2000, 19 (3), 321­340.
Bond, Stephen R., "Dynamic Panel Data Models: A Guide to Micro Data Methods and Practice,"
  Portuguese Economic Journal, 2002, 1 (2), 141 ­ 162.
Bond, Steve, Arshia Hashemi, Greg Kaplan, and Piotr Zoch, "Some Unpleasant Markup Arith-
  metic: Production Function Elasticities and their Estimation from Production Data," 2020. NBER
  working paper no. 27002.
Braguinsky, Serguey, Atsushi Ohyama, Tetsuji Okazaki, and Chad Syverson, "Acquisitions, pro-
  ductivity, and profitability: evidence from the Japanese cotton spinning industry," American Economic
  Review, 2015, 105 (7), 2086­2119.
Brandt, Loren, Feitao Jiang, Yao Luo, and Yingjun Su, "Ownership and Productivity in Vertically
  Integrated Firms: Evidence from the Chinese Steel Industry," 2018. Unpub. paper, University of Toronto.
  ,    ,   , and      , "Ownership and Productivity in Vertically Integrated Firms: Evidence from the
  Chinese Steel Industry," Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Bun, Maurice J. G. and Frank Windmeijer, "The Weak Instrument Problem of the System GMM
  Estimator in Dynamic Panel Data Models," Econometrics Journal, 2010, 13 (1), 95­126.
    and Vasilis Sarafidis, "Dynamic Panel Data Models," Oxford Handbook of Panel Data, 2015, pp. 76­
  110.
Cajal Grossi, Julia, Rocco Macchiavello, and Guillermo Noguera, "International Buyers' Sourcing
  and Suppliers' Markups in Bangladeshi Garments," 2019. CEPR discussion paper no. 13482.
Campa, Jose Manuel and Linda S. Goldberg, "Exchange Rate Pass-Through into Import Prices,"
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 2005, 87 (4), 679­690.
Card, David, "Using Regional Variation in Wages to Measure the Effects of the Federal Minimum Wage,"
  Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 1992, 46 (1), pp. 22­37.
Cengiz, Doruk, Arindrajit Dube, Attila Lindner, and Ben Zipperer, "The Effect of Minimum
  Wages on Low-Wage Jobs*," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 05 2019, 134 (3), 1405­1454.
Chamberlain, Gary, "Multivariate Regression Models for Panel Data," Journal of Econometrics, 1982,
  18, 5­46.
Chaudhuri, Saraswata and Eric Zivot, "A New Method of Projection-Based Inference in GMM with
  Weakly Identified Nuisance Parameters," Journal of Econometrics, 2011, 164 (2), 239­251.
Collard-Wexler, Allan and Jan De Loecker, "Production Function Estimation with Measurement
  Error in Inputs," 2016. NBER working paper no. 22437.
Costantini, James A. and Marc J. Melitz, "The Dynamics of Firm-Level Adjustment to Trade
  Liberalization," in Elhanan Helpman, Dalia Marin, and Thierry Verdier, eds., The Organization of
  Firms in a Global Economy, Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press, 2008, pp. 107­141.
Cragg, John G. and Stephen G. Donald, "Testing Identifiability and Specification in Instrumental
  Variable Models," Econometric Theory, 1993, 9 (2), 222­240.
De Loecker, Jan, "Product Differentiation, Multi-product Firms and Estimating the Impact of Trade
  Liberalization on Productivity," Econometrica, 2011, 79 (5).
    and Frederic Warzynski, "Markups and Firm-level Export Status," American Economic Review,
  2012, 102 (6), 2437­2471.
    and Pinelopi Koujianou Goldberg, "Firm Performance in a Global Market," Annual Review of
  Economics, 2014, 6 (1), 201­227.
  , Pinelopi K. Goldberg, Amit K. Khandelwal, and Nina Pavcnik, "Prices, Markups and Trade
  Reform," Econometrica, 2016, 84 (2), 445­510.
Dhyne, Emmanuel, Amil Petrin, Valerie Smeets, and Frederic Warzynski, "Multi Product Firms,
  Import Competition, and the Evolution of Firm-Product Technical Efficiencies," 2020. Unpub. paper,
  Aarhus University.
  ,    ,   , and     , "Theory for Extending Single-Product Production Function Estimation to Multi-


                                                   44
  Product Settings," 2020. Unpub. paper, Aarhus University.
Doornik, Jurgen A, Manuel Arellano, and Stephen Bond, "Panel Data Estimation Using DPD for
  Ox," 2012. Available at https://www.doornik.com/download/oxmetrics7/Ox Packages/dpd.pdf.
Doraszelski, Ulrich and Jordi Jaumandreu, "R&D and Productivity: Estimating Endogenous Pro-
  ductivity," Review of Economic Studies, 2013, 80 (4), 1338­1383.
    and    , "Measuring the Bias of Technological Change," Journal of Political Economy, 2018, 126 (3),
  1027­1084.
Eckel, Carsten and J. Peter Neary, "Multi-Product Firms and Flexible Manufacturing in the Global
  Economy," Review of Economic Studies, Jan 2010, 77, 188­217.
Eslava, Marcela and John C Haltiwanger, "The Life-Cycle Growth of Plants: The Role of Produc-
  tivity, Demand and Wedges," 2020. NBER working paper no. 27184.
  , John Haltiwanger, Adriana Kugler, and Maurice Kugler, "The Effects of Structural Reforms
  on Productivity and Profitability Enhancing Reallocation: Evidence from Colombia," Journal of Devel-
  opment Economics, 2004, 75, 333­371.
  ,    ,   , and    , "Factor Adjustments After Deregulation: Panel Evidence from Colombian Plants,"
  Review of Economics and Statistics, May 2009, 92 (2), 378­391.
  ,    ,    , and     , "Trade Reforms and Market Selection: Evidence from Manufacturing Plants in
  Colombia," Review of Economic Dynamics, 2013, 16, 135­158.
Feenstra, Robert C., "New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International Prices," American
  Economic Review, 1994, 84 (1), 157 ­ 177.
Forlani, Emanuele, Ralf Martin, Giordiano Mion, and Mirabelle Mu^               uls, "Unraveling Firms:
  Demand, Productivity and Markups Heterogeneity," 2016. CEPR Discussion Paper No. 11058.
Foster, Lucia, Cheryl Grim, John Haltiwanger, and Zoltan Wolf, "Firm-level Dispersion in Pro-
  ductivity: Is the Devil in the Details?," American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (5), 95­98.
  , John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson, "Reallocation, Firm Turnover and Efficiency: Selection
  on Productivity or Profitability?," American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (1), 394­425.
Fox, Jeremy T. and Val´      erie Smeets, "Does Input Quality Drive Measured Differences in Firm Pro-
  ductivity?," International Economic Review, 2011, 52 (4), 961­989.
Gandhi, Amit, Salvador Navarro, and David Rivers, "On the Identification of Gross Output Pro-
  duction Functions," Journal of Political Economy, 2020, 128 (8), 2973­3016.
Garcia-Marin, Alvaro and Nico Voigtl¨        ander, "Exporting and Plant-Level Efficiency Gains: It's in
  the Measure," Journal of Political Economy, 2019, 127 (4), 1777­1825.
Goldberg, Pinelopi K., Amit Khandelwal, Nina Pavcnik, and Petia Topalova, "Imported Inter-
  mediate Inputs and Domestic Product Growth: Evidence from India," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2010, 125 (4), 1727­1767.
Gong, Binlei and Robin C. Sickles, "Resource Allocation in Multi-divisional Multi-product Firms,"
  2019. Rice Initiative for the Study of Economics working paper 19-003.
Grieco, Paul L. E. and Ryan C. McDevitt, "Productivity and Quality in Health Care: Evidence from
  the Dialysis Industry," Review of Economic Studies, 09 2016, 84 (3), 1071­1105.
Grieco, Paul, Shengyu Li, and Hongsong Zhang, "Production Function Estimation with Unobserved
  Input Price Dispersion," International Economic Review, 2016, 57 (2), 665­690.
Griliches, Zvi and Jacques Mairesse, "Production Functions: The Search for Identification," in Steinar
  Strom, ed., Econometrics and Economic Theory in the Twentieth Century: The Ragnar Frisch Centen-
  nial Symposium, Cambridge University Press, 1998, pp. 169­203.
Gupta, Apoorv, "Firm Heterogeneity, Demand for Quality and Prices: Evidence from India," 2020.
  Unpub. paper.
Hall, Robert E., "Market Structure and Macroeconomic Fluctuations," Brookings Papers on Economic
  Activity, 1986, 1986 (2), pp. 285­338.
Hayakawa, Kazuhiko and Meng Qi, "Further Results on the Weak Instruments Problem of the System
  GMM Estimator in Dynamic Panel Data Models," Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 2020,
  82 (2), 453­481.


                                                  45
Hofstetter, Marc, "La Pol´     itica Monetaria y la Corte Constitucional: El Caso del Salario M´inimo,"
  Revista de Econom´  ia Institucional, 2006, 8 (14), 105­124.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, Whitney Newey, and Harvey S. Rosen, "Estimating Vector Autoregressions
  with Panel Data," Econometrica, Nov. 1988, 56 (6), 1371­1395.
Hottman, Colin, Stephen J. Redding, and David E. Weinstein, "Quantifying the Sources of Firm
  Heterogeneity," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016, 131 (3), 1291­1364.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J. Klenow, "Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (4), pp. 1403­1448.
Jaumandreu, Jordi and Heng Yin, "Comparing Productivity When Products and Inputs Differ in
  Quality: China Manufacturing Growth 1998-2013," 2018. Unpub. paper.
Katayama, Hajime, Shihua Lu, and James R. Tybout, "Firm-level Productivity Studies: Illusions
  and a Solution," International Journal of Industrial Organization, May 2009, 27 (3), 403­413.
Khandelwal, Amit K., Peter K. Schott, and Shang-Jin Wei, "Trade Liberalization and Embedded
  Institutional Reform: Evidence from Chinese Exporters," American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (6),
  2169­95.
Kleibergen, Frank, "Testing Parameters in GMM Without Assuming That They Are Identified," Econo-
  metrica, 2005, 73 (4), 1103­1123.
    and Richard Paap, "Generalized Reduced Rank Tests using the Singular Value Decomposition,"
  Journal of Econometrics, 2006, 133 (1), 97 ­ 126.
Klette, Tor Jakob and Zvi Griliches, "The Inconsistency of Common Scale Estimators When Output
  Prices Are Unobserved and Endogenous," Journal of Applied Econometrics, 1996, 11 (4), 343 ­ 361.
Kraay, Aart, "Weak Instruments in Growth Regressions: Implications for Recent Cross-Country Evidence
  on Inequality and Growth," 2015. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper no. 7494.
Kripfganz, Sebastian and Claudia Schwarz, "Estimation of Linear Dynamic Panel Data Models with
  Time-Invariant Regressors," Journal of Applied Econometrics, 2019, 34 (4), 526­546.
Kugler, Maurice and Eric Verhoogen, "Prices, Plant Size and Product Quality," Review of Economic
  Studies, January 2012, 79 (1), 307­339.
Levinsohn, James and Amil Petrin, "Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs to Control for
  Unobservables," Review of Economic Studies, April 2003, 70, 317­341.
Maloney, William F and Jairo Nu~        nez Mendez, "Measuring the Impact of Minimum Wages: Evidence
  from Latin America," in James J. Heckman and Carmen Pag´       es, eds., Law and Employment: Lessons
  from Latin America and the Caribbean, University of Chicago Press, 2004.
Marschak, Jacob and William H. Andrews, "Random Simultaneous Equations and the Theory of
  Production," Econometrica, 1944, 12 (3/4), 143­205.
Mayer, Thierry, Marc J Melitz, and Gianmarco IP Ottaviano, "Market Size, Competition, and
  the Product Mix of Exporters," American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (2), 495­536.
Melitz, Marc, "Estimating Firm-level Productivity in Differentiated Product Industries," 2000. Unpub.
  paper, Harvard University.
Mondrag´   on-V´elez, Camilo, Ximena Pe~       na, and Daniel Wills, "Labor Market Rigidities and Infor-
  mality in Colombia," Econom´    ia, 2010, 11 (1), 65­101.
Montiel Olea, Jos´  e Luis and Carolin Pflueger, "A Robust Test for Weak Instruments," Journal of
  Business & Economic Statistics, 2013, 31 (3), 358­369.
Nerlove, Marc, "Returns to Scale in Electricity Supply," in Carl F. Christ, ed., Measurement in Eco-
  nomics: Studies in Mathematical Economics and Econometrics in Memory of Yehuda Grunfeld, Stanford
  University Press, 1963.
Olley, G. Steven and Ariel Pakes, "The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications Indus-
  try," Econometrica, 1996, 64 (6), 1263­1297.
Ornaghi, Carmine, "Assessing the Effects of Measurement Errors on the Estimation of Production
  Functions," Journal of Applied Econometrics, 2006, 21 (6), 879­891.
Orr, Scott, "Within-Firm Productivity Dispersion: Estimates and Implications," 2020. Unpub. paper.
Park, Albert, Dean Yang, Xinzheng Shi, and Yuan Jiang, "Exporting and Firm Performance:


                                                  46
  Chinese Exporters and the Asian Financial Crisis," Review of Economics and Statistics, 2010, 92 (4),
  822­842.
Peter, Alessandra and Cian Ruane, "The Aggregate Importance of Intermediate Input Substitutabil-
  ity," 2020. Unpub. paper.
Redding, Stephen J. and David E. Weinstein, "Measuring Aggregate Price Indices with Taste Shocks:
  Theory and Evidence for CES Preferences," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2020, 135 (1), 503­560.
Roberts, Mark J. and Dylan Supina, "Output Price, Markups, and Producer Size," European Eco-
  nomic Review, 04 1996, 40 (3-5), 909­921.
Roodman, David, "How To Do xtabond2: An Introduction to Difference and System GMM in Stata,"
  Stata Journal, 2009, 9 (1), 86­136.
Rovigatti, Gabriele and Vincenzo Mollisi, "Theory and Practice of Total Factor Productivity Esti-
  mation: The Control Function Approach Using Stata," The Stata Journal, 2018, 18 (3), 618­662.
Rubens, Michael, "Market Structure, Oligopsony Power, and Productivity," 2020. Unpub. paper.
Sanderson, Eleanor and Frank Windmeijer, "A Weak Instrument F-test in Linear IV models with
  Multiple Endogenous Variables," Journal of Econometrics, 2016, 190 (2), 212­221.
Sato, Kazuo, "The Ideal Log-Change Index Number," Review of Economics and Statistics, 1976, 58,
  223­228.
Shenoy, Ajay, "Estimating the Production Function when Firms are Constrained," Review of Economics
  and Statistics, forthcoming.
Smeets, Valerie and Frederic Warzynski, "Estimating Productivity with Multi-product Firms, Pricing
  Heterogeneity and the Role of International Trade," Journal of International Economics, 2013, 90 (2),
  237 ­ 244.
S¨
 oderbom, M°    ans and Francis Teal, "Size and Efficiency in African Manufacturing Firms: Evidence
  from Firm-Level Panel Data," Journal of Development Economics, 2004, 73 (1), 369­394.
Stewart, Mark B., "Estimating the Impact of the Minimum Wage Using Geographical Wage Variation,"
  Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 2002, 64 (supplement), 583­605.
Stock, James H. and Jonathan H. Wright, "GMM with Weak Identification," Econometrica, 2000,
  68 (5), 1055­1096.
   and Motohiro Yogo, "Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression," in "Identification and
  Inference for Econometric Models: A Festschrift in Honor of Thomas J. Rothenberg," Cambridge UK:
  Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Stock, James H, Jonathan H Wright, and Motohiro Yogo, "A Survey of Weak Instruments and
  Weak Identification in Generalized Method of Moments," Journal of Business and Economic Statistics,
  2002, 20 (4), 518­529.
Sun, Liyang, "Implementing Valid Two-Step Identification-Robust Confidence Sets for Linear
  Instrumental-Variables Models," The Stata Journal, 2018, 18 (4), 803­825.
Syverson, Chad, "What Determines Productivity?," Journal of Economic Literature, 2011, 49 (2), 326­
  65.
Valmari, Nelli, "Estimating Production Functions of Multiproduct Firms," 2016. ETLA Working Papers
  no. 37.
Van Biesebroeck, Johannes, "The Sensitivity of Productivity Estimates: Revisiting Three Important
  Debates," Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 2008, 26 (3), 311 ­ 328.
Vartia, Yrjo, "Ideal Log-Change Index Numbers," Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, 1976, 3, 121­126.
Verhoogen, Eric, "Firm-Level Upgrading in Developing Countries," 2020. CDEP-CGEG working paper
  no. 83, Columbia University.
Windmeijer, Frank, "A finite sample correction for the variance of linear efficient two-step GMM esti-
  mators," Journal of Econometrics, 2005, 126 (1), 25 ­ 51.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M., "On Estimating Firm-Level Production Functions Using Proxy Variables to
  Control for Unobservables," Economics Letters, September 2009, 104 (3), 112­114.
  , Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010. 2nd edition.



                                                  47
Table 1. Primary Outputs, Rubber and Plastic Products Producers

                            Share of total
           CPC code                             CPC description of outputs
                              revenues

 A. Rubber Products Producers
         3611301         0.52                   Rubber tires, of a kind used on buses and trucks
         3611101         0.16                   Rubber tires, of a kind used on automobiles
         3612001         0.07                   Retreaded pneumatic tires
         3611303         0.05                   Rubber tires, of a kind used on agricultural vehicles and machines
         3626001         0.03                   Rubber gloves
         3627217         0.02                   Rubber separators for batteries
         3611502         0.02                   Strips for retreading rubber tires
         3611405         0.02                   Pneumatic tires, of a kind used on buses and trucks
         3627220         0.02                   Rubber cushions
         3624002         0.02                   Rubber conveyor belts
         3611501         0.01                   Camel-back strips for retreading tires
         3627216         0.01                   Rubber spare parts for automotive and machinery
         3627218         0.01                   Printing blankets
         3626004         0.01                   Surgical gloves
         3611401         0.01                   Rubber protectors for tires
         3791010         0.01                   Abrasive cloths and fabrics for cleaning
         3611404         0.01                   Pneumatic tires, of a kind used on motor car
         3542009         0.00                   Rubber-based adhesive
         3627207         0.00                   Rubber articles for electrical use
         3622202         0.00                   Rubber mixtures n.e.c. (not elsewhere classified)
 B. Plastic Products Producers
          3632001         0.09                  Polyvinyl tubing
          3641006         0.08                  Printed plastic bags
          3641003         0.08                  Printed plastic film in tubular form
          3633011         0.07                  Polypropylene film
          3633004         0.07                  Polyethylene film
          3641004         0.06                  Unprinted plastic bags
          3649007         0.06                  Plastic caps and lids
          3633012         0.05                  Plastic laminated film
          3649014         0.05                  Blister packaging for medicines
          3649002         0.05                  Plastic containers of a capacity not exceeding 1000 cm3
          3649003         0.05                  Plastic containers of a capacity exceeding 1000 cm3
          3633014         0.04                  Printed polyethylene film
          3694013         0.04                  Plastic straws
          3633008         0.04                  Acrylic sheets
          3641005         0.04                  Synthetic sacks
          3632008         0.03                  Fabrics of polypropylen in tubular form
          3649008         0.03                  Plastic container for drugs and medicines
          3633007         0.02                  Polyvinyl film
          3639201         0.02                  Polyvinyl film with textile material
          4153504         0.02                  Laminated aluminum foil

Notes: Baseline sample, producers of rubber and plastic products (ISIC rev. 2 categories 355 and 356), 1996-2009.
Shares for each industry calculated as revenues from output over total revenues for 2000-2009 period, pooling firms
and years.
Table 2. Primary Inputs, Rubber and Plastic Products Producers

                             Share of total
           CPC code                               CPC description of inputs
                             expenditures

 A. Rubber Products Producers
         0321001         0.40                     Natural latex
         3423112         0.12                     Carbon blacks and other forms of carbon
         2799601         0.07                     Tire cord fabric
         2819004         0.05                     Fabric of synthetic fiber in tubular form
         3611502         0.05                     Strips for retreading rubber tires
         4126301         0.04                     Iron or steel cable
         3478007         0.04                     Nylon
         3549405         0.03                     Stabilizers for synthetic resins
         0321002         0.03                     Natural rubber in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strips
         3633021         0.03                     Polypropylene fabric
         3549934         0.03                     Food emulsifier
         3480301         0.02                     Synthetic latex
         3622101         0.02                     Rubber sheets
         3549403         0.02                     Vulcanization Accelerators
         3543102         0.01                     Mineral oils
         3422101         0.01                     Dioxide, zinc oxide
         3549401         0.01                     Plasticizers
         3611402         0.01                     White strips for tires
         3474002         0.01                     Polyester resins
         3926001         0.01                     Used tires
 B. Plastic Products Producers
          3471001         0.35                    Polyethylene
          3476001         0.14                    Polypropylene
          3473002         0.12                    Polyvinyl chloride
          3472001         0.05                    Polystyrene
          3479902         0.04                    Synthetic emulsions
          3474002         0.04                    Polyester resins
          3549404         0.03                    Plastics additive
          3513004         0.03                    Alcohol-based flexographic inks
          3633011         0.03                    Polypropylene film
          3434007         0.03                    Colorants for plastics
          3415901         0.02                    Diisocyanates - desmophens - desmodurs
          3411403         0.02                    Styrene
          3215302         0.02                    Corrugated cardboard boxes
          3633004         0.02                    Polyethylene film
          3477002         0.02                    Acrylic resins
          3479903         0.02                    Homopolymers
          3474007         0.01                    Polyacetal thermoplastic resin
          3549401         0.01                    Plasticizers
          3413307         0.01                    Polyols
          4153501         0.01                    Aluminum foil

Notes: Baseline sample, producers of rubber and plastics products. Shares for each industry calculated as expenditures
on input over total expenditures for 2000-2009 period, pooling firms and years.
Table 3. Summary Statistics

                                                                                Rubber     Plastics      All

 A. Period: 1996-2009
 Number of Observations                                                           554        3693       4247
 Number of Firms                                                                  46         316         362
 Number of Workers                                                               98.08      101.37     100.94
 Production value (billions 2000 pesos)                                          10.46       8.83       9.04
 Earnings per year, permanent workers (millions 2000 pesos)                      7.14        7.00       7.02

 B. Period: 2000-2009
 Input variables
 No. inputs per firm in average firm-year                                        11.66       8.01      8.46
 Share of firms that import                                                       0.61       0.59      0.60
 No. inputs per firm in avg. firm-year, cond. on importing                       16.57       10.34     11.18
 Fraction of expenditure on imported inputs                                       0.23       0.18       0.19
 No. imported HS8 categories in avg. firm-year, cond. on importing               29.55       19.41     20.47

 Output variables
 No. outputs per firm in average firm-year                                        3.54       3.08       3.13
 Share of firms that export                                                       0.48       0.55       0.54
 No. outputs per firm in avg. firm-year, cond. on exporting                       5.26       3.83       4.00
 Fraction of revenues from exported outputs                                       0.08       0.06       0.06
 No. exported HS8 categories in avg. firm-year, cond. on exporting                5.64       5.38       5.41


Notes: Baseline sample, rubber and plastics products producers, 1996-2009. Table reports averages of firm-level
values (giving every firm equal weight). Exports and imports available in EAM data only in 2000-2009. Average
2000 exchange rate is approximately 2,000 pesos/USD.
Table 4. OLS and First Differences

                                              (1)            (2)            (3)              (4)

A. Sales and Expenditures
                                                    log salesit                     log salesit

log expenditureit                          0.675***       0.675***
                                            (0.027)        (0.027)
log labor (   it )                         0.298***       0.296***
                                            (0.039)        (0.040)
log capital (kit )                         0.087***       0.087***
                                            (0.019)        (0.019)
    log expenditureit                                                   0.488***          0.485***
                                                                         (0.050)           (0.052)
    log labor (      it )                                               0.294***          0.288***
                                                                         (0.037)           (0.036)
    log capital ( kit )                                                   0.010             0.010
                                                                         (0.019)           (0.018)
Year effects                                   N              Y             N                Y
R-squared                                    0.926          0.927         0.335            0.339

B. Sato-Vartia Output and Input Indexes
                                                SV )
                             log output index (yit                                              SV )
                                                                            log output index ( yit

log materials index (mSV
                      it )                 0.469***       0.468***
                                            (0.084)        (0.085)
log labor (   it )                         0.357***       0.358***
                                            (0.109)        (0.110)
log capital (kit )                         0.196***       0.195***
                                            (0.045)        (0.046)
    log materials index ( mSV
                           it )                                         0.434***          0.428***
                                                                         (0.052)           (0.053)
    log labor (      it )                                               0.283***          0.274***
                                                                         (0.046)           (0.045)
    log capital ( kit )                                                   0.013             0.015
                                                                         (0.020)           (0.020)
Year effects                                   N              Y             N                 Y
R-squared                                    0.704          0.705         0.258             0.263

Notes: Baseline sample: N (observations) = 4,247, N (distinct firms) = 362 for all regressions. Dependent
variables at top of columns.   refers to within-firm difference between t - 1 and t. Robust standard errors
in parentheses. *10% level, **5% level, ***1% level.
Table 5. Differences (Step 1): First Stage

                                                 mSV
                                                   it           it         kit         mSV
                                                                                         it           it         kit          mSV
                                                                                                                                it           it         kit
                                                 (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)           (7)         (8)          (9)

mSV
 it-2                                        -0.017*** 0.013*** 0.027***                                                  -0.018*** 0.013*** 0.026***
                                              (0.006)   (0.004)  (0.005)                                                   (0.006)   (0.004)  (0.005)
 it-2                                          0.014 -0.030*** 0.044***                                                     0.012 -0.031*** 0.042***
                                              (0.009)   (0.007)  (0.010)                                                   (0.009)   (0.007)  (0.010)
kit-2                                          0.009    0.009** -0.048***             0.001       0.002     -0.010***       0.007    0.008** -0.049***
                                              (0.006)   (0.004)  (0.007)             (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.003)       (0.006)   (0.004)  (0.007)
                                       imp
    pred. import price index ( wit )                                                -0.245** -0.040      0.073            -0.254*** -0.047      0.119
                                                                                     (0.097) (0.064)    (0.103)             (0.098)  (0.063)   (0.102)
    log min. wage x "bite" ( zit )                                                  -1.722** -1.642*** -2.518***           -1.792** -1.734*** -2.028***
                                                                                      -0.848  (0.489)   (0.605)             (0.861)  (0.495)   (0.600)

Year effects                                      Y           Y            Y            Y           Y            Y            Y            Y           Y
N                                               4,247       4,247        4,247        4,247       4,247        4,247        4,247       4,247        4,247
R-squared                                       0.024       0.035        0.038        0.025       0.031        0.015        0.026       0.039        0.041
F - statistic                                   3.424       7.703       21.018        4.486       5.891        6.819        3.704        7.245       13.904
F - SW                                          2.070       2.366       2.258         4.179       4.988       17.373        5.897       12.195       17.354

KP LM test (underidentification)                            1.995                                 3.925                                  15.88
KP Wald F-test (weak insts.)                                0.673                                 1.353                                  3.363


Notes: Dependent variables at tops of columns. SW refers to Sanderson and Windmeijer (2016), KP to Kleibergen and Paap (2006). The F-statistic is the
standard F for a test that the coefficients on the excluded instruments (indicated at left) are zero. The KP statistics, LM test for under-identification and
Wald F test for weak instruments, are for each IV model as a whole, and are not specific to Columns 2, 5, 8. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *10%
level, **5% level, ***1% level.
Table 6. Differences (Step 1): Second Stage

                                                                 Dep.var.:                           SV )
                                                                                 log output index ( yit
                                                                                                                internal &
                                                      internal         external            internal &            external
                                                    instruments      instruments            external           instruments
                                                        only           + kit-2            instruments             (LIML)
                                                         (1)              (2)                 (3)                   (4)

    log materials index ( mSV
                           it )                        0.520            0.247               0.381**              0.381**
                                                      (0.487)          (0.541)              (0.177)              (0.179)
    log labor (     it )                                0.485           0.600               0.397**              0.397**
                                                      (0.394)          (0.714)              (0.184)              (0.184)
    log capital ( kit )                                -0.148           -0.211               -0.181               -0.181
                                                      (0.196)          (0.215)              (0.124)              (0.124)

Year effects                                             Y                 Y                   Y                    Y
N                                                      4,247             4,247               4,247                4,247
R-squared                                              0.224             0.191               0.239                0.239
Materials Robust (LC) Conf. Int. 90%                                                  [   0.150 - 0.612]   [   0.103 - 0.658]
Labor Robust (LC) Conf. Int. 90%                                                      [   0.159 - 0.636]   [   0.105 - 0.690]
Materials Robust CI (LC) Conf. Int. 95%                                               [   0.106 - 0.656]   [   0.050 - 0.711]
Labor Robust CI (LC) Conf. Int. 95%                                                   [   0.113 - 0.681]   [   0.049 - 0.746]
Arellano-Bond AR(2) statistic                          0.323             0.285               0.339                0.339
Arellano-Bond p-value                                  0.746             0.776               0.735                0.735

Notes: Corresponding first-stage estimates are in Table 5: Column 1 here corresponds to Columns 1-3, Column 2
to Columns 4-6, Column 3 to Columns 7-9 of Table 5. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Weak-instrument-
robust confidence intervals are based on LC test of Andrews (2018), implemented by Stata twostepweakiv command.
Arellano-Bond statistic and p-value test for serial correlation in residual, based on Arellano and Bond (1991). *10%
level, **5% level, ***1% level.
Table 7. Levels (Step 2): First and Second Stages

A. First stage
                                                          Dep.var.: log capital (kit )
                                                            (1)           (2)

   kit-1                                                  0.666***
                                                           (0.106)
   kit-2                                                                0.676***
                                                                         (0.112)

Year effects                                                   Y            Y
N                                                            4,247        4,131
R squared                                                   0.028         0.027
Kleibergen-Paap LM test (underidentification)               43.269       40.554
Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-test (weak insts.)                   39.453       36.727


B. Second stage
                                                                       SV -  mSV - 
                                                            Dep.var.: yit     m it    it
                                                             (1)          (2)      (3)

log capital kit                                             0.196         0.289          0.239***
                                                           (0.088)       (0.101)          (0.020)
                                                           [0.188]       [0.196]

Year effects                                                  Y             Y               Y
N                                                           4,247         4,131           4,247
R-squared                                                   0.173         0.170           0.258
Specification                                                IV            IV             OLS


Notes: Panel B Columns 1-2 correspond to Panel A Columns 1-2. Panel C Column 3 is OLS.
Uncorrected robust standard errors in parentheses. Corrected robust standard errors in brackets.
See Section 2.4.2 for details. *10% level, **5% level, ***1% level.
Table 8. System GMM

                                                                                       log salesit
                                                                              (1)          (2)          (3)

log salesit-1                                                             0.636*** 0.607*** 0.550***
                                                                           (0.079)   (0.082)    (0.082)
log expenditureit                                                         0.524*** 0.537*** 0.483***
                                                                           (0.083)   (0.080)    (0.059)
log expenditureit-1                                                       -0.250*** -0.232*** -0.179***
                                                                           (0.064)   (0.056)    (0.042)
log labor (   it )                                                          0.055     0.051    0.258***
                                                                           (0.122)   (0.084)    (0.067)
log labor (   it-1 )                                                         0.068     0.062     -0.070
                                                                           (0.112)   (0.084)    (0.064)
log capital (kit )                                                          0.103*     0.050      0.033
                                                                           (0.062)   (0.062)    (0.040)
log capital (kit-1 )                                                       -0.089*    -0.037     -0.014
                                                                           (0.050)   (0.053)    (0.034)

N                                                                            4,247        4,247       4,247
Lag limit                                                                      2            3          all
Hansen test                                                                  107.0        156.4       344.2
Hansen p-value                                                               0.428        0.587       1.000

Notes: Table presents estimates of standard System GMM model (Blundell and Bond, 2000), using the
"two-step" procedure described in Roodman (2009), with initial weighting matrix defined in Doornik et al.
(2012) and finite-sample correction from Windmeijer (2005). The Stata command is xtabond2 (Roodman,
2009), with options h(2), twostep, and robust. The difference equation includes lags to t - 2 in Column 1,
lags to t - 3 in Column 2, and all available lags in Column 3. The numbers of instruments are as indicated in
Appendix Table A12. The Hansen test of overidentifying restrictions is appropriate in the non-homoskedastic
case, but should be interpreted with caution, as it is weakened by the presence of many instruments. See
Section 6 for further details. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *10% level, **5% level, ***1% level.
Table 9. Proxy-Variable Methods

                                                                     Dep.var.: log salesit

                                                          OP           LP        Wooldridge        GNR
                                                          (1)          (2)          (3)             (4)

log expenditureit                                      0.672***     0.636***      0.604***       0.406***
                                                        (0.028)      (0.033)       (0.019)        (0.010)
log labor (   it )                                     0.258***     0.289***      0.290***       0.513***
                                                        (0.049)      (0.046)       (0.010)        (0.035)
log capital (kit )                                     0.131***     0.113***      0.054**        0.138***
                                                        (0.035)      (0.035)       (0.025)        (0.027)

N                                                        1,933        4,247         4,247          4,247


Notes: Table presents estimates in our baseline sample from proxy-variable methods of Olley and Pakes
(1996) (OP), Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) (LP), Wooldridge (2009) (using materials as the proxy), and
Gandhi et al. (2020) (GNR). OP, LP, and Wooldridge estimates generated by Stata command prodest
(Rovigatti and Mollisi, 2018). GNR estimates from authors' own code. See Section 6 for further details.
Standard errors in parentheses from bootstraps with 50 replications. *10% level, **5% level, ***1% level.
Table 10.       TFP (Standardized) as Predictor of Future Export Growth

                                                        asinh(export valueit+s ) - asinh(export valueit )
                                                            s=1                 s=2                s=3
                                                             (1)                 (2)                (3)
A. TSIV
T F PtT SIV - T F PtT
                    -s
                      SIV                                    0.097            1.204***           1.633***
                                                            (0.310)            (0.321)            (0.365)
R-squared                                                    0.005              0.012              0.017
B. OLS using Sato-Vartia quantity indexes
T F PtOLS -SV - T F PtOLS
                      -s
                          -SV
                                           0.074                              0.437***           0.463**
                                          (0.152)                              (0.156)           (0.181)
R-squared                                  0.005                                0.010             0.011
C. System GMM
T F PtSysGM M - T F PtSysGM
                      -s
                            M
                                                             0.158            0.753***           0.971***
                                                            (0.210)            (0.219)            (0.254)
R-squared                                                    0.005              0.012              0.015
D. Olley and Pakes
T F PtOP - T F PtOP
                 -s                                          0.071            0.329**            0.411**
                                                            (0.138)           (0.145)            (0.170)
R-squared                                                    0.005             0.009              0.011
E. Levinsohn and Petrin
T F PtLP - T F PtLP
                 -s                                          0.071            0.350**            0.427**
                                                            (0.139)           (0.146)            (0.171)
R-squared                                                    0.005             0.009              0.011
F. Wooldridge
T F PtW - T F PtW
                -s                                           0.091            0.452***           0.577***
                                                            (0.154)            (0.162)            (0.190)
R-squared                                                    0.005              0.010              0.012
G. Gandhi, Navarro and Rivers
T F PtGN R - T F PtGN
                   -s
                      R                                      0.035            0.460***           0.463**
                                                            (0.155)            (0.159)           (0.185)
R-squared                                                    0.005              0.010             0.011
H. Ackerberg, Caves and Frazer
T F PtACF - T F PtACF
                  -s                                         0.149            0.343**            0.353**
                                                            (0.126)           (0.135)            (0.152)
R-squared                                                    0.005             0.010              0.010
N                                                           3,539               2,835              2,127
Year effects                                                  Y                   Y                  Y
Notes: TFP calculated in levels (see Appendix Table A14 for details and pairwise correlations), then standardized
by year to have variance 1 (pooling years). (For OP method, TFP calculated for all observations in baseline sample,
even those with zero investment omitted from estimation in Table 9.) Robust standard errors in parentheses. *10%
level, **5% level, ***1% level.

                                                       57
