                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    ROBOTS AND LABOR IN THE SERVICE SECTOR:
                        EVIDENCE FROM NURSING HOMES

                                      Karen Eggleston 
                                       Yong Suk Lee 
                                       Toshiaki Iizuka

                                     Working Paper 28322
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28322


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2021




We gratefully acknowledge financial support from a Stanford Asia-Pacific Research Center
faculty award, the Freeman Spogli Institute for International Studies Japan Fund, and JSPS
KAKENHI Grant Number 18H00861. We thank discussants including Robert Seamans at the
AEA 2020 meetings and seminar participants at Stanford University Human-Centered AI
Institute, SIEPR, and NBER Summer Institute 2020. Sean Chen and Haruka Ito provided
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Karen Eggleston , Yong Suk Lee , and Toshiaki Iizuka. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Robots and Labor in the Service Sector: Evidence from Nursing Homes
Karen Eggleston , Yong Suk Lee , and Toshiaki Iizuka
NBER Working Paper No. 28322
January 2021
JEL No. I11,J14,J23,O30

                                           ABSTRACT

In one of the first studies of service sector robotics using establishment-level data, we study the
impact of robots on staffing in Japanese nursing homes, using geographic variation in robot
subsidies as an instrumental variable. We find that robot adoption increases employment by
augmenting the number of care workers and nurses on flexible employment contracts, and
decreases difficulty in staff retention. Robot adoption also reduces the monthly wages of regular
nurses, consistent with reduced burden of care. Our findings suggest that the impact of robots
may not be detrimental to labor and may remedy challenges posed by rapidly aging populations.


Karen Eggleston                                  Toshiaki Iizuka
Shorenstein Asia-Pacific Research Center         Graduate School of Economics
Stanford University                              University of Tokyo
616 Serra Street                                 Bunkyo-ku, Japan
Stanford, CA 94305                               toshi.iizuka@gmail.com
and NBER
karene@stanford.edu

Yong Suk Lee
Freeman Spogli Institute of International Studies
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
yongslee@stanford.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28322
1. Introduction
        A wave of new technologies ­ such as robotics, artificial intelligence, digital
platforms, and big data analytics ­ have prompted increasing concern about a substantial and
negative impact on labor markets in the coming decades (Brynjolfsson and McAfee 2014).
These technologies raise uncertainties about employment, wages, productivity, and
inequality, and sustainability of high living standards. According to some narratives, a
dystopian future looms, with robots displacing humans through ongoing relentless
automation. Against the backdrop of stagnant median real wages, long-term structural
changes, and outsourcing under globalization compounded by the unequal impacts of crises,
it is not surprising that bleak prospects for the future of meaningful work contribute to
"deaths of despair" (Case and Deaton 2020).
            Yet automation also holds promise for addressing some labor market challenges.
Demographers warn of the potential negative economic impacts of rising old-age dependency
ratios and declining employment-to-population ratios in the US (Abraham and Kearney 2020)
and many other high-income countries, prompting policies to support fertility, promote
longer working lives, and adapt labor tasks for older workers.1 In many high-income
countries far along in the demographic transition, robots are increasingly being adopted to
remedy these challenges posed by rapidly aging populations, both in terms of augmenting a
declining working-age population and meeting demand for services from a growing elderly
population. Indeed, development and diffusion of robotics and automation technologies can
be linked to if not driven by demography (Acemoglu and Restrepo 2018, Prettner and Bloom
2020). Evidence from Japan and other OECD countries with older population age structures
than that of the US shows that demographic factors account for a large part of variation in
industrial robotics adoption (Acemoglu and Restrepo 2018). In the US, the projected
reduction in labor supply from demographic change may outweigh the reduction in demand
from automation for a decade or longer, Varian (2020) argues.
           The research question we address in this paper is how adoption of robots affects
workers in the service sector. We contribute to the literature in two ways. First, the rapidly
growing literature on the impact of robots on labor markets has almost entirely focused on the
manufacturing sector (e.g., Acemoglu and Restrepo 2020; Dauth et al. 2017; Dixen et al.




1
    See Bloom and Prettner (2020) for a recent review.
                                                         1
2019; Bessen et al. 2019),2 but very few have examined the service sector.3 This is an
important omission because, as we discuss below, robots may play substantially different
roles in the service sector especially in a tight labor market. As far as we are aware, our paper
is the first to rigorously examine the impact of robots on jobs in the service sector. Second,
while previous studies have used industry-level aggregate data, we use establishment-level
data from a single industry. This alleviates some of the concerns that arise from unobserved
industry-level shocks that may bias the effect of robot adoption, similar to other on-going
research that uses establishment- or firm-level robot adoption data in the manufacturing
sector (Acemoglu et al. 2020; Lee and Lee 2020; Humlum 2019; Koch et al. 2019; Dixen et
al. 2019; Cheng et al. 2019).4 Industry-level studies that examine the impact of robots on
manufacturing workers have found mixed effects, consistent with task-based theories that
predict differing displacement versus reinstatement effects (e.g. Acemoglu and Restrepo
2019).5 Firm-level studies generally find that robot adopters have higher total output and
employment but lower labor share and production worker employment. However,
identification challenges still remain in most of these firm-level studies, and virtually all are
confined to the manufacturing sector (Acemoglu et al. 2020, Humlum 2019, Koch et al.
2019).
          Our study delves into this question by examining the early phase of robot adoption in
the nursing home industry in Japan, where the government has promoted adoption of robots
as a strategy to address the shortage of care workers in the face of the decline in working-age
population. Thus, Japan's long-term care system is in many ways the ideal setting to study
how robotic technologies will interact with aging societies, especially when facing a
declining overall population. In fact, it is projected that as many as 18 out of 36 OECD
countries will face declining populations by 2055 (United Nations 2017). As many more
countries face aging populations, Japan's case will help shed light on how demographics
interact with the debate surrounding new automation technologies.

2
  Studied settings include the US (Acemoglu and Restrepo 2020), Canada (Dixen et al. 2019), China (Cheng et
al. 2019), Japan (Adachi et al. 2020), South Korea (Lee and Lee 2020), France (Acemoglu et al. 2020), Spain
(Koch et al. 2019), Denmark (Humlum 2019), and Germany (Dauth et al. 2017), among others.
3
  Much of the discussion up to now has appeared in industry reports or health care journals with a focus on the
technology itself rather than the consequences for labor (Qureshi and Syed 2014; Huston 2013).
4
  Previous studies have highlighted the importance of establishment-level data for better understanding the
relationship of AI/ robotics and other new technologies with labor markets and productivity (e.g. National
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 2017; Raj and Seamans 2019; Frank et al. 2019).
5
  Acemoglu and Restrepo (2020) find that robot adoption has a robust negative impact on employment and
wages in the US. However, Chung and Lee (2020) using the same empirical framework find that the impact of
robots on local employment in the US evolves over time and eventually becomes positive in more recent years.
                                                       2
             We study this issue using survey data from 2017 for about 860 nursing homes in
Japan. The data contain various staffing information, such as the number of nurses and care
workers, their wages, and turnovers, along with other nursing home characteristics, including
whether the nursing home adopts robots. In Japan, national government has actively
promoted the development and use of robots in long-term care and local governments provide
subsidies to adopt robots in nursing homes. Our empirical identification strategy utilizes this
variation in robot subsidies across prefectures.6 OLS may be problematic because staffing
and adoption of robots are correlated with other characteristics of the nursing home, its other
technology, and management. Because the decision to subsidize robots for long-term care
(LTC) may be correlated with local labor market conditions, we control for various factors
that may affect the demand for and supply of care workers in the local economy.
             In the setting of long-term care for the elderly, demographic change may have
already spurred significant development of robotics technology (Acemoglu and Restrepo
2018) and the belief that robots can substitute for workers, bolstering the declining supply of
care workers as the demand for care (i.e., the number of older adults requiring long-term
care) continues to grow. However, the caring professions have also often been held up as
among the few for which robotics and AI provide poor substitutes, at least for the tasks
involving compassion, empathetic communication, and emotional connection (MGI 2017,
Jackson New York Times December 14, 2019). These areas embody the continuing or new
tasks in which labor has a comparative advantage. Furthermore, robots may reduce turnover
and side effects such as back pain, while potentially increasing the quality of care from
reduced falls and injury. Ultimately the effect of robots on staffing is an empirical question,
since conceptually, the impact could be either to complement or substitute for various tasks
of current care workers and nurses.
             We find that robot adoption increases the number of care workers and nurses.
Interestingly, these effects are concentrated on non-regular employees and have no effect on
regular employees. Non-regular workers are on more flexible employment contracts but with
fewer benefits. We also find that robot adoption reduces the monthly wages of regular nurses.
This may be due to the reduction of care burden at night, including night shift hours, afforded
by monitoring robots, the kind of robot most frequently adopted by nursing homes. Finally,
robot adoption reduces the likelihood of nursing homes reporting difficulty in staff retention,


6
    There are 47 prefectures in Japan.
                                                  3
which is consistent with the intent of subsidizing robot adoption, i.e., reducing the burden of
care workers. Taken together, our findings indicate that robot adoption does not reduce jobs,
but promotes more flexible work, either by increasing non-regular employees or potentially
encouraging part-time work. Our findings are among the first to examine to what extent
robots complement or substitute workers in the service sector using establishment-level data,
uncovering hints of which specific tasks and worker types are most likely to have been
affected since 2017 and going forward in tight labor markets.
       In addition to the literature already mentioned, this study relates to the literature on
automation and its implications for labor share (Autor and Salomons 2018; Acemoglu and
Restrepo 2019), as well as the emerging literature that focuses on artificial intelligence and
jobs (Felten et al. 2018; Brynjolfsson et al. 2018; Webb 2020). Also, our study contributes to
the literature on nursing homes and the economics of automation for labor providing long-
term care services. Our empirical work brings Japanese data to expand and test hypotheses
and trends documented in the US and Europe regarding nursing home staffing (Hackmann
2019, Chen et al. 2020), facility characteristics (e.g. Banaszak-Holl et al. 2018) and quality of
care (Castle 2008; Zhang and Grabowski 2004), as well as the parallel literature on skilled
nursing facilities (e.g. Rahman, Norton and Grabowski 2016).
         In the remainder of this paper, we first describe the setting, our data, and empirical
strategy. Our empirical results first document the correlates of robot adoption, and then
utilize our IV strategy to examine the effects of robot adoption on staffing, wages, turnover,
and wage share. A short discussion concludes.


2. Robot Adoption and Long-Term Care in Japan
2.1. Japan's demographic challenges and shortage of care workers
       Because of rapid aging, the demand for long-term care is expected to dramatically
increase in Japan. Figure 1 illustrates the growing demand for long-term care, in several
related panels. The two maps in panels A and B show a geographic snapshot of the
proportion aged 70 and older, and the share of nursing home residents with the most severe
functional limitations (care-required levels 4 and 5). Panel C graphs the increase in
population in Japan aged 75 and older, showing the significant projected increase in the
coming decades in the proportion aged 85 and older, sometimes called the "oldest old." The
expansion of this population signifies the increasing demand for long-term care services in


                                                4
Japan, including assistance with basic activities of daily living such as eating, toileting, and
bathing.
        At the same time, the supply of care workers may not grow to meet the demand
(Figure 2 Panel A), as official projections indicate a shortfall of 380,000 care workers by
2025 (MHLW 2017), although the shortfall depends to some extent on local labor markets
and national policies regarding accepting more immigrant labor. The growing demand and
limited supply have translated into a tight labor market for care workers, with the ratio of job
offers to applicants about twice the average in Japan (Figure 2 Panel B). The shortage of care
workers--those who provide direct contact care to older or disabled clients through
assistance with tasks of daily living like toileting and bathing--has been blamed on several
factors, including that care workers are not well compensated and often experience physical
repercussions such as lower back pain.7 In particular, care worker wages barely exceed the
minimum wage. As Appendix Table 1 indicates, the average hourly pay for care workers was
965 Yen in 2017, compared to the average minimum wage of 902 Yen.


2.2 Subsidizing care robots
        For many years, Japan has been a leader in terms of robot production and utilization,
and Japan is now seeking to use robots to cope with its demographic challenges. The
government has implemented several programs to promote robots in long-term care for older
adults. On the supply side, the government has subsidized development of nursing care (or
"kaigo") robots (i.e., robots used in long-term care, mostly for frail elderly) as part of Japan's
growth strategy. The latest version of Japan's "Robot Strategy," laid out by a body within the
cabinet of the Japanese government, articulates several specific goals: increasing the share of
people who want to use robots for providing care from the currently estimated 60% to 80%;
lowering the risk to care workers of suffering back pain (ultimately to zero) by using robots
for helping with transfers; and enabling faster pre-market review for new medical devices.8
To achieve such goals, starting in April 2013, the Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare
(MHLW) and Ministry of Economy, Trade, and Industry (METI) identified eight task areas
such as transfer aid and communication for which they subsidize development of long-term


7
  A survey by the Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare showed that 14.3% of those who left their jobs as care
workers cited lower back pain as the reason.
8
  See complete report at http://www.meti.go.jp/english/press/2015/pdf/0123_01b.pdf.


                                                      5
care robots. In October 2017, the ministries expanded to twelve the number of task and
technology areas to subsidize. (Our survey data covers the earlier period, ending in 2017.)
       On the demand side, starting in 2015, the central government set aside funds for each
prefectural government to utilize to improve its local long-term care services. Subsidies for
purchasing nursing care robots were part of a menu of items for which funds could be used.
Some prefecture-level governments started subsidizing the cost of adopting long-term care
robots in 2015. The subsidies typically cover 50% of the cost, up to 100,000 yen
(approximately US$1,000) per robot. Prefecture governments usually specify a planned
number of robots they will subsidize in a given year, with subsidies provided on a first-come,
first-served basis to nursing homes that apply. Other conditions may also apply, such as a
ceiling on the number of robots for which a single nursing home may receive subsidies. As
we discuss later in Section 3.2, we use this cross-prefectural variation in the planned number
of robots subsidized as an instrument for robot adoption. In April 2016, additional prefectures
introduced the adoption subsidy. The number of prefectures that subsidize robot adoption has
increased over time; as of FY2018, 36 prefectures out of 47 offer such subsidies (MHLW
2019). Starting in April 2018, the maximum amount that prefectures can cover was increased
to 300,000 yen (approximately US$3,000) per robot. Separately from the prefectural
government subsidies, in 2016, the central government earmarked a supplementary budget to
promote adoption of robots in long-term care facilities, totaling 5.3 billion yen
(approximately US$53 million), with up to 3 million yen (US$30,000) per establishment.


2.3 Robots in nursing homes
       Appendix A illustrates the categories of long-term care robots we discuss in this
paper, including the categorization of nursing care robots developed by the Japanese
government and used in their survey of long-term care facilities. The MHLW defines a
nursing care robot (or "kaigo robot") as a form of robot technology that either directly aids
care workers or helps the frail resident become more independent. Furthermore, the METI
stipulates that a robot has three characteristics: the ability to sense information, make
decisions based on that information, and take physical actions in response. Thus, we are able
to distinguish robots from other kinds of technology used in care services, and can be fairly
confident that the prefectural reports about nursing care robot subsidies consistently capture
the same set of robotic technologies. According to the 2017 Report on Robotics in Elderly


                                                6
Care by the MHLW,9 the 10 types are robots as wearable transfer aids; nonwearable transfer
aids; mobility aids; toileting aids; monitoring systems; communication support; dementia
therapy; rehabilitation support; medication support; and other robots. In our analyses, we
group these into three main categories: transfer aid robots, mobility robots, and
communication and monitoring robots.
            Currently, qualitative evidence suggests that robots can reduce the burden on care
workers, but that most tasks cannot be substituted completely. Accordingly, human care
workers and robots need to coordinate and divide tasks. Anecdotal reports also hint at the
potential longer-term impacts for quality of care for residents. For example, one elderly care
center in Setagaya, Tokyo, that has used five types of robots since 2017--including
monitoring robots to sense clients' movements in and out of bed and movement-supporting
robots to enhance mobility--reported that the robots not only helped to prevent client hip
problems and to reduce staff burden, but also contributed to decreasing the rate of physical
accidents by 30%.10 A government pilot study of nursing care robots in 40 nursing homes
found that monitoring robots allowed for better efficiency and reduced burden for care
workers; movement assistance robots (wearable and non-wearable) resulted in better
prevention of hip pain in care workers, but did not change the users' satisfaction; and for
nonwearable movement assistance robots, care workers said that it took time to use the
robots, but led to better communication and greater safety. Managers reported that monitoring
robots led to some change in inputs, since help could be provided by one staff member only,
instead of multiple staff, although the time requirement did not decrease. Moreover, some
indications of improved quality of life and less pain suggest that adoption of robotics could
contribute to enhanced quality of care. Our study complements and extends these
descriptive, anecdotal, and small-scale previous studies.


2.4 Long-term care in Japan
             Japan implemented universal long-term care insurance starting in year 2000. The
insurance covers eligible elderly above age 65, evaluated for care need levels, covering
payments to care providers for day-care services, in-home services, and residential nursing
homes for long-term custodial care. (It does not pay family members for care at home.) The
levels of care required or "Kaigo Neediness Index" are described in the appendix; they vary

9
    http://www.techno-aids.or.jp/robot/file29/jirei2017.pdf
10
     https://kaigorobot-online.com/contents/52
                                                          7
from level 1 ("mostly able to eat and use the bathroom independently" but "requires some
form of help in taking care of the surroundings") to the most severe level 5 ("unable to use
the bathroom and eat" independently and "exhibits many instances of problematic behavior
or decline in understanding"). The government regulates public long-term care service prices,
which are uniform across nursing homes.


3. Data and Empirical Strategy
3.1 Facility-level data
          We analyze facility-level data from the annual Fact-Finding Survey on Long-term
Care Work collected by the Care Work Foundation in Japan. 11 More than 8,000 long-term
care facilities are surveyed each year, with survey questions about adoption of robots
included since 2016. 12 The survey is fielded to a random sample of facilities that provide a
variety of in-home, day-care, and custodial long-term care services, with a response rate of
about 50%.
          In this study, we focus on approximately 860 nursing homes that responded to the
survey. There are two types of nursing homes. The first is the "custodial type" or "tokuyo" in
Japanese, where users reside in the facility and receive long-term custodial care--such as
assistance with eating, toileting, and bathing--usually for the remainder of their lives. The
other is the "skilled nursing type" or "roken" in Japanese, providing intensive, medium-term
(3-6 months) rehabilitation services; many of the residents come directly after being
discharged from the hospital. These facilities resemble skilled nursing facilities in the US.
          There are also two types of caregivers entrusted with hands-on care for the clients of
these facilities: care workers and nurses. The former assist residents with activities of daily
living; they are subject to three different levels of licenses but nevertheless relatively low-
skilled and low paid, as noted previously. Nurses perform a variety of clinical, rehabilitative
and caregiving tasks, and are subject to more restrictive licensing entitling them to provide
nursing services in medical facilities such as hospitals and clinics. Both are overwhelmingly
staffed by women. Regulations in Japan require both types of nursing homes to maintain a
3:1 ratio of residents per caregiver, i.e., care workers plus nurses must total at least one for
every 3 residents. A part-time medical doctor is sufficient for custodial nursing homes. For

11
   The data was provided by the Social Science Japan Data Archive, Center for Social Research and Data
Archives, Institute of Social Science, The University of Tokyo.
12
   We attempted to conduct the same analysis for 2016 but the instrumental variable was too weak to do so,
probably because many fewer prefectures provided robot adoption subsidies in that year.
                                                       8
the skilled nursing facilities, there is an additional nurse staffing requirement of 7:1 (i.e., one
nurse per seven residents), and the facility must have a full-time medical doctor on staff.
           To provide suggestive evidence about the representativeness of the survey (given
potential selection among respondents), we compare to the universe of such facilities for the
type most likely to adopt robots (regular size custodial care residential facilities).13 As shown
in the multiple panels of Appendix Figure 2, the distribution of size and staffing among the
survey respondents is similar to those for the universe of such facilities, except that the
survey sample facilities are slightly larger.14 Overall the survey appears reasonably
representative.
         The survey provides information not only about each facility, but also a sample of
worker-level variables including wages. The survey asks nursing homes to report the wage of
up to 20 employees, selected to be representative of average employees in that facility, such
as those with long or short tenure at the facility. The individual-level data includes basic
demographics (gender, age), work type (regular or nonregular), qualifications, tenure, full
time vs. part time, and payment type (hourly vs. monthly). We utilize these data to examine
the relationship between robot adoption and wages, controlling for other worker
characteristics. While the sample of care workers is ample (6,360 regular, monthly-wage care
workers and 1,674 non-regular, hourly wage care workers), that of nurses is smaller (i.e.,
1,251 regular nurses with monthly wages), and results for non-regular, hourly-paid nurses
should be interpreted with caution, given the limited number of nurses of that type (196)
included in the survey.
         The Survey also includes questions about human resource management, providing
useful information about management practices or even proxies for management quality.
These include answers to the following questions: Do you have employment regulations for
non-regular workers? Do you employ or assign a human resources manager? Do you have a
wage table for regular workers? Do you review non-regular workers' wages at least once a
year? To reduce separation of workers and increase their retention, do you try to improve


 We obtained the universe of nursing homes from KaigoKensaku, a website run by prefecture governments,
13

which provides basic data on the universe of care providers.
14
   According to the two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that they come
from the same distribution, except for care levels 1 and 2 (mildest care levels) and total employment
(distributions of total employees, care workers, and nurses). The latter difference is probably because the survey
asks about the number of workers and residents of the establishment, which may provide multiple services
including in-home care and adult day care. In contrast, the data from the website on the universe of nursing
homes is supposed to contain information only for a specific type of long-term care service.
                                                        9
working conditions such as by reducing overtime work or making it easier to take paid leave?
To increase retention do you increase wages? We include these variables to capture
differences in management practices.


3.2 Prefecture-level data on robot subsidies and labor market conditions
        A second source of data is our compilation of prefecture-level subsidy availability and
generosity. As mentioned earlier, Japan's central government and some local governments in
Japan started in 2015 to provide subsidies to nursing homes for purchase of robots supporting
long-term care for frail elderly residents. Based on the documents we gathered, it seems clear
that since 2015 more and more prefectures began to subsidize nursing homes' acquisition
prices for long-term care robots, typically with a maximum amount per robot. Our primary
source of data was an official website that lists prefecture reports on how they utilize the
funds, distributed by the central government, set aside to improve long-term care services in
each prefecture.15 Prefectures use the funds to subsidize nursing homes to purchase nursing
care robots. We reviewed each prefecture's reports starting in FY2015 to extract information
on how they subsidize nursing homes for robot purchases.16 We then directly contacted each
prefecture to confirm these numbers.
        From this unique dataset, we utilize two primary measures: the 2017 planned number
of robots in each prefecture (which comes directly from government reports); and the ratio of
this planned or targeted number of robots to the number of nursing homes (both custodial and
skilled nursing) in the prefecture. The latter "planned number of robots subsidized per
nursing home" serves as our main instrumental variable for robot adoption at the facility
level. Figure 3 illustrates the magnitude and geographic variation in these measures of
planned subsidies for nursing care robots. Panel A maps the number of planned robots
subsidized in each prefecture, and panel B maps the planned number of robots subsidized per
nursing home (or "planned robot exposure").




15
   Documentation about use of these funds, called "chiiki iryo kaigo sougo kakuho kikin," is available through
the MHLW at https://www.mhlw.go.jp/stf/seisakunitsuite/bunya/0000060713.html.
16
   Our primary measure is the prefectural target for number of robots adopted, but we also coded information on
budget funds allocated to robot subsidies and the prefecture target for number of facilities that adopt robots.
When prefectures do not report a planned number of robots to be subsidized but have budget funds allocated to
robot subsidies or report the planned number of facilities to be subsidized, we impute the planned number of
robots subsidized using the mean value of the correlation between planned number of robots and robot subsidies
(or planned number of facilities) observed in the data.
                                                      10
       We also gathered measures of geographical variation in demography and labor
markets from government statistical agencies. We use this prefecture-level data to control for
prefecture characteristics that might be correlated with the decision to subsidize nursing care
robots and labor market outcomes. These variables include total population; elderly
population aged 70 and older; per capita income; minimum wage; unemployment rate; the
ratio of job openings to applicants; and nursing home statistics (number of facilities, number
of residents, total staffing, and capacity by custodial vs. skilled nursing home).
         We first document the association of robot adoption with various characteristics of
nursing homes. Then to identify the causal impact of robots on staffing, we use the prefecture
subsidies an instrumental variable for the adoption of robots in nursing homes.


3.3 Description of robot adoption landscape
         We start by describing what types of robots have been adopted for what kinds of
services within residential facilities in Japan, as reported by respondents to the Survey in
Japan. In 2016, 17.6% of nursing homes reported using any type of robot, rising to 26%
among the 857 nursing homes surveyed in 2017 (the focus of our study). Table 1 shows that
monitoring robots are the most common type of robot used by nursing homes (representing
14.9% of nursing homes); they help monitor whether individuals have gotten out of bed,
fallen, or need assistance. Other common types of robots used by facilities are transfer aid
robots (7.7%) to assist care workers with moving individuals such as from bed to wheelchair
(4.7% wearable by the care worker, 3.3% non-wearable); mobility robots (5.3%) to assist
residents with movement, toileting and bathing; and communication robots (2.8%) to provide
comfort and interaction with residents. The appendix provides illustrations of each type of
robot and how they are used in caregiving.
         Table 1 also shows our data on subsidies. "Robot subsidy" is an indicator variable
equal to 1 if the prefecture where the nursing home is located offers a subsidy for adopting
nursing care robot(s), which by 2017 covered almost three-quarters (71.9%) of the nursing
homes in our sample. The planned number of robots subsidized per nursing home in a
prefecture ranges from 0 to 1.162, with a mean of 0.21. Figure 4 shows a bin scatterplot with
20 bins showing the positive correlation between our instrument -- planned number of robots
subsidized per nursing home -- and actual robot adoption by nursing homes in 2017,
providing some support for our instrumental variable.


                                               11
          Table 2 shows other characteristics of the 857 Japanese nursing homes covered in
the survey, with facilities dichotomized into adopters and non-adopters (of any robot), and
the final columns show the total. The average nursing home in our survey employs 42 care
workers, 8 nurses, and 80 total staff, the majority (66%) of whom are regular (generally full-
time, monthly wage) employees. Facilities have been in operation on average for a little over
17 years. The wages of workers are similar among adopters and non-adopters, and the
turnover rate is relatively high among all the nursing homes. About one-third (32.1%) report
that retention of staff is a problem. Most are custodial LTC homes; skilled nursing facilities
represent 20.3% of the sample. All of these nursing homes covered by public long-term care
insurance are not-for-profit organizations.17
          Facilities that had acquired at least one robot were slightly larger with more staff
(Table 2). Robot-adopting nursing homes had more care workers (mean 47.7 vs. 40.4) and
more nurses (8.7 vs. 7.7) compared to their counterparts without robots, although the
differences in staff per resident are not significant. Robot-adopters have a slightly lower
separation rate of care workers, a higher percentage reporting that they currently employ
immigrant labor (21% compared to 14% among non-adopting nursing homes), and fully 10
percentage point higher reported intention to hire immigrant labor in the future (41% vs.
30%).
          Robot-adopting homes also have slightly higher percentages of residents with lower
functional status and higher care-required levels (i.e. 64% vs. 62% of residents at levels 4 and
5), representing a slightly more severe case mix than their non-adopting counterparts. Robot-
adopting homes are also more likely to own almost all the other forms of assistive
technologies (e.g. adjustable beds, lifts for movement, and so on). However, robot adoption
does not significantly differ between custodial versus skilled nursing facilities or by
ownership type.
          Next, we show summary statistics for the aforementioned survey questions about
human resource management. Robot-adopters are 10 percentage points more likely to have a
human resource manager (68% vs 58%) and are more likely to report that they make effort to
improve wages for retention of employees (59% vs. 45% among non-adopters). Robot-
adopters are also more likely to offer training to new employees. In terms of prefecture


17
  The majority are owned and managed by social welfare organizations (78%), with 15% by medical
corporations, 2.9% by local governments, and very few by other non-profit organizations like social welfare
councils.
                                                      12
characteristics, robot-adopters tend to be in more populous, aged prefectures with higher
unemployment rates and minimum wages.
         Our regressions control for facility type, since as shown in Appendix Table 1, skilled
nursing facilities differ from custodial nursing homes in several important respects. As
alluded to, they are slightly less likely to adopt robots (23% vs 26% for custodial homes),
with the largest difference for monitoring and communication robots. Skilled nursing homes
also are larger than the average custodial home (89 vs 62 residents), with more nurses per
resident and fewer care workers per resident. Overall, residents per care worker plus nurse in
the sampled nursing homes fall well within the required staffing ratios: custodial nursing
homes average 1.3 residents per care worker and 8.7 residents per nurse; skilled nursing
homes average 2.1 residents per care worker and 6.1 residents per nurse.


3.4. Estimation specification
         We first assess the correlates of robot adoption with the following specification:
                        = 0 + 1  + 2  + 3  +  , (1)
where  is an indicator variable for whether nursing home j in prefecture k has
adopted any robots for long-term care.  is a vector of facility j's characteristics, including
whether it is a custodial or skilled nursing facility; number of residents and case mix (i.e.,
number of residents at different care need levels); dummy variables for each technology used
in the nursing home and each of the measured management practices. We also control for
years of operation; location (metropolis, urban, rural); and corporation type (social welfare
council, social welfare organization, medical corporation, local government, and other). Also
included in  are perceptions of managers of facilities regarding the shortage of care workers
and nurses, and difficulty of hiring high quality care workers. We created these variables by
averaging across nursing homes in the same locality, but excluding nursing home j (we label
these leave-one-out variables as "labor shortage perception controls" in the tables).  is a
vector of prefecture characteristics, including per capita income, unemployment rate, total
population, population aged 70 or older, minimum wage, number of nursing homes,
occupancy rate of nursing homes, and job applicants per opening, number of people certified
for different care levels, population estimates, and whether there were subsidies to secure
workers or improve facilities.  is planned number of robots subsidized per nursing home in
prefecture k. The 's are parameters to be estimated, and  is the error term. This regression


                                                13
in turn becomes the first stage for our IV strategy to study the impact of robot adoption on
staffing and wages, where  is the excluded instrument.
         Next to identify the causal effect of robot adoption on staffing, we estimate
regressions of the following form:
                      = 0 + 1  + 2  + 2  +  , (2)

where  represents various staffing measures of nursing home j in prefecture k in 2017 (e.g.

log(care workers), log(nurses), log(total number of workers)). The  indicator variable
for robot adoption is the primary variable of interest. The other control variables for facility
and prefecture characteristics are as specified above. We cluster standard errors at the
prefecture level.
       We also examine the relationship between robot adoption and wages:

                = 0 + 1  + 2  + 3  + 4  +  ,                                  (2')

where  represents the wage of worker i at nursing home j in prefecture k.  captures
individual characteristics including gender, age, age squared, qualifications (e.g., whether the
worker has a certification), tenure, and tenure squared. We look separately at wages of care
workers, nurses, and managers, as well as the difference between regular and non-regular
care workers and nurses.
       Of course, there may be numerous endogeneity issues with these specifications.
Nursing home adoption of robots may be correlated with other factors such as unobserved
aspects of quality and management that also determine their staffing and wages. We use an
IV approach based on prefecture-level subsidies for robot adoption. One concern about the
instrument is that the decision to subsidize nursing care robots may be correlated with local
labor market conditions, which may also affect staffing of nursing homes. To mitigate this
concern, we control for various demand and supply side factors that would affect the
tightness of the labor market, including elderly population aged 70 and older, per capita
income, minimum wage, unemployment rate, and the ratio of job openings to applicants.
Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistics are reported for the first-stage of the 2SLS regressions
and we cluster the standard errors at the prefecture level.


4. Empirical Results
4.1 Robot adoption



                                                14
       What are the primary predictors of robot adoption for long-term care? Table 3 shows
the results for our estimation of equation (1). All regressions also control for years of
operation; location (metropolis, urban, rural); corporation type (social welfare council, social
welfare organization, medical corporation, local government, and other); and an indicator for
skilled nursing homes. Standard errors clustered by prefecture are in parentheses.
       In our most parsimonious specification (Table 3 column 1), we see that nursing home
size, as measured by number of residents served, is a strong positive predictor of robot
adoption. Adding variables for case-mix of residents (column 2), we see that a higher share of
the most functionally impaired residents (i.e. care-level-required 5) is positively correlated
with adopting robots. This association appears to arise through association with other
technologies for caregiving for the most functionally impaired, such as wheel chair lifts and
wheel chair scales, which are strongly correlated with robot adoption (column 3). When we
also control for management practices at the nursing home (column 4), we find that having an
HR manager and "seeking to improve wages for retention" are strongly associated with robot
adoption. Those management practices continue to be strongly associated with robot adoption
when we also add prefectural characteristics (column 5), additional facility characteristics
(column 6), and constructed variables related to perceptions of labor shortage in the locality
(column 7). Appendix Table 4 presents the coefficient estimates on the additional variables
included in columns 5 to 7. Finally, we see in the last two columns that the planned number
of robots per nursing home in 2017 (the first row) is a strong and significant predictor of
robot adoption, whether controlling for overall size (column 8) or for residents' case mix as
well as number (column 9). Planned number of robots per nursing home is our instrument for
identifying causal effects of robot adoption on staffing and wages. We use the column 9
specification for our IV regression.


4.2 OLS results
       We next turn to the relationship between robot adoption and nursing home staffing.
Table 4 shows results for OLS regressions of staffing on robot adoption among the 857
nursing homes. Panel A focuses on all employees (both regular and non-regular employees),
Panel B on regular employees, and Panel C on non-regular employees. Regular employees
are those with no fixed employment period. Non-regular employees are other employees
including contract and part-time employees. Non-regular employees are on more flexible
work contracts with fewer benefits, and often work part-time. The first three columns show
                                               15
the different kinds of staff: care workers, nurses, and total number of workers (whether
providing care or other managerial and logistic support). Robot adoption is positively
correlated with nurse staffing, though not statistically significantly so for non-regular nurses
(column 2). Robot-adopting nursing homes have between 3 to 8 percent more staff than their
non-adopting counterparts.
         We next turn to wages (columns 4 to 8). Since worker characteristics are a powerful
determinant of wages, in these regressions we control for various worker attributes as
specified in Equation (2'). We find that robot-adopting nursing homes do not seem to have a
different wage structure than their non-adopting counterparts, though the negative estimates
hint that they may be offering lower wages.18


4.3 IV results
         Table 5 reports our staffing and wage results using planned number of robots
subsidized per nursing home in 2017 as the IV to identify the causal effect of robot adoption.
The impact of robots on staffing is positive and significant for both care workers and nurses.
The estimate suggests that robot adoption leads to about 28% more care workers and 39%
more nurses. Total employees increase by about 26%. However, the increases in staffing
occur entirely among the non-regular employees. Robot adoption approximately doubles the
number of non-regular care workers (from an average of about 12 employees) and increases
the number of non-regular nurses by about 78% (from an average of about 2.5 employees).
The estimates on regular employees are negative but not significant. These findings indicate
that robot adoption does not displace workers but may complement investments in higher
quality care by increasing care workers and nurses with more flexible labor contracts.
         After using the instrumental variable, the coefficient estimates on robot adoption
become significantly positive. This may happen, for example, if an unobserved negative


18
  We also examined the relation between staffing and robot adoption by type (Appendix Table 5 Panel A) and
the year in which the facility acquired the robot (Panel B). The associations are less significant for specific types
of robots given larger standard errors, although unsurprisingly the associations are strongest for the most-
commonly-adopted types: monitoring and communication robots (weakly associated with regular nurse staff)
and aid robots (strongly associated with non-regular nurse staff). Regarding the timing of robot adoption (Panel
B), we see that the positive association with staffing is of larger magnitude for the most recent robots. Nursing
homes that adopted robots in 2017 have 10 to 15% higher numbers of staff, with the association only significant
for regular employees. We see in Appendix Table 6 negative association with wages of non-regular nurses,
especially for monitoring and communication robots, and with robots first adopted before 2017. However, robot
adoption is not correlated with nurses' monthly wages -- which are more common than hourly wages, and
virtually the only form of payment for regular employees.


                                                         16
shock in the staffing regression (such as the difficulty of hiring caregivers in the local market,
which negatively affects the number of workers) is correlated with robot adoption by the
nursing home. Such a correlation seems plausible and the OLS estimate on robot adoption
would be negatively biased; the IV regression that removes the confounding effect would
result in a more positive coefficient estimate.
        Robot adoption reduces monthly wages of nurses, especially of regular nurses, whose
wages decrease by about 22%. The IV estimate on non-regular nurse (hourly) wages are
unreliable due to the small sample and low first stage F-statistic. The estimates for care-
workers are also negative but the magnitudes are smaller (2.8 to 6%) and not statistically
significant. As we noted before, care-worker wages are only slightly greater than the
minimum wage, and this wage floor limits how much care worker wages can decrease. On
the other hand, robot adoption seems to increase manager wages by about 18%, though the
estimate is not significant. The IV estimates indicate that the OLS estimates in the wage
regressions were positively biased. This could be due to unobserved local labor market
conditions, such as the difficulty of hiring caregivers, being positively correlated with wages
and robot adoption.
        The reduction in nurse monthly wages may reflect reduction in caregiver burden
during night shifts, since the most frequently adopted kind of robot, monitoring robots, are
specifically designed to substitute for tasks such as frequent night-time rounds to monitor
residents' well-being, which are provided by regular employees. According to a government
survey on the effectiveness of care robots,19 42% of workers who have used monitoring
robots find that they reduce psychological burden, and 32% say they reduce the number of
visits to residents' rooms. Obayashi and Masuyama (2020) also find that communication
robots help reduce the burden on care workers during night shifts.
        In Table 6 we separately examine the types of robots adopted by nursing homes and
present the IV estimates. Monitoring robots are typically video devices or bed pads that use
sensors to evaluate resident mobility and sleep patterns. Aid robots help care workers with
lifting and transporting of residents, and mobility robots assist residents with their
movements. Panel A examines regular employees, and Panel B examines non-regular
employees. First, we can see that the instrumental variable is relevant for monitoring robots
and aid robots, but not mobility robots as the small first-stage F-statistics indicate. This

19
  Research project on the effectiveness of nursing care robots
https://www.mhlw.go.jp/content/12601000/000488463.pdf (in Japanese) (accessed November 23, 2020).
                                                  17
suggests that nursing homes use the subsidy to primarily install monitoring or aid robots. The
estimates we find in Table 5 are most similar with the estimates from monitoring robots,
which is the category of robot most commonly adopted by nursing homes. The increase in
non-regular staffing and reduction in regular nurse wages we find in Table 5 is largely driven
by monitoring robots and aid robots. Indeed, the wage reduction from robot adoption may
likely be attributable to monitoring and aid robots, which assist nurses and care workers,
especially during night shifts. The estimate for regular care worker is smaller in magnitude,
which may be due to care worker wages being low and the downward limit set by the
minimum wage.
        The reduction in nurse monthly wages may also be due to more nurses taking up part-
time hours. The MHLW and the Japanese Nursing Association have been encouraging part-
time regular workers as a way for workers to retain their regular status while working shorter
hours to increase flexibility in employment patterns.20
          Table 7 shows results for wage share and revenue growth of nursing homes. The IV
estimate indicates that robot adoption significantly reduces the wage share by 7.7% points,
which is consistent with the decrease in nurse wages and the increased investment in capital,
i.e., robots. Revenue growth is not significantly impacted by robot adoption. Table 8 column
1 examines whether robot adoption affects retention of workers. The outcome is a dummy
variable indicating whether retention of workers at the nursing home is low and is considered
a problem. Given the physically demanding nature of the care giving and low pay, retention
can be a challenge in many nursing homes. The estimation result indicates that robot adoption
reduces the likelihood that the nursing home considers retention problematic, which suggests
that robots may indeed help reduce the burden on care workers and nurses. This is consistent
with our finding that robot adoption is negatively associated with turnover of care workers,
though it is not statistically significant (Appendix Table 7).
          For Japan, the use of foreign employees is especially of interest, as policies have
long discouraged much immigration but have just recently begun to be relaxed, in part to
relieve the forecasted shortfall of LTC workers. In Table 8 columns 2 and 3, we show OLS
and 2SLS results regarding nursing home hiring of foreign workers in 2017. Consistent with

20
  According to the Labor Force Survey of 2017 by the Statistics Bureau of Japan, the possibility to balance
demands of at-home production (i.e., housework, childcare, elderly care) with supplemental household income
during flexible work hours was the main reason why female non-regular workers reported desire to remain in
their current status. In the Long-term Care Work survey that we use, more than 60% of non-regular nurses and
care workers in custodial care nursing homes did not want to become regular workers.

                                                     18
what was already evident from the descriptive statistics, nursing homes that adopt robots
(especially aid robots) are more likely to have hired foreign workers, but this association is
not causal (column 2). A similar pattern applies to reported plans to hire immigrant labor in
the future: while future hiring of foreign workers has a significant positive association with
robot adoption, the 2SLS estimate is indistinguishable from zero.
       In Appendix Table 8, we examine the robustness of our IV results on staffing using a
different instrumental variable: the planned number of robots subsidized per nursing home in
2016. Since our robot adoption variable measures whether the nursing home has any robots in
2017, the robot subsidy in the previous year would likely be a relevant instrument as well.
The first-stage F-statistics are somewhat smaller than the estimates we get when we use the
2017 subsidy variables, though still considerably greater than 10. Overall, we find that the
results are qualitatively and quantitatively similar to the results when using the 2017 subsidy
variable. We also examine our key results on staffing and wages while limiting our sample to
custodial nursing homes only and find that results are not sensitive to the inclusion of skilled
nursing facilities (Appendix Table 9).


5. Conclusion
       To date, there has been little firm-level evidence on the labor market impact of
robotics in the service sector, or across countries with different demographic profiles. Yet
most middle- and high-income economies have large or dominant service sectors, so that
establishment-level evidence about robot use in service delivery may be even more important
than industrial robot diffusion for understanding current and future economic impacts.
Moreover, demography matters. The same new wave of technologies that inspires fear in
many countries is often viewed in Japan as a remedy for the social and economic challenges
posed by Japan's demography: a declining overall population and increasing proportion of
elderly, while eschewing any large-scale immigration. Japan has been actively developing
and subsidizing deployment of robots in nursing homes to deal with labor shortages and high
turnover rates among long-term care workers.
       Examining establishment-level 2017 micro-data from Japan from the Fact-Finding
Survey on Long-term Care Work, we find that robot adoption increases, rather than
decreases, the number of care workers and nurses, by primarily adding non-regular jobs.
Employment contracts for non-regular workers often are temporary and flexible, offering
fewer benefits than those enjoyed by regular employees. We also find that robot adoption
                                               19
reduces the monthly wages of regular nurses. We surmise that this may be attributable to the
reduction of care burden during night shifts, since monitoring robots may reduce frequent
night-time rounds to monitor residents' well-being and night shift hours. Additionally,
adoption of monitoring robots might have promoted part-time hours by regular nurses. The
Japan Nursing Association has been encouraging part-time regular work contracts to reduce
stress on nurses and promote work-life balance. Finally, consistent with reduced burden of
care, robot adoption reduces the likelihood of nursing homes reporting difficulty in staff
retention. Taken together, our finding indicates that robot adoption does not reduce jobs, but
promotes more flexible work, either by increasing the tasks performed by non-regular
employees or potentially encouraging part-time work.
        The effects of robots that we find may be generalizable to some extent beyond the
specific context of nursing homes in Japan, since the working and employment conditions--
strenuous work, low pay, and high turn-over--are common aspects of many service sectors in
other countries as well. Moreover, aging and declining populations is inevitable for a large
number of OECD countries, and their labor markets may soon face similar challenges as
Japan does.
          Over time, staffing may need to be re-engineered to reflect new groupings of tasks.
At this early stage, robots may be augmenting care workers on specific tasks and not having
negative staffing effects yet, as organizations experiment with how best to incorporate
robotics into the routines of a nursing home. Eventually automation may lead to more
meaningful work and less stress, monotony, and error, although whether regular or non-
regular care workers and nurses will enjoy these benefits is less clear.21
          Our findings are broadly consistent with predictions that the jobs that complement
robotics in the service sector are lower-paying ones (e.g. MGI 2017), since we find the
employment increase was for nonregular care workers and nurses, those who receive fewer
employer-provided benefits. On the other hand, we cannot rule out that part of the effect or
even the primary effect involved upskilling, as for example would occur if monitoring robots
replaced nurse tasks during long and tedious night shifts, allowing them to work fewer hours
while focusing on higher-skill components of their jobs. It is not clear if the reduction in

21
   Robot adoption without reduction in staffing may also have unmeasured benefits in specific circumstances,
such as complementing telemedicine and social distancing to protect frail elderly populations during a pandemic
like COVID-19 or in future seasonal influenza epidemics, supplementing caregiving tasks when care workers in
nursing homes and other post-acute care settings may be stressed. Although this aspect of robot adoption has not
yet been studied, we plan to do so in our follow-up research. For comparative views from the US during the
COVID-19 pandemic, see for example Grabowski and Joynt Maddox (2020).
                                                      20
effective work hours from fewer or less onerous night shifts more than outweighed the
reduction in monthly wages. Certainly, care workers and nurses in robot-adopting nursing
homes would be learning the new tasks associated with incorporating relatively cutting-edge
technologies into everyday caregiving tasks, and are well-placed to give feedback to
manufacturers and management about robot design and usage.
          This study provides a foundation for continuing to monitor the effects of robot
adoption in long-term care services in Japan and elsewhere in the world. Whether our results
represent only an early period of diffusion, or mask impacts that complement or augment
some types of labor while substituting for others, merits continued research. To fully
understand the impact of automation on work, we need to follow the evolution of labor
markets and automation over longer periods of time. Japan may be a harbinger for aging
populations and economies around the world. However, with only one or two cross-sections
of data with limited and recent overall robot adoption, we may see few definitive impacts and
not yet be able to discern patterns that evolve or cumulate over time. Moreover, one of the
primary impacts of robots, on quality of care, is largely unmeasured in the survey we used.
Future analysis that focuses on the impact of automation on quality of care in nursing homes
would provide a fuller picture of how automation effects jobs and productivity in the service
sector.




                                               21
References

Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo. 2018. Demographics and Automation. NBER
Working Paper No. 24421.

Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo. 2019b. "Automation and New Tasks: How
Technology Displaces and Reinstates Labor." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 33 (2): 3-
30.

Acemoglu Daron, and Pascual Restrepo. 2019. Artificial intelligence, automation and work.
Published in The Economics of Artificial Intelligence: An Agenda. Edited by Ajay Agrawal,
Joshua Gans, and Avi Goldfarb, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 2019.

Acemoglu, D., & Restrepo, P. 2020. Robots and Jobs: Evidence from US Labor
Markets. Journal of Political Economy, 128(6): 2188-2244. https://doi.org/10.1086/705716

Acemoglu, Daron, Claire Lelarge, and Pascual Restrepo. 2020. "Competing with Robots:
Firm level Evidence from France." NBER Working Paper No. 26738.

Adachi, Daisuke, Daiji Kawaguchi, and Yukiko Saito. 2020. "Robots and Employment:
Evidence from Japan, 1978-2017." Mimeo.

Agrawal, A., Gans, J., & Goldfarb, A. 2019. Artificial Intelligence: The Ambiguous Labor
Market Impact of Automating Prediction. doi: 10.3386/w25619

Autor, D. 2019. Work of the Past, Work of the Future. doi: 10.3386/w25588

Autor, D. & Salomons, A. 2018. Is Automation Labor Share-Displacing? Productivity
Growth, Employment, and the Labor Share. Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 2018(1), 1­87. doi: 10.1353/eca.2018.0000

Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane. 2003. "The skill content of recent
technological change: An empirical exploration." Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, no. 4:
1279-1333.

Banaszak-Holl, Jane, Orna Intrator, Jiejin Li, Qing Zheng, David G. Stevenson, David C.
Grabowski, and Richard A. Hirth. 2018. "The Impact of Chain Standardization on Nursing
Home Staffing." Medical care 56, no. 12 : 994.

Bessen, James. 2017. "AI and Jobs: The Role of Demand," Boston University School of Law
Law & Economics Paper Series.

Bessen, J. E., Goos, M., Salomons, A., & Berge, W. V. D. 2019. Automatic Reaction - What
Happens to Workers at Firms that Automate? SSRN Electronic Journal. doi:
10.2139/ssrn.3328877

Bloom, D., Mckenna, M., & Prettner, K. 2018. "Demography, Unemployment, Automation,
and Digitalization: Implications for the Creation of (Decent) Jobs, 2010­2030," NBER
Working Paper No. 24835, July 2018.doi: 10.3386/w24835
Boccuti, C., Casillas, G., & Neuman, T. (2015, July 10). Reading the Stars: Nursing Home
Quality Star Ratings, Nationally and by State. Retrieved from
https://www.kff.org/medicare/issue-brief/reading-the-stars-nursing-home-quality-star-ratings-
nationally-and-by-state/.

Brauner, D., Werner, R. M., Shippee, T. P., Cursio, J., Sharma, H., & Konetzka, R. T. 2018.
Does Nursing Home Compare Reflect Patient Safety In Nursing Homes? Health
Affairs, 37(11), 1770­1778. doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.2018.0721

Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Andrew McAfee. The second machine age: Work, progress, and
prosperity in a time of brilliant technologies. WW Norton & Company, 2014.

Brynjolfsson, Erik, Tom Mitchell, and Daniel Rock. 2018. "What Can Machines Learn, and
What Does It Mean for Occupations and the Economy?" American Economic Review 108:
43-47.

Castle, Nicholas G. 2008. "Nursing home caregiver staffing levels and quality of care: A
literature review." Journal of Applied Gerontology 27, no. 4 : 375-405.

Chen, M. Keith, Judith A. Chevalier, and Elisa F. Long. 2020. Nursing Home Staff Networks
and COVID-19. NBER Working Paper No. 27608

Cheng, Hong, Ruixue Jia, Dandan Li, and Hongbin Li. 2019. "The Rise of Robots in China."
Journal of Economic Perspectives 33(2): 71-88.

Chung, Jong Hyun, and Yong Suk Lee. 2020. "The Evolving Impact of Robots on Jobs."
Mimeo.

Cornell, P., Grabowski, D., Norton, E., & Rahman, M. 2019. Do Report Cards Predict Future
Quality? The Case of Skilled Nursing Facilities. doi: 10.3386/w25940

Dauth, Wolfgang, Sebastian Findeisen, Jens Südekum, and Nicole Woessner. 2017.
"German Robots--The Impact of Industrial Robots on Workers." Working paper.

Destefano, Timothy, Sho Haneda, and Hyeog Ug Kwon, "Determinants of Structural
Adjustment and Employment Use in Japan: Firm Characteristics, Offshoring and Industrial
Robotics," The Research Institute of Economy, Trade and Industry, RIETI Discussion Paper
Series 19-E-067, September 2019, available at
https://www.rieti.go.jp/en/publications/summary/19090001.html.

Dixon, Jay, Bryan Hong, and Lynn Wu. 2020. "The Robot Revolution: Managerial and
Employment Consequences for Firms." Mimeo.

Doyle, C., Setoya, N., Goeman, D., & Kayama, M. 2017. The Role of Home Nursing Visits
in Supporting People Living with Dementia in Japan and Australia: Cross-National Learnings
and Future System Reform. Health Systems & Reform, 3(3), 203­213. doi:
10.1080/23288604.2017.1342178

Felten, Edward W., Manav Raj, and Robert Seamans. 2018. "A Method to Link Advances in
                                             23
Artificial Intelligence to Occupational Abilities." AEA Papers and Proceedings, 108: 54-57.

Frank, M. R., Autor, D., Bessen, J. E., Brynjolfsson, E., Cebrian, M., Deming, D. J., ...
Rahwan, I. 2019. Toward understanding the impact of artificial intelligence on
labor. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(14), 6531­6539. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1900949116

Grabowski, David C., and Karen E. Joynt Maddox, 2020. Postacute Care Preparedness for
COVID-19: Thinking Ahead," JAMA March 25, 2020.
doi:10.1001/jama.2020.4686.

Hackmann, M. B. 2019. Incentivizing Better Quality of Care: The Role of Medicaid and
Competition in the Nursing Home Industry. American Economic Review, 109(5), 1684­1716.
doi: 10.1257/aer.20151057

Harrington, C., Carrillo, H., Garfield, R., & Squires, E. (2018, April 3). Nursing Facilities,
Staffing, Residents and Facility Deficiencies, 2009 Through 2016. Retrieved from
https://www.kff.org/medicaid/report/nursing-facilities-staffing-residents-and-facility-
deficiencies-2009-through-2016/.

Harrington, C., Wiener, J. M., Ross, L., & Musumeci, M. B. (2017, October 28). Key Issues
in Long-Term Services and Supports Quality. Retrieved from
https://www.kff.org/medicaid/issue-brief/key-issues-in-long-term-services-and-supports-
quality/.

Humlum, Anders. 2019. "Robot Adoption and Labor Market Dynamics." Mimeo.

Iizuka, T., Noguchi, H., & Sugawara, S. 2017. Pay-for-Performance and Selective Referral in
Long-Term Care. SSRN Electronic Journal. doi: 10.2139/ssrn.2971560

Ikegami, N., & Ikezaki, S. 2013. Nursing Homes and End-of-Life Care in Japan. Journal of
the American Medical Directors Association, 14(10), 718­723. doi:
10.1016/j.jamda.2013.02.008

Jackson, Maggie. "Would You Let a Robot Take Care of Your Mother?" New York Times,
December 14, 2019, https://www.nytimes.com/2019/12/13/opinion/robot-caregiver-
aging.html.

Jin, X., Tamiya, N., Jeon, B., Kawamura, A., Takahashi, H., & Noguchi, H. 2018. Resident
and facility characteristics associated with care-need level deterioration in long-term care
welfare facilities in Japan. Geriatrics & Gerontology International, 18(5), 758­766. doi:
10.1111/ggi.13248

Kawaguchi, Daiji, and Kiho Muroga, 2019. "Population Aging, Productivity, and Technology
in Japan." University of Tokyo Graduate School of Economics, August 10, 2019 working
paper.

Koch, Michael, Ilya Manuylov, and Marcel Smolka. 2019. "Robots and firms." CESIfo
Working Papers 7608.
                                               24
Lee, Changkeun, and Yong Suk Lee. 2020. "The Different Shades of Digitization in
Manufacturing: Automation vs. Smartification." Mimeo.

Mann, Katja, and Lukas Puttmann 2017. "Benign Effects of Automation: New Evidence from
Patent Texts." Unpublished manuscript.

McKinsey Global Institute, 2017, Jobs Lost, Jobs Gained: Workforce
transition in a time of automation. MGI 2017, available at
https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/future-of-work/jobs-lost-jobs-gained-what-the-
future-of-work-will-mean-for-jobs-skills-and-wages.

Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare, Japan. Various years. Prefectural report on funds set
aside to improve health care and long-term care service in each prefecture (chiiki iryo kaigo
sougo kakuho kikin"). https://www.mhlw.go.jp/stf/seisakunitsuite/bunya/0000060713.html.

MHLW 2019: https://www.mhlw.go.jp/content/12300000/000529832.pdf (accessed
December 12, 2019).

Nakanishi, M., Shimizu, S., Murai, T., & Yamaoka, A. 2015. "Ageing in Place" Policy in
Japan: Association Between the Development of an Integrated Community Care System and
the Number of Nursing Home Placements Under the Public Long-Term Care Insurance
Program Among Municipal Governments. Ageing International, 40(3), 248­261. doi:
10.1007/s12126-014-9215-x

National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2017. Information Technology
and the U.S. Workforce: Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here? Washington, DC:
The National Academies Press. doi:10.17226/24649.

Nomura, S., Blangiardo, M., Tsubokura, M., Nishikawa, Y., Gilmour, S., Kami, M., &
Hodgson, S. (2015). Mortality risk amongst nursing home residents evacuated after the
Fukushima nuclear accident. European Journal of Public Health, 25(suppl_3). doi:
10.1093/eurpub/ckv175.081

Obayahi, Kazuko, and Masuyama Shigeru. 2020. Pilot and Feasibility Study on Elderly
Support Services Using Communicative Robots and Monitoring Sensors Integrated with
Cloud Robotics. Clinical Therapeutics 42(2).

Ono, M., Miyauchi, S., Edzuki, Y., Saiki, K., Fukuda, H., Tonai, M., ... Murashima, S. 2014.
Japanese nurse practitioner practice and outcomes in a nursing home. International Nursing
Review, 62(2), 275­279. doi: 10.1111/inr.12158

Prettner, K., & D.E. Bloom, 2020. Automation as a potential response to the challenges of
demographic change, Chapter 6 in Automation and Its Macroeconomic Consequences
(Prettner and Bloom, eds.), Academic Press, 2020, pp. 163-185.
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818028-0.00006-5.



                                              25
Rahman, Momotazur, Edward C. Norton, and David C. Grabowski. 2016. "Do hospital-
owned skilled nursing facilities provide better post-acute care quality?" Journal of Health
Economics 50: 36-46.

Revision of the Priority Areas to Which Robot Technology is to be Introduced in Nursing
Care To encourage businesses to develop nursing-care robots contributing to self-reliance
support. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://www.meti.go.jp/english/press/2017/1012_002.html.

Yamamoto-Mitani, N., Saito, Y., Takaoka, M., Takai, Y., & Igarashi, A. 2018. Nurses' and
Care Workers' Perception of Care Quality in Japanese Long-Term Care Wards: A Qualitative
Descriptive Study. Global Qualitative Nursing Research, 5, 233339361881218. doi:
10.1177/2333393618812189

Ueno, A. and J. Hamawaki. 2017. The Impact of the 2009 Long-term Care Compensation
Reform on Caregiver Wages, Working Hours, and Job Separation Rate (in
Japanese). Japanese journal of health economics & policy. 29(1), 33-57.

United Nations 2017. World Population Prospects: The 2017 Revision, custom data acquired
via website. Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division.

Varian, Hal. 2019. "Automation v Procreation, aka Bots v Tots." Working paper. Presented at
AEA 2020 San Diego.

Webb, Michael. 2020. "The Impact of Artificial Intelligence on the Labor Market." Mimeo.

Zhang, Xinzhi, and David C. Grabowski. 2004. "Nursing home staffing and quality under the
nursing home reform act." The Gerontologist 44, no. 1: 13-23.




                                              26
Figure 1. Demand for long-term care (LTC) in Japan

A. Proportion of population ages 70+                                      B.Proportion of nursing homes residents with
                                                                           substantial functional limitations (level 4/5 care)




Source: Statistical Data on Prefectures (Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications)
Map source: GADM ver. 3.6, Center for Spatial Sciences at the University of California, Davis

C. Number of older Japanese likely to require long-term care, 2000 to 2060




  25


  20


  15


  10


   5


   0
       2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050 2055 2060

                              75~84 years old (mil)      85+ years old (mil)

Source: Population Projection for Japan (National Institute for Social Security and Population Issues), National Census (Ministry
of Internal Affairs and Communications).


                                                               27
Figure 2. Supply of LTC workers and labor markets in Japan

Panel A: Actual vs. expected number of care workers

     3

 2.5
                                                                            0.38
     2

 1.5

     1                                                                      2.15
                1.71               1.83

 0.5

     0
                2013               2015                   ...               2025

           Actual and expected number of care workers (mil)         Shortage in 2025

Source: MHLW (2017) (http://www.techno-aids.or.jp/robot/file29/02shiryo.pdf accesses Dec. 12, 2019)



Panel B: Ratio of job offers to applicants for the LTC industry in comparison

 6

 5

 4

 3

 2

 1

 0
         2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

                       Unemployment rate (%)
                       Ratio of job offers to applicants (LTC industry)
                       Ratio of job offers to applicants (all industries)

Data source: Employment Security Statistics (MHLW), Labor Force Survey (MHLW)




                                                                  28
Figure 3. Subsidies for nursing care robots
Panel A: Number of planned robots (2017)                                       Panel B: Planned robot exposure (2017)




Source: Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare, Japan. Various years. Prefectural report on funds set aside to improve health care
and long-term care service in each prefecture ("chiiki iryo kaigo sougo kakuho kikin").
https://www.mhlw.go.jp/stf/seisakunitsuite/bunya/0000060713.html.

Map source: GADM ver. 3.6, Center for Spatial Sciences at the University of California, Davis

Figure 4: Subsidies for nursing care robots predict robot adoption, 2017




Source: Binscatter plot, using 30 bits, based on authors' compiled dataset of nursing home subsidies and 2017 survey data on
Japanese nursing homes. The horizontal axis is the prefecture's planned number of robots to have adopted, divided by the number
of custodial and skilled nursing homes in that prefecture in 2017.


                                                                    29
Table 1. Robot adoption and subsidy
                                       Mean    Std. Dev.   Min   Max     Obs
 Adopt robots                          0.260    0.439       0     1      857
 Adopt aid robots                      0.077    0.267       0     1      857
  Transfer aid: wearable               0.047    0.211       0     1      857
  Transfer aid: non-wearable           0.033    0.178       0     1      857
 Adopt mobility robots                 0.053    0.223       0     1      857
  Mobility aid: outdoor                0.005    0.068       0     1      857
  Mobility aid: indoor                 0.008    0.090       0     1      857
  Excretion support                    0.005    0.068       0     1      857
  Bathing support                      0.029    0.168       0     1      857
 Adopt communication robots            0.174    0.379       0     1      857
  Monitoring facility                  0.149    0.357       0     1      857
  Communication robots                 0.028    0.165       0     1      857


 Robot subsidy                         0.719    0.450       0     1      857
 Planned number of robots subsidized   0.210    0.269       0    1.162   857
 per nursing home




                                               30
Table 2. Descriptive statistics
                                      Robot non-adopter        Robot adopter         Difference of Means               Total
                                     Mean      Std. Error   Mean      Std. Error      Mean      Std. Error   Mean         Std. Error
Number of care workers               40.350      0.753      47.700      1.498      -7.350***       1.556     42.242          0.687
Number of nurses                     7.695       0.199      8.683       0.295      -0.988***       0.380     7.943           0.167
Number of total staff                77.635      2.717      87.429      2.838       -9.794**       4.925     80.169          2.155
Number of care workers - regular
                                     28.162      0.569      33.004      1.060      -4.842***      1.153      29.404         0.508
employees
Number of nurses - regular
                                      5.110      0.163       5.604      0.243       -0.494        0.312       5.233         0.136
employees
Number of total staff - regular
                                     51.928      2.037      56.754      1.814       -4.826        3.634      53.172         1.588
employees

Care worker log monthly wage         12.496      0.003      12.498      0.006       -0.002        0.006      12.497         0.003
Nurse log monthly wage               12.708      0.008      12.724      0.011       -0.016        0.015      12.712         0.006
Manager log monthly wage             13.230      0.020      13.272      0.027       -0.041        0.038      13.241         0.016

Separation rate of care workers       0.156      0.009       0.143      0.007         0.013       0.015       0.152         0.007
Hiring rate of care workers           0.161      0.005       0.162      0.010        -0.001       0.011       0.161         0.005
Turnover rate of care workers         0.316      0.012       0.305      0.016         0.012       0.023       0.313         0.010
Report retention as a problem         0.327      0.018       0.307      0.030         0.020       0.035       0.321         0.015
Hire foreign workers                  0.143      0.013       0.208      0.026       -0.065**      0.027       0.160         0.012
Plan to hire foreign workers          0.297      0.017       0.405      0.032      -0.108***      0.035       0.325         0.015

Years of operation                   17.709      0.387      17.715      0.578       -0.005        0.742      17.708         0.324
Number of residents requiring care
                                     25.460      0.786      25.446      1.246        0.014        1.526      25.420         0.665
level 1, 2, or 3
Number of residents requiring care
                                     22.287      0.405      24.633      0.813      -2.347***      0.839      22.896         0.368
level 4
Number of residents requiring care
                                     18.788      0.412      20.921      0.681      -2.133***      0.808      19.334         0.354
level 5
Care workers per resident             0.684      0.025       0.720      0.022       -0.035        0.045       0.694         0.019
Nurses per resident                   0.124      0.003       0.130      0.004       -0.006        0.006       0.125         0.003

Skilled nursing home                  0.211      0.015       0.183      0.025        0.027        0.030       0.203         0.013
Social welfare council                0.021      0.005       0.017      0.008        0.005        0.011       0.020         0.005
Social welfare organization           0.784      0.016       0.842      0.024       -0.058*       0.030       0.799         0.013
Medical corporation                   0.150      0.014       0.121      0.021        0.030        0.026       0.143         0.011
Local government                      0.029      0.006       0.008      0.006        0.020*       0.011       0.023         0.005

Wheel chair lifts                     0.722      0.017       0.825      0.025      -0.103***      0.032       0.748         0.014
Adjustable beds                       0.918      0.010       0.954      0.014        -0.036*      0.019       0.928         0.008
Seat lifting wheel chair              0.090      0.011       0.108      0.020         -0.018      0.022       0.095         0.010
Special bathtub                       0.799      0.015       0.863      0.022       -0.063**      0.029       0.816         0.013
Stretcher                             0.867      0.013       0.938      0.016      -0.071***      0.024       0.885         0.010
Wheel chair for showers               0.649      0.018       0.742      0.028      -0.093***      0.035       0.673         0.015
Wheel chair scale                     0.900      0.011       0.983      0.008      -0.084***      0.020       0.921         0.009

Has employment regulation for non-
                                      0.926      0.010       0.908      0.019        0.017        0.020       0.921         0.009
regular workers
Has a HR manager                      0.580      0.019       0.675      0.030      -0.095***      0.036       0.604         0.016
Has a wage table                      0.911      0.011       0.938      0.016        -0.026       0.021       0.918         0.009
Improve working conditions for
                                      0.576      0.019       0.579      0.032       -0.003        0.037       0.577         0.016
retention
Improve wages for retention           0.451      0.019       0.592      0.032      -0.140***      0.037       0.487         0.016
Additional Provider Payment           0.971      0.006       0.988      0.007        -0.016       0.012       0.975         0.005

Log(per capita income)                7.986      0.006       7.985      0.010         0.001       0.011       7.986         0.005
Unemployment rate                     2.550      0.020       2.665      0.030      -0.114***      0.038       2.580         0.017
Log(total population)                14.773      0.031      14.923      0.053       -0.150**      0.062      14.811         0.027
Log(population 70 or older)          13.203      0.028      13.343      0.048       -0.140**      0.056      13.239         0.025
Minimum wage                         805.529     2.353      814.038     4.342        -8.509*      4.753      807.706        2.076
Log(number of nursing homes)          5.558      0.022       5.664      0.037       -0.106**      0.044       5.585         0.019
Jobs hired per opening                0.720      0.004       0.738      0.008       -0.018**      0.009       0.724         0.004

                                                               31
Nursing home job openings per
                                        3.566    0.043    3.656    0.073    -0.089     0.086   3.589    0.037
applicant
Occupancy rate of nursing homes         0.940    0.0004   0.937    0.001   0.002***    0.001   0.939    0.0004
Log (Number of people certified for
                                        9.830    0.026    9.966    0.045   -0.136***   0.052   9.865    0.023
care level 3 in the prefecture)
Log (Number of people certified for
                                        9.755    0.026    9.896    0.044   -0.141***   0.051   9.791    0.023
care level 4 in the prefecture)
Log (Number of people certified for
                                        9.474    0.027    9.624    0.045   -0.149***   0.053   9.513    0.023
care level 5 in the prefecture)
Prefecture subsidies for securing
                                        1.254    0.044    1.175    0.072     0.792     0.086   1.234    0.038
workers
Prefecture subsidies for improving
                                        10.221   0.271    11.535   0.454   -1.315**    0.533   10.557   0.233
facilities
Log (Estimated population in 2040)      14.602   0.033    14.758   0.056   -0.156**    0.066   14.642   0.029
Log (Estimated male population over
                                        12.482   0.031    12.628   0.051   -0.146**    0.060   12.519   0.026
70 in 2040)
Log (Estimated female population
                                        12.812   0.0304   12.959   0.051   -0.148**    0.060   12.850   0.026
over 70 in 2040)

Training for regular care workers       0.686    0.018    0.745    0.028    -0.059*    0.034   0.701    0.015
Training for new regular care
                                        0.508    0.019    0.628    0.031   -0.120***   0.037   0.539    0.016
workers
Training for non-regular care workers   0.544    0.019    0.524    0.033     0.021     0.038   0.539    0.017
Training for new non-regular care
                                        0.357    0.019    0.450    0.033   -0.093**    0.037   0.381    0.016
workers

Perception on shortage of care
                                        0.450    0.004    0.461    0.006    -0.012     0.008   0.453    0.003
workers
Perception on shortage of nurses        0.220    0.004    0.231    0.007    -0.011     0.008   0.223    0.004
Perception on shortage of laborers      0.714    0.004    0.726    0.007    -0.012     0.008   0.717    0.004




                                                            32
Table 3. Robot adoption
                                  (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)             (7)          (8)             (9)
                                                                         Dependent variable: Adopt robot
                                                                                                +Additional +Perceptions
                                                          Other Management +Prefecture
                                                                                                  facility    of labor                 Subsidy
                                                       technology practices variables
                                                                                                 variables   shortage

Planned number of robots                                                                                                      0.423***     0.428***
per nursing home in 2017                                                                                                      (0.0892)     (0.0896)
                                0.0323      0.0926       0.0855       0.0965        0.0804         0.0735         0.0637       0.0232       0.0690
Skilled nursing home
                               (0.0628)    (0.0660)     (0.0667)     (0.0682)      (0.0698)       (0.0717)       (0.0747)     (0.0659)     (0.0706)
                              0.0983***                                                                                        0.0661*
Log(number of residents)
                               (0.0306)                                                                                       (0.0340)
Log(care level 1~3                         -0.00246    -0.00728        -0.0105      -0.00816         -0.0111       -0.0104                   -0.0105
residents)                                 (0.0249)    (0.0247)       (0.0247)      (0.0248)        (0.0262)      (0.0264)                   (0.0262)
                                            0.0320       0.0191         0.0133        0.0201          0.0222        0.0245                    0.0400
Log(care level 4 residents)
                                           (0.0359)    (0.0357)       (0.0356)      (0.0354)        (0.0361)      (0.0363)                   (0.0361)
                                           0.0591**     0.0510*       0.0536*         0.0460          0.0344        0.0283                    0.0278
Log(care level 5 residents)
                                           (0.0301)    (0.0308)       (0.0306)      (0.0308)        (0.0319)      (0.0327)                   (0.0324)
                                                       0.0730**       0.0695**      0.0740**       0.0863***      0.0774** 0.0805** 0.0800**
Wheel chair lifts
                                                       (0.0321)       (0.0317)      (0.0322)        (0.0333)      (0.0338)      (0.0341) (0.0341)
                                                        -0.0785        -0.0856      -0.0970*        -0.122**      -0.138**     -0.147** -0.153***
Adjustable beds
                                                       (0.0573)       (0.0561)      (0.0537)        (0.0563)      (0.0566)      (0.0579) (0.0575)
                                                         0.0190       -0.00227      -0.00380          0.0164        0.0176       0.0180       0.0167
Seat lifting wheel chair
                                                       (0.0517)       (0.0516)      (0.0502)        (0.0532)      (0.0528)      (0.0519) (0.0520)
                                                         0.0141         0.0124        0.0204        0.00470        -0.0105      -0.0149      -0.0148
Special bathtub
                                                       (0.0390)       (0.0385)      (0.0394)        (0.0407)      (0.0426)      (0.0419) (0.0419)
                                                         0.0557         0.0550        0.0599          0.0575       0.0770*      0.0846*      0.0809*
Stretcher
                                                       (0.0445)       (0.0443)      (0.0444)        (0.0472)      (0.0463)      (0.0464) (0.0464)
                                                         0.0245         0.0261        0.0296          0.0282        0.0263       0.0292       0.0285
Wheel chair for showers
                                                       (0.0316)       (0.0318)      (0.0320)        (0.0331)      (0.0336)      (0.0331) (0.0331)
                                                       0.165***       0.154***      0.152***        0.145***      0.158*** 0.153*** 0.149***
Wheel chair scale
                                                       (0.0373)       (0.0371)      (0.0373)        (0.0383)      (0.0391)      (0.0406) (0.0403)
Has employment regulation                                              -0.0515       -0.0500         -0.0165       -0.0114      -0.0229      -0.0241
for non-regular workers                                               (0.0551)      (0.0553)        (0.0604)      (0.0618)      (0.0616) (0.0615)
                                                                      0.0567*       0.0644**          0.0457      0.0634** 0.0739** 0.0737**
Has a HR manager
                                                                      (0.0297)      (0.0297)        (0.0311)      (0.0315)      (0.0312) (0.0311)
                                                                      0.00704         0.0127          0.0265        0.0232       0.0248       0.0231
Has a wage table
                                                                      (0.0504)      (0.0508)        (0.0537)      (0.0553)      (0.0538) (0.0537)
Improve working conditions                                             -0.0213       -0.0177         -0.0227       -0.0258      -0.0206      -0.0236
for retention                                                         (0.0293)      (0.0294)        (0.0304)      (0.0309)      (0.0304) (0.0305)
                                                                     0.0919*** 0.0903***           0.0830*** 0.0836*** 0.0891*** 0.0901***
Improve wages for retention
                                                                      (0.0291)      (0.0291)        (0.0303)      (0.0309)      (0.0305) (0.0305)
Additional Provider                                                   -0.00409       -0.0141         -0.0253       -0.0135      -0.0253      -0.0296
Payment                                                               (0.0726)      (0.0723)        (0.0777)      (0.0776)      (0.0788) (0.0787)
Observations                       938        938          938            934           934             884           857         857          857
R-squared                         0.029      0.032        0.054          0.069         0.100           0.113         0.127       0.153        0.154
Notes: All regressions additionally control for years of operation, location (metropolis, urban, rural), corporation type (social council, social
organization, medical facility, local government facility, and other), region fixed effects, and a dummy for skilled nursing homes. Standard errors
clustered by prefecture are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                         33
Table 4. Robot adoption and staffing ­ OLS Estimates
                                  (1)           (2)            (3)                (4)           (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)

                                                           Log(tota                          Log(hou
                              Log(num                                         Log(mont                                     Log(hou      Log(mont
                                             Log(num       l number                             rly        Log(mont
                               ber of                                         hly wage)                                      rly        hly wage)
 VARIABLES                                     ber of          of                            wage) -       hly wage)
                                care                                            - care                                     wage) -          -
                                              nurses)      employe                             care         - nurses
                              workers)                                         workers                                      nurses      managers
                                                              es)                            workers

 Panel A. All
 employees
                               0.0429        0.0684**       0.0582*           -0.00443        -0.0120       -0.0106        -0.0477       0.000756
 Adopt robots
                              (0.0324)       (0.0307)       (0.0352)           (0.0140)      (0.0100)       (0.0140)       (0.0314)      (0.0311)
 Observations                    857            857           857               6,805          1,685          1,307          202            650
 R-squared                      0.429          0.506         0.386              0.590          0.314          0.507         0.788          0.426

 Panel B. Regular
 employees
                               0.0306        0.0680*         0.0470           -0.00527                      -0.0134
 Adopt robots
                              (0.0395)       (0.0361)       (0.0376)           (0.0136)                     (0.0138)
 Observations                    857            857           857               6,360                         1,251
 R-squared                      0.408          0.476         0.397              0.569                         0.466

 Panel C. Non-regular employees
                               0.0798         0.0414         0.0848                           -0.0117                      -0.0517
 Adopt robots
                              (0.0553)       (0.0522)       (0.0524)                         (0.0098)                      (0.0313)
 Observations                    857            857           857                              1,674                         196
 R-squared                      0.254          0.212         0.282                             0.314                        0.786
 Worker
                                                                                 Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
 characteristics
 Base facility
                                 Yes            Yes           Yes                Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
 characteristics
 Resident case-mix               Yes            Yes           Yes                Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
 Other technology
                                 Yes            Yes           Yes                Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
 adoption
 Management
                                 Yes            Yes           Yes                Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
 practices
 Prefecture
                                 Yes            Yes           Yes                Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
 characteristics
 HR development
                                 Yes            Yes           Yes                Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
 practices
 Labor shortage
                                 Yes            Yes           Yes                Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
 perceptions

Notes: Base facility characteristics control for years of operation, location (metropolis, urban, rural), corporation type, and skilled nursing homes.
Resident case-mix controls for the log number of residents with care levels 1-3, 4, and 5. Other technology adoption controls for each non-robot
technology used in the nursing homes. Management practices control for human resource management practices. Prefecture characteristics
controls for the demographic and economic conditions. HR development practices control for human resource development practices in a facility.
Labor shortage perceptions control for labor shortage perceptions on care workers, nurses, and laborers in general. Standard errors clustered by
prefecture are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                         34
Table 5. Robot adoption and staffing ­ IV Estimates
                                  (1)            (2)           (3)               (4)           (5)            (6)           (7)           (8)
                                                           Log(total
                                                                             Log(month      Log(hour
                               Log(numb      Log(numb       number                                       Log(month      Log(hour      Log(month
                                                                             ly wage) -     ly wage)
 VARIABLES                     er of care      er of          of                                         ly wage) -     ly wage)      ly wage) -
                                                                                care          - care
                                workers)      nurses)      employee                                        nurses        - nurses      managers
                                                                              workers       workers
                                                              s)
 Panel A. All employees

                               0.278***       0.388***      0.255**            -0.0291       -0.0599      -0.269***       0.0592         0.182
 Adopt robots
                                (0.0737)       (0.125)       (0.106)          (0.0487)      (0.0523)       (0.0702)       (0.122)       (0.115)
 Observations                     857           857           857               6,805         1,685         1,307          202            650
 First stage F-statistic        73.486         73.486        73.486            61.858        75.554         48.92         5.425         54.983


 Panel B. Regular employees

                                -0.0780       -0.00082      -0.0418            -0.0279                    -0.221***
 Adopt robots
                                (0.121)        (0.115)       (0.135)          (0.0496)                     (0.0617)
 Observations                     857           857           857               6,360                       1,251
 First stage F-statistic        73.486         73.486        73.486            72.689                       53.215


 Panel C. Non-regular employees

                               1.062***       0.784***      0.76***                          -0.0586                      0.0609
 Adopt robots
                                (0.167)        (0.264)       (0.145)                        (0.0516)                      (0.121)
 Observations                     857           857           857                             1,674                        196
 First stage F-statistic        73.486         73.486        73.486                          74.718                        6.43
 Worker characteristics                                                          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 Base facility
                                  Yes           Yes           Yes                Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 characteristics
 Resident case-mix                Yes           Yes           Yes                Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 Other technology
                                  Yes           Yes           Yes                Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 adoption
 Management practices             Yes           Yes           Yes                Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 Prefecture characteristics       Yes           Yes           Yes                Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 HR development
                                  Yes           Yes           Yes                Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 practices
 Labor shortage
                                  Yes           Yes           Yes                Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 perceptions

Notes: Worker characteristics control for gender, age, age squared, experience, experience squared, and qualification level of the worker. Base
facility characteristics control for years of operation, location (metropolis, urban, rural), corporation type, and skilled nursing homes. Resident
case-mix controls for the log number of residents with care levels 1-3, 4, and 5. Other technology adoption controls for each non-robot
technology used in the nursing homes. Management practices control for human resource management practices. Prefecture characteristics
controls for the demographic and economic conditions. HR development practices control for human resource development practices in a facility.
Labor shortage perceptions control for labor shortage perceptions on care workers, nurses, and laborers in general. Standard errors clustered by
prefecture are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                       35
Table 6. IV results by robot type
                                (1)        (2)         (3)              (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)           (8)

                                                   Log(total         Log(month    Log(hourl
                           Log(numb     Log(numb                                              Log(month    Log(hourl    Log(month
                                                   number of         ly wage) -   y wage) -
 VARIABLES                 er of care     er of                                               ly wage) -   y wage) -    ly wage) -
                                                   employee             care        care
                            workers)     nurses)                                                nurses      nurses       managers
                                                      s)              workers      workers


 Panel A. Regular employees

                              -0.113    -0.00119    -0.0605           -0.0410                 -0.316***
 Monitoring robots
                              (0.173)    (0.167)     (0.194)          (0.0714)                 (0.0947)
 Observations                  857        857         857              6,360                    1,251
 First stage F-statistic      63.404     63.404      63.404           32.374                    32.655

                              -0.216    -0.00228     -0.115           -0.0679                  -0.681**
 Aid robots
                              (0.337)    (0.318)     (0.374)          (0.126)                  (0.256)
 Observations                  857        857         857              6,360                    1,251
 First stage F-statistic      58.172     58.172      58.172           44.871                    18.356

                              -0.395    -0.00417     -0.212            -0.127                  -0.844*
 Mobility robots
                              (0.617)    (0.583)     (0.688)          (0.235)                  (0.459)
 Observations                  857        857         857              6,360                    1,251
 First stage F-statistic      7.989      7.989       7.989              6.8                     5.394

 Panel B. Non-regular employees

                           1.538***     1.135***    1.100***                       -0.0868                   0.0736
 Monitoring robots
                              (0.262)    (0.378)     (0.225)                      (0.0777)                  (0.139)
 Observations                  857        857         857                          1,674                      196
 First stage F-statistic      63.404     63.404      63.404                        39.066                    20.04

                           2.936***     2.168***    2.101***                       -0.109                    0.0671
 Aid robots
                              (0.601)    (0.656)     (0.503)                       (0.102)                  (0.128)
 Observations                  857        857         857                          1,674                      196
 First stage F-statistic      58.172     58.172      58.172                        61.205                    22.13

                            5.380**     3.972**     3.849***                       -0.574                    0.940
 Mobility robots
                              (2.264)    (1.859)     (1.375)                       (0.607)                  (3.864)
 Observations                  857        857         857                          1,674                      196
 First stage F-statistic      7.989      7.989       7.989                          1.76                      0.08
Notes: Worker characteristics control for gender, age, age squared, experience, experience squared, and qualification level of the
worker. Base facility characteristics control for years of operation, location (metropolis, urban, rural), corporation type, region
fixed effects, and skilled nursing homes. Resident case-mix controls for the log number of residents with care levels 1-3, 4, and 5.
Other technology adoption controls for each non-robot technology used in the nursing homes. Management practices control for
human resource management practices. Prefecture characteristics controls for the demographic and economic conditions. HR
development practices control for human resource development practices in a facility. Labor shortage perceptions control for
labor shortage perceptions on careworkers, nurses, and laborers in general. Standard errors clustered by prefecture are in
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                36
Table 7. Wage share and revenue growth
                                                         (1)                       (2)                       (3)                      (4)
                                                        OLS                      2SLS                     OLS                     2SLS
                                                                                                     Revenue growth           Revenue growth
 VARIABLES                                        Wage share (%)           Wage share (%)
                                                                                                          (%)                      (%)
 Panel A. Adopt any robot
                                                        0.589                  -7.705**                    -1.109                   -4.369
 Adopt robots
                                                       (0.871)                  (3.086)                   (0.951)                   (3.949)
 Observations                                            779                       779                      802                       802
 R-squared                                              0.095                                              0.084
 First stage F-statistic                                                         83.09                                              68.145


 Panel B. Robot adoption by type
                                                        1.064                                              0.105
 Aid robots
                                                       (1.373)                                            (1.482)
                                                        0.339                                              0.877
 Mobility robots
                                                       (1.328)                                            (1.632)
                                                       -0.119                                              -1.467
 Communication robots
                                                       (0.979)                                            (1.182)
 Observations                                            779                                                802
 R-squared                                              0.095                                              0.084

 Panel C. Robot adoption by time
                                                        0.802                                              -1.177
 Robot first adopted before 2017
                                                       (0.908)                                            (0.997)
                                                       -0.747                                              -1.719
 Robot first adopted in 2017
                                                       (1.862)                                            (1.847)
 Observations                                            779                                                802
 R-squared                                              0.095                                              0.084

 Base facility characteristics                           Yes                      Yes                       Yes                       Yes
 Resident case-mix                                       Yes                      Yes                       Yes                       Yes
 Other technology adoption                               Yes                      Yes                       Yes                       Yes
 Management practices                                    Yes                      Yes                       Yes                       Yes
 Prefecture characteristics                              Yes                      Yes                       Yes                       Yes
 HR development practices                                Yes                      Yes                       Yes                       Yes
 Labor shortage perceptions                              Yes                      Yes                       Yes                       Yes
Notes: Worker characteristics control for gender, age, age squared, experience, experience squared, and qualification level of the worker. Base
facility characteristics control for years of operation, location (metropolis, urban, rural), corporation type, region fixed effects, and skilled nursing
homes. Resident case-mix controls for the log number of residents with care levels 1-3, 4, and 5. Other technology adoption controls for each
non-robot technology used in the nursing homes. Management practices control for human resource management practices. Prefecture
characteristics controls for the demographic and economic conditions. HR development practices control for human resource development
practices in a facility. Labor shortage perceptions control for labor shortage perceptions on care workers, nurses, and laborers in general.
Standard errors clustered by prefecture are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                          37
Table 8. Retention and foreign workers
                                                          (1)                         (2)                          (3)
                                                                                                         Plan to hire foreign
                                               Retention is difficult       Hire foreign workers
                                                                                                               workers
 Panel A. OLS estimates
                                                       -0.0157                     0.0633**                     0.0641*
 Adopt robots
                                                       (0.0394)                    (0.0321)                     (0.0385)
 Observations                                            846                          852                          849
 R-squared                                              0.070                        0.111                       0.116

 Panel B. 2SLS estimates
                                                      -0.258**                      -0.0382                     -0.0288
 Adopt robots
                                                       (0.123)                      (0.133)                     (0.130)
 Observations                                            846                         852                          849
 First stage F-statistic                                73.55                       72.928                       73.788
 Base facility characteristics                           Yes                          Yes                         Yes
 Resident case-mix                                       Yes                          Yes                         Yes
 Other technology adoption                               Yes                          Yes                         Yes
 Management practices                                    Yes                          Yes                         Yes
 Prefecture characteristics                              Yes                          Yes                         Yes
 HR development practices                                Yes                          Yes                         Yes
 Labor shortage perceptions                              Yes                          Yes                         Yes
Notes: Worker characteristics control for gender, age, age squared, experience, experience squared, and qualification level of the worker. Base
facility characteristics control for years of operation, location (metropolis, urban, rural), corporation type, region fixed effects, and skilled nursing
homes. Resident case-mix controls for the log number of residents with care levels 1-3, 4, and 5. Other technology adoption controls for each
non-robot technology used in the nursing homes. Management practices control for human resource management practices. Prefecture
characteristics controls for the demographic and economic conditions. HR development practices control for human resource development
practices in a facility. Labor shortage perceptions control for labor shortage perceptions on care workers, nurses, and laborers in general.
Standard errors clustered by prefecture are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                          38
