                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT AND SCHOOL PRODUCTIVITY:
                          EVIDENCE FROM INDIA

                                       Renata Lemos
                                    Karthik Muralidharan
                                        Daniela Scur

                                     Working Paper 28336
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28336


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 2021, Revised July 2021




We thank Nick Bloom, Cesi Cruz, Alex Eble, Deon Filmer, Bob Gibbons, Dan Honig, Julien
Labonne, Lant Pritchett, Simon Quinn, Arman Rezaae, Abhijeet Singh, Margaret Stevens, John
Van Reenen and several seminar participants at the CSAE, Empirical Management Conference,
NEUDC, Oxford, and SIOE for very useful comments and suggestions. We are deeply grateful to
M. Srinivasa Rao, B. Srinivasulu, S. Ramamurthy, and staff of the Azim Premji Foundation for
their support in setting up and overseeing the data collection that this paper is based on. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Renata Lemos, Karthik Muralidharan, and Daniela Scur. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Personnel Management and School Productivity: Evidence from India
Renata Lemos, Karthik Muralidharan, and Daniela Scur
NBER Working Paper No. 28336
January 2021, Revised July 2021
JEL No. I25,M5,O1

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper uses new data to study school management and productivity in India. We report four
main results. First, management quality in public schools is low, and ~2 below high-income
countries with comparable data. Second, private schools have higher management quality, driven
by much stronger people management. Third, people management quality is correlated with both
independent measures of teaching practice, as well as school productivity measured by student
value added. Fourth, private school teacher pay is positively correlated with teacher effectiveness,
and better-managed private schools are more likely to retain their most effective teachers. Neither
pattern is seen in public schools.

Renata Lemos                                     Daniela Scur
World Bank                                       Cornell University
1850 I Street NW                                 Dyson School of Applied Economics
Washington, DC 20433                             and Management
and Center for Economic Performance,             Ithaca, NY 14853-6201
London School of Economics                       dscur@cornell.edu
rlemos@worldbank.org

Karthik Muralidharan Department
of Economics, 0508 University of
California, San Diego 9500 Gilman
Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
kamurali@ucsd.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28336
1       Introduction
Developing countries have made impressive progress in expanding primary school enrollment
in the last couple of decades, but learning outcomes continue to be poor (World Bank; 2018).
A growing body of evidence suggests that simply expanding schooling inputs may not be
very effective without also improving the productivity of how these inputs are used (Glewwe
and Muralidharan; 2016). One possible contributor to school productivity is the quality of its
management, and there is growing interest in studying and improving school management.
Yet, there is little evidence on the extent to which school management quality is correlated
with either teaching practices or school productivity.
    In this paper, we examine this question using data from two projects in India, the De-
velopment World Management Survey (D-WMS) and the Andhra Pradesh School Choice
(APSC) project. The D-WMS is a new measurement tool that we developed for this paper
to expand on the original WMS tool (Bloom and Van Reenen; 2007) to obtain comparable
but yet more granular measures of management quality in a low-capacity setting. The APSC
project studied in Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2015) collected four years of rich panel
data on schools, students, and teachers in a representative sample of rural public and private
schools in the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh (AP).1 The combination of these two datasets
allows us to present the first detailed and comparable evidence of the types of management
practices used in primary schools in a developing country, across the public and private
sector, and also examine how they correlate with measures of school effectiveness.
    We report four main results. First, public schools in AP have low management quality.
Based on a normalized cross-country comparison, we estimate that management quality in
AP public schools is almost 2 below the mean of 6 high-income countries with comparable
data.2 However, the low management quality in AP is not an outlier after adjusting for
log per-capita income. Thus, the income gradient in school management quality across
countries could be one reason that education systems in higher income countries add more
human capital for each year of schooling, as shown by Schoellman (2011).
    Second, within AP, private schools are much better managed with an average man-
agement score that is 1.36 higher than in AP public schools (normalized relative to the
distribution of AP public schools). Our management score can be decomposed into scores
    1
     The original state of AP was divided into two states (AP and Telangana) on June 2, 2014. Since this
division took place after our data collection, we use the term "AP" to represent the original undivided state.
   2
     School management scores for other countries were collected as part of Bloom et al. (2015), and are
comparable with the AP data because they were collected based on the same measurement scale. We
include only public schools from the WMS dataset in this exercise. The figure normalizes management
scores across countries since it makes cross-country comparisons.



                                                      1
on both operations and people management, and we see that the public school disadvantage
is driven primarily by very low scores on people management: private schools scored nearly
4.8 higher than public schools on this index. Relative to global benchmarks, the comparable
scores for AP private schools are in line with those of public school systems in Brazil, Italy,
and Colombia. This suggests that the private sector in India is able to achieve measures of
management quality comparable to public school systems in much richer countries.
    Third, we find that school management quality (and especially people management) is
significantly correlated with independent measures of teaching quality as well as student
value-added. In public schools, a 1 higher people-management score is associated with
0.26 better teacher practices and 0.34 higher student value added. In private schools,
these are 0.24 and 0.16 respectively. We also find that a large portion of the differences in
value-addition across public and private schools can be explained by differences in the quality
of people management (in an accounting sense, but not necessarily in a causal sense).
    Fourth, we find that better management is directly correlated with personnel policies that
reward effective teaching on both the intensive (wage) and extensive (selection) margins. In
private schools, more effective teachers, measured by teacher value-added (TVA), receive
significantly higher wages even after controlling for observable teacher characteristics. A
teacher who adds an extra 1 to student learning each year on average is paid about 26%
higher wages. We find no correlation between TVA and wages in public schools. Better
managed private schools are also more effective at selecting and retaining their most effective
teachers, but we find no such relationship in public schools.
    A key question for interpreting our results is to understand where the variation in man-
agement practices comes from and what it is correlated with. We examine correlations of
management practices with school, teacher, and head-teacher characteristics and do find
some meaningful relationships -- especially with parental education and employment, and
teacher qualifications and school size in private schools. However, we still find considerable
variation in management quality after controlling for all these characteristics, and all the
results above hold even with the residualized measure of management quality.
    This residual variation most likely reflects idiosyncratic variation in school-level manage-
ment practices. This is consistent with the management scores in our setting being below
2.5 for most schools on the D-WMS scale, which codes management quality on a 1-5 scale.
On this scale, scores below 3 reflect variation in individual practices that are not formally
codified in any school management policy. As such, the variation in management quality
in our data is best interpreted as reflecting variation in management practices employed by
individual school leaders rather than variation in formal policies.


                                               2
    Our first contribution is to the measurement of management practices in low and middle
income countries (LMICs). Specifically, this paper presents the development and first use
of the enhanced measurement tool (the D-WMS) designed for low-capacity contexts. The
survey instruments along with detailed notes on administering and coding the surveys are
included in Appendix B.3 We recommend the use of these tools for future research on man-
agement in LMICs (wherever feasible) for three reasons. First, it allows for a more precise
and granular understanding of management practices and their relationship with productiv-
ity - especially in the lower end of the distribution where management practices in LMICs are
concentrated.4 Second, the greater precision in measurement will improve power for detect-
ing changes in management quality in response to interventions to improve management.5
Third, the D-WMS maintains comparability with the original WMS that has been deployed
in several settings and allows cross-country comparisons of the sort shown in this paper.6
    Second, we show that management quality -- especially the quality of personnel man-
agement -- is strongly correlated with school productivity. Prior work has documented the
correlation between school management quality and levels of test scores across secondary
schools in (primarily) OECD countries (Bloom et al.; 2015). However, differences in test-
score levels across schools could reflect omitted variables such as student selectivity and may
not be a good measure of school productivity. The combination of independent measures
of teaching practices and panel data on student learning allow us to present direct evidence
on the correlation between school management quality and independent measures of school
effectiveness and productivity.7
    Third, we complement the literature on school leadership where multiple papers have
studied the impact of changes in principals and superintendents on school quality, and shown
that school leaders "matter" (Coelli and Green; 2012; Walsh and Dotter; 2020; Lavy and
   3
      All survey materials are available on the WMS website: www.worldmanagementsurvey.org
   4
      For instance, using the WMS comparable scores, 81% of the public schools in AP would have a people-
management score of 1, which is the lowest possible score and would generate considerable floor effects in
measurement. With the D-WMS scoring grid, only 6% of schools scored the minimum score of 1.
    5
      For instance, using the WMS scales to study the relationship between management quality and school
productivity in our setting would have yielded directionally similar findings, but with larger standard errors
and more insignificant results due to the greater coarseness of the coding relative to the D-WMS.
    6
      Since the time we developed, piloted, refined, and finalized the D-WMS tool for this project, we have
shared the D-WMS instrument and methodology with research teams in Brazil, Colombia, Haiti, Indonesia,
Mexico, Mozambique, Pakistan, Tanzania and Puerto Rico.
    7
      Several studies have found that estimates of the impact of education interventions using value-added
methods that control for lagged test scores are comparable to those obtained from experimental studies.
(e.g., Kane and Staiger; 2008; Kane et al.; 2014; Chetty et al.; 2014). Prior work in developing countries has
documented the correlation between intermediate outcomes of management quality (such as teacher absence
or time-on-task) and value-added (e.g., Duflo et al.; 2012; Romero et al.; 2020), but has not directly measured
management practices or correlated them with school productivity.



                                                      3
Boiko; 2017; Munoz and Prem; 2020). Yet, for the most part, this literature has not con-
sistently measured specific practices of school leaders. Our results showing that variation in
management practices measured by the D-WMS are also correlated with independent mea-
sures of teacher value-added and practices suggest that differences in school productivity
that may otherwise be attributed to school "leadership" can be accounted for by specific
management practices. This knowledge may help in designing programs whereby school
leaders could be coached to implement better practices and become more effective, as shown
in the United States (Fryer; 2014, 2017). In contrast, the main practical implication of
simply knowing that school leaders "matter" would be to focus on the selection margin of
identifying effective school leaders.
    Finally, we contribute to the broader literature on public-sector personnel economics
(e.g. Lazear (1995); Finan et al. (2015)), and to the comparative analysis of management
in the public and private sector (Rainey and Chun; 2007). Specifically, we present (to
our knowledge) the first evidence that combines measures of management quality, employee
behaviors, and productivity; with comparable data across public and private sector entities
in any sector. This allows us to demonstrate the central role played by better personnel
management in explaining the greater productivity in the private sector.


2    The Indian primary school institutional context
The undivided state of Andhra Pradesh (AP) would be India's fifth largest state, with a
population of 85 million. At the time of this study, AP had similar averages to the rest
of India on measures of human development, primary school enrolment, literacy, infant
mortality and teacher absence (Muralidharan and Sundararaman; 2011). In this context,
public schools are owned and run by the government, and private schools are owned and
run by private individuals or organizations (including religious and charitable ones). At the
time of the study, an estimated 3.2 million children in AP attended public schools and 2.1
million attended private schools (see Young Lives dataset in Woldehanna et al. (2018)).
    The private schools in our study sample are not elite schools. Rather, they represent a
segment of schools that are referred to as "low-cost" or "budget" private schools. These low-
cost private schools have substantially lower per-student expenditure than public schools,
and the vast majority of enrollment in private schools in India is accounted for by this
segment of schools (CSF; 2020). Similar trends are seen in Pakistan (Andrabi et al.; 2008).
The main driver of the lower costs in these private schools is that they pay much lower
teacher salaries.


                                              4
    Public school teachers are much more likely to have formal teacher training credentials
(99% vs. 34%), though these qualifications have been shown to be poor predictors of better
student performance (Muralidharan and Sundararaman; 2011). They are civil servants hired
by the state government on permanent contracts and are paid over 5 times the average private
school teacher salary (Rs. 14,286 vs. 2,607 per month in data collected between 2008-2012).
Decisions regarding teacher postings and transfers are typically made at the district level.
While this process is often politically influenced in several Indian states,(Béteille; 2009)
Andhra Pradesh had introduced a systematic and transparent process of teacher postings
and transfers since the late 1990s (Ramachandran et al.; 2016).8
    Teacher effort and accountability are significantly higher in private schools. Private
schools have much lower rates of teacher absence (9% vs. 24%), and higher rates of observed
active teaching when measured by unannounced visits to schools (50% vs. 35%). They also
have a longer school year (11 more working days) and longer school days (45 minutes longer
per day). Public primary schools in our sample have an average of 68 students and 3 teachers
across grades 1-5. Private schools are substantially larger with over 300 students on average
and about 14 teachers. Private schools also have lower levels of multi-grade teaching (where
one teacher simultaneously teaches multiple grades) than public schools (24% vs 79%). 9
Though these private schools are low cost, they still charge fees, whereas public schools are
free. Thus, students attending these private schools come from relatively more advantaged
backgrounds, as measured by parental education, occupation, and assets.10


3       Data
3.1     Measuring management in low and middle-income countries
        (LMICs): the Development WMS (D-WMS)
The original World Management Survey (WMS) project started in 2002 and has since then
collected over 30,000 data points on the quality of management practices in establishments
in the manufacturing, retail, education and healthcare sectors across 39 countries.11 The
    8
     The transparent criteria used to determine teachers priority for transfer requests include length of service
(or seniority), spousal job postings (for those with spouses who are also employed by the government), and
duration spent in the current post.
   9
     All figures reported in this section are based on Tables 3, 4, and 5 of Muralidharan and Sundararaman
(2015). We present a comparison of key metrics in Table A1.
  10
     In addition to being true in our sample, this is also seen in several other studies (Tooley; 2009; Muralid-
haran and Kremer; 2008; Vennam et al.; 2014; Singh; 2015).
  11
     For a review of the latest WMS public dataset, see Scur et al. (2021). For the first paper on WMS
measurement in schools, see Bloom et al. (2015). More information on the WMS project can be found at


                                                       5
methodology involves an interview lasting approximately one hour with the senior-most
manager at the establishment (for schools, this is the head teacher or principal). Highly
trained analysts score the manager responses on a set scale of 1 to 5 based on a common
scoring rubric. A score of 1 means there are no processes at all or very little processes in
place, while a score of 2 means there are some informal processes in place mainly adopted
by the headteacher herself (as opposed to some formal "school policy"). A score of 3 means
there is a formal process in place, though it has weaknesses such as not being followed all the
time or properly. Scores of 4 and 5 indicate increasing levels of adherence and embeddedness
of the practices such that they are part of the culture of the school.
    The distribution of scores for schools in high income countries span almost the entire
range of the WMS scores, from 1 to a little above 4. LMICs (and especially schools in
LMICs) have much lower scores on average, often bunching at the minimum score of 1. To
better capture variation in this thick bottom tail, we developed and use an enhanced measure
of management quality for this paper -- which we refer to as the Development WMS (D-
WMS).12 The D-WMS adds granularity to the measurement of management practices, while
maintaining comparability with the original WMS in two ways: first, it expands the number
of questions in each domain by a factor of three to separately capture the existence, use, and
monitoring of various management practices. Second, it expands the scoring grid to allow for
half points between 1 and 5, relative to the original WMS that only allowed integer scores.
Put together, it enables a six-fold increase in the granularity of measurement of management
quality. We discuss each innovation below.

3.1.1    Expansion to improve measurement of management quality

The WMS measures 20 "topics" that each include a set of questions that help the interviewer
gather the appropriate information to score based on a set rubric. For each topic, there are
three broad types of questions that interviewers use: first they ask about the existence of the
practice (for example, does the school even have performance indicators and which ones),
then they ask about the usage of the practice (how is it implemented, how often it is used)
and finally they ask about the monitoring of the practice itself (how do they keep track that
it is being understood and used effectively). In the original WMS these three factors were
embedded in each score, while in the D-WMS they are explicit and require separate scores.
This approach reduces measurement error by providing a much tighter scoring rubric and
www.worldmanagementsurvey.org.
  12
     This paper supersedes the note in Lemos and Scur (2016), which describes the protocols for implemen-
tation of the D-WMS but does not validate the instrument by correlating the resulting management scores
with independent measures of teaching practices and school productivity (which this paper does).


                                                   6
limiting the amount of judgment that interviewers need to apply in coding responses. This is
especially important for LMIC settings, where high quality interviewers may not be available
or affordable (the original WMS was coded by MBA students from leading universities).
    The expansion enables a better understanding of management practices, and the gaps
between existence and use of tools and techniques. As shown by Muralidharan and Singh
(2020), public schools in India often have good policies on paper, but these are not matched
by actual practice. We found evidence of similar gaps in our field pilots, and adapted
the survey instrument accordingly to capture distinctions between the existence and use of
various management practices.13 Using survey instruments that capture this distinction will
be especially useful for research on the effectiveness of management interventions in LMICs.

3.1.2    Expansion to capture greater variation across the scoring scale

The scores in low and middle income income countries in the original WMS rarely go beyond
3. To capture finer variation in the lower tail, our expanded survey instrument measures the
level of adoption of management practices on a scale of 1 to 5, in increments of 0.5 for each
of the 20 topics. In AP public schools, the distribution of the comparable WMS people-
management scores would have a mode of 1. By allowing for half scores to be awarded, we
can distinguish between a school that has absolutely no practices in place (score of 1) and
one that has some semblance of practices in place but that they are still rather ad-hoc (score
of 1.5). We can also distinguish between schools that have an informal practice in place
(score of 2) and a "good" informal practice in place that is almost like "formal school policy"
(score of 2.5). We provide a more detailed example of the scoring of management practices
in Appendix B.

3.1.3    Building comparable scores

To build the comparable scores, we average the three sub-scores for each of the 20 topics and
take the average across these topics to construct scores for overall management, operations
management, and people management.14 To build comparable metrics to the WMS, we re-
cast the averages for each of the topics into the next lowest whole number. This is because
  13
     For example, a headteacher that we visited in AP during the pilot showed us a great report card that
they use to measure student achievement (Figure B1). When asked what they do with the report cards and
the information, they showed us a storage spot where all the data was kept safely but unfortunately also not
used or even usable. This is similar to findings reported in Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2010).
  14
     The questions and training are identical, and the information gathered that forms the basis of the
scoring is consistent with WMS tools. The main contribution of the D-WMS is to enable a systematically
more granular coding of the same information.



                                                     7
the WMS scoring guidelines are to score in a strictly increasing gradient, such that if a
school does not have processes that are good enough to reach a score of 3, then they would
have to be given a 2 (regardless of how close they would be to a 3). In the D-WMS grid,
they would be awarded a 2.5. This means that it is simple to take each half point score
and round down to the nearest integer and mimic the original WMS scoring methodology.
For the cross-country comparisons in Figures 1 and A1 only, we use the WMS-comparable
score and normalize relative to the full global dataset. For the rest of the analysis in this
paper, we use the D-WMS scores and normalize relative to only the AP sample (since those
comparisons are within the state).
    Consistent with the broader literature based on WMS surveys, we present and analyze
both the overall management score, and also the component scores on operations and peo-
ple management. The operations-management score is based on the first 14 questions on
the D-WMS, and the people-management score is based on the last 6 questions (see Ta-
bles B1 and B2 in Appendix B for the full list of 20 questions). Throughout this paper,
we use the term "people management" to refer to the score obtained on the D-WMS sur-
vey (consistent with the use of the term in the WMS literature), and the term "personnel
management" to refer to broader personnel related actions taken by school leaders.
    Figure 2 shows the difference between the D-WMS scores and the WMS-comparable
versions of the scores. The D-WMS distribution captures a mechanical shift to the right
relative to the WMS equivalent (due to the rounding down of scores under the WMS rubric).
However, the D-WMS also captures meaningful new variation between scores of 1 and 2, and
2 and 3 that change the shape of the distributions. This is seen most clearly in the distribution
of people-management scores distribution in the public sector, where under WMS scoring
guidelines, 80% of schools would have the lowest score of 1. In contrast, the D-WMS provides
much more granular information with only 6% of schools having a score of exactly 1.15
    We collected D-WMS data for a random sample of schools in the APSC project sam-
ple from January to May 2013 through face-to-face interviews with school headteachers.
Each interview lasted approximately 1.5 hours and was carried out by two enumerators --
a primary interviewer and secondary note-taker -- who reviewed their notes immediately
after the interview and scored the practices according to the scoring manual and grid. The
enumerators passed a one-week intensive D-WMS training session prior to field work.
  15
    Note that the binning in the histogram in Figure 2 makes it appear that around 20% of schools have
a score of 1 under the D-WMS as well. However, this bin includes values up to 1.1 and only 6% of schools
score at the actual lower bound of 1.




                                                   8
3.2     School, teacher and student data: the APSC dataset
The main school-teacher-student data from the APSC project is explained in Muralidharan
and Sundararaman (2015) and spans the 4 school years of the project in AP (2008-09 to
2011-12). We use several variables to build measures from this dataset: student value added,
teacher value added, an index of teacher practices, teacher wages, and a measure of teacher
selection and retention.
    For student value added (SVA) and teacher value added (TVA), we use a panel of subject-
specific test scores from tests administered by the APSC project team for Telugu (language)
and Math, along with teacher assignments into these subjects. We estimate SVA by using the
residuals of a regression of the end of year test score on the previous year's test score for each
student, and estimate TVA using the Chetty et al. (2014) method.16 This method yields
a TVA estimate for each teacher and year, using information from all years and subjects
taught by each teacher.
    We construct a teacher practices index using the set of questions in the teacher question-
naires that related to classroom practices, along with audit data from classroom observation
visits. These were collected independent of the student tests and the D-WMS management
survey. We aggregated the sixteen items (fourteen self-reported practices and two audit-
based measures of teacher presence and likelihood of being found teaching) into a single
index using the Anderson (2008) method.17 A full description of each measure of teaching
practice is provided in Appendix B.4; we also present simple correlations of each teaching
practice with student value added in Figure B2.
    Data on teacher wages are based on self-reports by teachers for all 4 years. Data on
teacher turnover and retention is from the second year only. The APSC project collected
data on the full roster of teachers, that tracked which teachers had moved out and which
ones had transferred in, only in the first two years of the project. For each school, we identify
the highest and lowest value added teacher within the school using our measure of TVA and
construct a measure of "good HR outcome" based on the transfer information between years
1 and 2. The variable takes a value of 1 when the highest value added teacher is retained
in the school or transferred into the school, or the lowest value added teacher is transferred
out of the school. It takes a value of zero otherwise.
    The combined dataset of APSC-DWMS data includes 299 schools, 190 private and 109
public schools. Note that we only measure management quality once in each school, at
  16
    For a summary and discussion of this method, see Appendix B.3.
  17
    This methodology weights the impact of the included variables by the sum of their rows in the inverse
variance-covariance matrix, thereby assigning greater weight to questions that carry more "new information".



                                                     9
the end of the study period, and assign this score to the school for all years of student
and teacher data.18 Our main analysis includes data for Telugu and Math tests for 15,305
students; 12,661 from private schools and 2,665 from public schools. Overall, our sample
has 35,964 observations over four years in an unbalanced panel. There are a total of 1,171
teachers in our sample; 864 in private schools and 307 in public schools.


4      Results
4.1     Management quality and global comparisons
Figure 1a shows the comparable standardized scores of public school management across a
set of countries surveyed using the WMS (UK, Sweden, Canada, US, Germany, Italy, Brazil
and India) and the D-WMS (Mexico, Colombia, and Andhra Pradesh). The D-WMS scores
were re-scaled to match the WMS scoring convention: all half points were rounded down to
the next lowest whole point for each survey question (for example, all scores of 2.5 were re-
cast to 2) and the management indices and standardization were based on these comparable
scores. The scores are standardized relative to the global distribution. The high-income
country mean is 0.975 , and the score for AP public schools is -1 . Thus, the average public
school in AP scores almost two standard deviations below the average in the high income
countries in the WMS.
    To place these scores in context, Figure 1b plots the standardized management scores
against the log of the 10-year average GDP per capita for these countries. We see that
there is a robust positive correlation between countries' GDP per capita and the quality of
school management. Though public school management scores in AP are substantially lower
than high-income country averages, their scores are not an outlier after controlling for log
per-capita income.
    These facts are directly relevant for understanding the variation in education system
productivity across countries. There is evidence from comparable cross-country assessment
data that students from richer countries perform better than those from poorer countries of
the same age (OECD; 2019). Further, there is also evidence that the labor-market returns to
each year of schooling is higher for students educated in richer countries (Schoellman; 2011).
However, there is very little evidence on the drivers for this fact or their relative importance.
  18
    Thus, our analysis treats management as a "fixed characteristic" of the school throughout the study
period and does not aim to study inter-temporal variation in management quality within schools. Prior
research suggests that management practices are slow-moving and difficult to change even with interventions,
so this is a reasonable assumption in this context (e.g., Gibbons and Henderson; 2012).



                                                    10
One likely explanation is that higher-income countries' education systems have more inputs
per student (including having more educated parents). However, it is also possible that there
is variation in the productivity of these inputs across countries. As such, to the extent that
the quality of school management is correlated with the productivity of school systems (as
we show below), Figure 1b suggests that poorer management quality may be an important
contributor to the lower productivity of education systems in lower-income countries.
    The discussion above is analogous to the "growth accounting" literature that has aimed
to decompose variation in cross-country GDP per capita into variation in inputs (land, labor,
and capital -- both physical and human) and variation in total factor productivity (TFP)
(Caselli; 2005). Given the growing interest in understanding the comparative productivity
of education systems across countries (Pritchett; 2015; Singh; 2019), and investments in
comparable data on learning outcomes across countries (Filmer et al.; 2020), it may be
useful to conduct a similar accounting exercise to explain variation in the effectiveness of
education systems. Since management quality is likely to be an important component of
TFP, the D-WMS can be a useful measurement tool for such an exercise. This would be
analogous to the approach taken by Bloom et al. (2016) for manufacturing.
    Turning from cross-country comparisons to AP-specific facts, Table 1 presents manage-
ment scores for public and private schools for each of the 20 management practices in the
survey. It also presents scores on operations and people management, and the 10-90 per-
centile range of scores. Figure 3a shows the distribution of the AP D-WMS management
scores for public and private schools.
    The average public school has a D-WMS management score of 1.81 while a school at the
90th percentile has a score of 2.05, both suggesting weak management practices throughout
the support of the distribution. Private schools, in contrast, are significantly better managed,
scoring 0.34 points higher, or 1.36 greater than the public-school mean. Figure 1b provides
another way to benchmark this difference and shows that the quality of management in
private schools in AP is comparable to that in public schools in middle-income countries like
Brazil, Colombia, and Mexico which have 4 times greater GDP per capita than India.
    This difference is especially pronounced in the area of people management. Figure 3b
shows the distributions of operations and people management scores for each type of school.
The mean difference in the operations-management index across public and private schools is
0.12 points, which is relatively small. However, people-management scores in public schools
are very low -- with a mean of 1.26, and a standard deviation of 0.18. Private schools
score 0.87 points higher in people management, which is nearly 4.8 higher (relative to the




                                              11
distribution of people-management scores in public schools).19
    The public school distribution of people management in AP is also informative because we
observe a distribution of scores despite official policies being identical across public schools.
The D-WMS score, however, captures variation not just in official policies but also de facto
variation in practices that may be in place at the school. For example, there may be institu-
tional constraints to hiring and firing teachers, but they do not prevent headteachers from
identifying effective and ineffective performers, and taking informal followup actions at their
own level without relying on official processes or directives to do so.


4.2     Correlates of school management practices
Having documented the variation in management practices across schools, we now examine
the correlates of this variation. Table 2 presents the coefficients of binary regressions between
student, teacher and school characteristics and school management scores. Each cell reports
coefficients from a single regression. Table A2 presents the multiple regression analogue.
    In public schools, management quality is significantly correlated with parental socio-
economic status -- positively with parental education, and negatively with the fraction of
parents who are manual laborers. There is also suggestive evidence of positive correlations
with teacher education and training, though these relations are not typically significant.
    In private schools, management quality is strongly positively correlated with teacher
education and training and also with the education level of the headteacher. It is negatively
correlated with the fraction of parents who are manual laborers and (somewhat surprisingly)
positively correlated with the fraction of students who belong to historically disadvantaged
scheduled castes.20 Management quality is also positively correlated with school size and
with average school fees, which is not surprising.
    The relationships above are correlations and purely descriptive. However, what is impor-
tant for interpreting our results below is that there continues to be nearly as much variation in
the residualized management scores (after controlling for all the variables in Table 2) as in the
raw distributions of management scores. We plot these in Figure 4 and see that the resid-
ualized distribution (especially for people management) shifts leftward for private schools
  19
     We replicate the two cross-country figures using the people-management score in Figure A1, and see
that people management quality in AP private schools are higher than those in public schools in Brazil,
Colombia, and Mexico, and comparable to those in public schools in Italy (a country that is nearly seven
times richer than India on PPP adjusted GDP per capita).
  20
     One possible explanation is that religious or missionary private schools may disproportionately locate
in the most disadvantaged areas and may be better managed. We are unfortunately not able to test this
directly since we do not have data on whether the school is run by a missionary organization.



                                                    12
and rightward for public schools (reflecting the greater socioeconomic advantage of students
attending private schools). But, the shape of the distribution is virtually unchanged.21
    This is consistent with most of the variation we observe in management scores being
driven by variation in de facto practices of individual school leaders. Indeed, the meaning
of D-WMS scores below 3 (which is the range where almost all schools in our sample score)
is that management practices are informal and driven by individual headteachers more than
policy. Thus, the correlations presented below should not be interpreted as the causal ef-
fect of any specific management practice. Rather, the results below are best thought of as
connecting the literatures on school leadership and school management by providing a sys-
tematic way of getting into the "black box" of school leadership and coding specific practices
of school leaders that may be correlated with variation in their effectiveness.


4.3     School management and teacher practices
To explore the relationship between teacher practices and school management, we build a
teacher practices index and estimate the specification:

                T eacherP racticeijst =  + Ms + 1 Tj + 2 Ss + j + t + ijst                         (1)

    where T eacherP racticeijst is the index of sixteen teaching practices (described in Ap-
pendix B.4) for teacher i, teaching subject j , at school s, at time t. Ms is the z-score of each
management index, the set of controls included are those described in Table 2: Tj are the
teacher and headteacher controls, Ss are the school controls including the school averages
of student characteristics in Table 2. j and t are subject and year fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered at the school level.
    Table 3 reports the results separately for public and private schools; for overall, opera-
tions, and people-management scores; and with and without the controls listed above. We
see a strong and highly significant correlation (p < 0.01) in all 6 columns in Panel A (with
no controls). Coefficients are slightly smaller but substantively unchanged and still signifi-
cant after including a full set of controls (Panel B). Thus, the quality of overall, operations,
and people management are all strongly correlated with independently recorded measures of
teaching practice in both public and private schools.
    This result helps to validate the content of the D-WMS measurement tools as capturing
  21
    The raw (and residualized) standard deviations of the distributions are as follows. Private schools
operations management: 0.93 (0.85 ); private schools people management: 0.55 (0.61 ); public schools
operations management: 1.02 (0.99 ); public schools people management: 0.39 (0.53 ).




                                                  13
elements of management quality that are able to meaningfully predict classroom teaching
practices. It is also a contribution to the management literature more broadly where it has
typically not been possible to observe (and correlate) both WMS-comparable management
scores and measures of employee behavior in their core tasks in the same data set.


4.4     School management and student value added
Next, we examine the correlations between management scores and school productivity,
measured by student value added. We do so by running the following specification for public
and private schools, separately:

              V alueAddedpjst =  + Ms + 1 Xp + 2 Tjs + 3 Ss + j + t + pjst                          (2)

    where V alueAddedpjst is the student value added for student p, subject j , at school s in
year t. Ms is the z-score of each management index. We estimate Equation 2 both with and
without controls. The set of controls included are those described in Table 2: Xp are the
individual student controls, Tj are the teacher and headteacher controls, Ss are the school
controls including the school averages of student characteristics in Table 2. j and t are
subject and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the school level.
    We also estimate the relationship between management quality and student value addi-
tion using a lagged test-score specification, where the outcome variable is test scores (T Spjst )
in year t and we include lagged test scores on the right-hand side (T Spjs,t-1 ). We estimate:

           T S pjst =  + Ms + 0 T Spjs,t-1 + 1 Xp + 2 Tjs + 3 Ss + j + t + pjst                     (3)

    Table 4 presents these results without controls (Panel A) and with the full set of controls
(Panel B), and for public schools (columns 1-4) and private schools (columns 5-8). Table A4
presents the results from the lagged test-score specification. Since the results are very similar
across both approaches, we present those from Equation 2 in the main tables, and Equation 3
in the Appendix.22
    Starting with public schools, we see a strong and significant correlation (p < 0.01) between
all management practices (overall, operations, and people) and student value-added (SVA).
However, variation in people management seems to matter much more (around 3 times more)
for explaining variation in school effectiveness. We see this both by comparing columns 3 and
  22
    We do not include a control for a student's voucher-winning status in Equation 3 to keep the set of
controls consistent across public and private schools. Results are unchanged if we include this control.



                                                  14
2, and in column 4 when we include both component scores as regressors. The results are
practically unchanged when we include a full set of controls (Panel B): both magnitudes and
significance of coefficients are very similar across Panels A and B. Results from the lagged
test-score specification are also very similar (Table A4).
    While these results are based on correlations, they provide strong suggestive evidence
that better management practices -- especially personnel management practices -- are likely
to matter for school productivity. The value-added specification mitigates several omitted
variable concerns, and the robustness to inclusion of a wide variety of controls provides
additional reassurance on this front. Further, since official policies are identical across all
public schools, the variation in management practices reflect de facto practices that are
implemented at the school level. Thus, the appropriate way to interpret our results is not
as the causal impact of specific practices, but as getting into the "black box" of variation in
school leaders' effectiveness by codifying their practices and identifying common patterns in
the practices of effective school leaders. In particular, school leaders who implement better
personnel management practices appear to be able to deliver greater value addition.
    Turning to private schools (Table 4: columns 5-8), we see that the correlations are smaller
and not significant between SVA and either overall or operations management scores. People-
management scores are significantly correlated with SVA even in private schools (in both
columns 7 and 8), but the magnitude is much smaller than in the case of public schools.
Results are very similar both without and with controls, and in the lagged test-score speci-
fication (Table A4).
    These results provide consistent evidence that the quality of personnel management seems
to matter for productivity both across public and private schools. However, one reason that
the variation in personnel management quality may matter more in explaining variation in
public school productivity is that the average level of personnel management is higher in
private schools to begin with. Thus, given the very low base levels of personnel management
in public schools, the marginal returns to even modest improvements may be high. The
same reasoning may explain why overall and operations management scores are significantly
correlated with SVA in public schools but not in private schools.
    Next, we examine the extent to which variation in student value added across public and
private schools is correlated with management quality. We do so by pooling the student data
from public and private schools and estimating the following equation:

 V alueAddedpjst =  + Ms + 1 P RIs + 2 SCOp + 1 Xp + 2 Tjs + 3 Ss + j + t + pjst (4)




                                              15
   where V alueAddedpjst is the student value added for student p, subject j , at school s in
year t. Ms is the z-score of each management index. P RIs is a private school indicator, and
SCOs is an indicator for whether a student was a scholarship recipient in the Muralidharan
and Sundararaman (2015) AP School Choice Experiment. The set of controls included are
those described in Table 2: Xp are the student controls, Tj are the teacher and headteacher
controls, Ss are the school controls including the school averages of student characteristics.
j and t are subject and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the school level.
We also estimate these relationships using the lagged test-score specification below:

 T Spjst =  + Ms + 0 T Spjs,t-1 + 1 P RIs + 2 SCOp + 1 Xp + 2 Tjs + 3 Ss + j + t + pjst (5)

    Results from Equation 4 are reported in Table 5. Without any controls (Panel A), we
see that the average private school appears to have an annual value added of 0.35 higher
(column 1). This is not a causal estimate. Our goal is simply to provide an accounting
decomposition of the extent to which this private school "premium" can be accounted for by
stronger management practices.23 We see that including overall or operations management
scores reduce the private school premium slightly but do not meaningfully change the results
(columns 2-3). However, including a control for people-management scores sharply reduces
the private school premium and renders it insignificant (columns 4-5).
    Patterns of results are similar with controls (Panel B). The private school premium is
larger with controls, likely reflecting the lower average teacher education, experience, and
training in the private schools (Table A1). Thus, the pure private school productivity pre-
mium may be even larger after accounting for their lower input quality. As in Panel A,
including people-management scores significantly reduces the estimated private school pre-
mium: the magnitude falls by more than half (columns 4-5). Taken together, the significantly
greater quality of personnel management appears to be a key driver of the private school
premium in this setting. We see the same results from estimating the lagged test-score
specification in Equation 5 (Table A5).
  23
     The significant negative coefficient on the "scholarship" variable suggests that the average voucher-
winning student in the APSC study did not benefit from this private school "premium", which is consistent
with the experimental evaluation of the voucher program that found modest to no test-score gains from
winning a voucher to attend a private school (Muralidharan and Sundararaman; 2015). Readers are referred
to that paper for a discussion of potential reasons for this result.




                                                   16
4.5     Personnel management across public and private schools
We now examine a direct measure of effective personnel management in schools -- which
is the extent to which teachers are rewarded for being more productive, measured by their
value added. We examine this question on both the intensive margin of wages, and the
extensive margin of hiring and retention. We study the relationship between teacher pay
and productivity using the following specification:



 LnW agesjs =  + 1 Ms + 2 P RIs + 3 T V Ajs + 4 P RIs × T V Ajs + 1 Tjs + 2 Ss + js (6)

    where LnW agesis is the average log of wages of teacher j in school s over all years the
teacher taught at each school. P RIs is an indicator for private school. T V Ais is the teacher
value added measure (estimated as in Chetty et al. (2014)), averaged across the years the
teacher taught at the school. The TVA measure is normalized to have a mean of zero and
standard deviation of 1. Tj are the teacher and headteacher controls, Ss are the school
controls including the school averages of student characteristics from Table 2. Standard
errors are clustered at the school level.
    Results are presented in Table 6. Panel A reports the raw correlations without controls,
and Panel B includes all controls listed above. Columns (1) to (3) include only public school
teachers and Columns (4) to (6) include only private school teachers. Column (7) includes
the full sample of teachers across public and private schools.
    We find no correlation between pay and productivity in public schools, with or without
controls, reflecting a rigid compensation schedule that is mainly based on qualifications and
seniority.24 If anything, pay and productivity appear (insignificantly) negatively correlated
in public schools. This is consistent with other studies finding evidence of lower effort
among older and more senior teachers (who are paid more).25 Unsurprisingly, there is also
no correlation between management quality and teacher pay in the public sector given that
headteachers have no authority over teacher pay.
    In contrast, teacher pay in private schools is strongly positively correlated with TVA.
Without any controls, a teacher who is able to improve average student test scores by one
additional standard deviation earns about 42% higher wages (Panel A, Column 4)). This
relationship is positive and significant even after including all controls listed in Table 2, and
  24
      This is also consistent with evidence from the health sector where Das et al. (2016) show that there is
no correlation between doctor pay and quality of care provided in public clinics in India.
   25
      For instance, Kremer et al. (2005) find that older and more senior teachers in public schools in India are
significantly more likely to be absent, and are also likely to be paid more.


                                                      17
we estimate that such a teacher earns about 26% higher wages (Panel B, Column 4)). This
wage premium is seen even after controlling for observable characteristics such as education,
experience, and training suggesting that private school managers are able to identify and
reward effective teachers. Doing so is a core feature of effective personnel management and
we see that the superior people-management scores in private schools are reflected in this
independent metric.
    Turning to management scores, we see that teachers in better managed schools are paid
a wage premium (Panel A, Columns 5 and 6) over and above getting paid more for being
more effective. This may reflect selection: management quality is positively correlated with
school size and school fees (Table 2) which may directly affect teacher wages.26 Indeed, we
see that this correlation is not significant in Panel B after including the full set of controls
in Table 2 while the relationship between teacher pay and productivity continues to be so.
    Combining the data across public and private schools, we see that the levels of teacher
salaries are much lower in private schools, but more effective teachers are paid more in private
schools (Column 7).27 Our results are similar to and consistent with those found in Pakistan
by Bau and Das (2020). They also find no significant relationship between teacher wages
and TVA in the public sector, but find a significant positive correlation in the private sector.
    Turning to the extensive margin, we estimate:

                          HRoutcomeis =  + 1 Ms + 2 P RIs + Ss + is                                        (7)

    where HRoutcomejst equals 1 ("good") if a high value added teacher is transferred into
or retained in the school, or if a low value added teacher is transferred out. It takes a value
of 0 otherwise. Ms is the management index of interest (operations or people), and P RI is a
private school indicator. Ss are the school controls including the school averages of student
characteristics from Table 2. Standard errors are clustered at the district level.
    Table 7 reports the results. We see that private schools on average are less likely to have a
good HR outcome on the extensive margin (Column 1). This reflects the fact that they have
much higher rates of teacher turnover, and so they are more likely to lose high-performing
teachers. However, we see that better managed private schools are significantly more likely
to have a positive HR outcome, again consistent with patterns found in manufacturing
firms from Bender et al. (2018) and Cornwell et al. (2021). When we include the full set
   26
      A channel of selection is consistent with results in Bender et al. (2018) and Cornwell et al. (2021), who
find that better managed firms are more likely to hire and retain more effective workers and managers.
   27
      The F-test on the sum of the TVA and Private x TVA coefficients yields a p-value of 0.0002 for the
specification in Panel A and 0.0076 for the specification in Panel B, lending further support to this point.




                                                      18
of controls, only the people-management score is significant, consistent with the outcome
variable being more relevant to personnel management. There is no meaningful correlation
between management quality and teacher selection or retention in public schools.
    Note that detailed teacher roster data (including on transfers and new entrants) was
collected only in the first 2 years of the APSC project and so our HR outcomes are defined
using only the second-year teacher roster. This limits the sample size and the results above
should therefore be treated only as suggestive. We present them for completeness since we
are not aware of any prior evidence on this question. Testing for this result in larger samples
and over longer time periods is an important area for future research.


5    Discussion and Conclusion
There is a growing recognition that the quality of management practices may be an important
determinant of productivity differences across firms and countries (Syverson; 2011; Bloom
et al.; 2014, 2016; Scur et al.; 2021). In this paper, we measure management quality of public
and private schools in a low-capacity setting; plot these against global benchmarks (with and
without income adjustments); study the correlations between management quality and both
teacher practices and school productivity; and examine correlations between teacher pay
and productivity across public and private schools. We do so by developing and deploying a
new measurement tool (the D-WMS) that permits both greater granularity of measurement
of management practices in low capacity settings and comparability with the widely used
WMS surveys; and by combining this D-WMS data with panel data on student test scores
across public and private schools and a rich dataset of school and teacher characteristics.
    Our results strongly suggest that management quality -- and especially the quality of
personnel management -- is likely to be an important component of school productivity.
Better managed schools also have better teaching practices, and add more value to student
learning. Extrapolating from this micro-evidence using school-level variation, the plots of
management scores across countries suggest that cross-country differences in school manage-
ment quality may play a role in explaining the documented differences in school productivity
across countries (Schoellman; 2011; Singh; 2019).
    More generally, our results contribute to a better understanding of public sector per-
sonnel economics and to the comparative study of management and productivity across the
public and private sectors. In particular, our data highlight that the quality of personnel
management in the public sector is especially poor and we directly show the lack of correla-



                                              19
tion between pay and productivity for public sector workers.28 In contrast, private schools
have much higher personnel management scores and pay more effective teachers more (even
after controlling for several observable characteristics). Our results suggest that even modest
improvements in public school management practices at the level of school leaders may be
highly effective at improving teacher effort and effectiveness.
    Consistent with this view, there is considerable interest among donors, policy makers,
and private organizations (both for and non profit) in designing and implementing programs
to improve school management in LMICs. The belief that such interventions can be effective
is also supported by evidence of success in the US (Fryer; 2014, 2017).
    At the same time, recent evidence suggests that improving management quality in public
schools at scale in LMICs is not easy. For instance, a large-scale randomized evaluation of a
flagship school quality improvement program in India found that it had no impact on either
teaching practices or learning outcomes, despite the program design reflecting several global
"best practices" (Muralidharan and Singh; 2020). Thus, much more research is needed to
learn about effective and cost-effective ways of improving school management at scale. The
D-WMS measurement tools developed for this paper can be a useful complement to such
efforts by enabling researchers to use a common and comparable scale across studies to (a)
measure baseline levels of management, (b) measure improvements in management practice
from various interventions, and (c) to experimentally study the relationship between changes
in school management practices and changes in teaching practices and student outcomes.29




  28
      These findings are consistent with a growing body of experimental evidence from developing countries
that find that the default patterns of common across-the-board pay increases in public schools may not be
effective (de Ree et al.; 2017), and that even modest amounts of performance-linked pay in public schools
can be highly effective (Leaver et al.; 2021; Muralidharan and Sundararaman; 2011).
   29
      In their evaluation of an ambitious school management reform in India, Muralidharan and Singh (2020)
find that the program led to changes on paper but not in practice. Thus, the additional granularity of the
D-WMS -- that distinguishes between the existence, use, and monitoring/follow-up of various management
practices -- may be especially relevant for studying future school management interventions in LMICs.


                                                   20
References
Anderson, M. L. (2008). Multiple inference and gender differences in the effects of early in-
 tervention: A reevaluation of the abecedarian, perry preschool, and early training projects,
 Journal of the American Statistical Association 103(484): 1481­1495.

Andrabi, T., Das, J. and Khwaja, A. I. (2008). A dime a day: The possibilities and limits
 of private schooling in pakistan, Comparative Education Review 52(3): 329­355.

Bau, N. and Das, J. (2020). Teacher value added in a low-income country, American Eco-
  nomic Journal: Economic Policy 12(1): 62­96.

Bender, S., Bloom, N., Card, D., Van Reenen, J. and Wolter, S. (2018). Management
  practices, workforce selection, and productivity, Journal of Labor Economics 36(S1): S371­
  S409.

Béteille, T. (2009). Absenteeism, transfers and patronage: The political economy of teacher
  labor markets in India, PhD thesis.

Bloom, N., Lemos, R., Sadun, R., Scur, D. and Van Reenen, J. (2014). The new empirical
  economics of management, Journal of the European Economics Association 12(4): 835­
  876.

Bloom, N., Lemos, R., Sadun, R. and Van Reenen, J. (2015). Does management matter in
  schools?, The Economic Journal 125: 647­674.

Bloom, N., Sadun, R. and Van Reenen, J. (2016). Management as a technology?, Working
  Paper 22327, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bloom, N. and Van Reenen, J. (2007). Measuring and explaining management practices
  across firms and countries, Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(4): 1351­1408.

Caselli, F. (2005). Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences, in P. Aghion and
  S. Durlauf (eds), Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 1 of Handbook of Economic Growth,
  Elsevier, chapter 9, pp. 679­741.

Chetty, R., Friedman, J. and Rockoff, J. (2014). Measuring the impact of teachers I: evaluat-
 ing bias in teacher value-added estimates, American Economic Review 104(9): 2593­2632.

Coelli, M. and Green, D. (2012). Leadership effects: School principals and student outcomes,
  Economics of Education Review 31(1): 92 ­ 109.


                                             21
Cornwell, C., Schmutte, I. and Scur, D. (2021). Building a productive workforce: the role of
  structured management practices, Management Science forthcoming.

CSF (2020). State of the sector report: Private schools in india, Technical report, Central
 Square Foundation.

Das, J., Holla, A., Mohpal, A. and Muralidharan, K. (2016). Quality and accountability in
 health care delivery: Audit-study evidence from primary care in india, American Economic
 Review 106(12): 3765­99.

de Ree, J., Muralidharan, K., Pradhan, M. and Rogers, H. (2017). Double for Nothing?
  Experimental Evidence on an Unconditional Teacher Salary Increase in Indonesia, The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 133(2): 993­1039.

Duflo, E., Hanna, R. and Ryan, S. P. (2012). Incentives work: Getting teachers to come to
 school, American Economic Review 102(4): 1241­78.
 URL: https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.102.4.1241

Filmer, D., Rogers, H., Angrist, N. and Sabarwal, S. (2020). Learning-adjusted years of
  schooling (LAYS): Defining a new macro measure of education, Economics of Education
  Review 77: 101971.

Finan, F., Olken, B. A. and Pande, R. (2015). The Personnel Economics of the State, NBER
  Working Papers 21825, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Fryer, R. G. (2014). Injecting charter school best practices into traditional public schools:
  evidence from field experiments, Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(3): 1355­407.

Fryer, R. G. (2017). Management and student achievement: Evidence from a randomized
  field experiment, Working Paper 23437, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gibbons, R. and Henderson, R. (2012). Relational contracts and organizational capabilities,
  Organization Science 23(5): 1350­1364.

Glewwe, P. and Muralidharan, K. (2016). Chapter 10 - improving education outcomes
  in developing countries: Evidence, knowledge gaps, and policy implications, Vol. 5 of
  Handbook of the Economics of Education, Elsevier, pp. 653 ­ 743.

Gordon, R., Kane, T. and Staiger, D. (2006). Identifying effective teachers using performance
 on the job, The Hamilton Project White Paper 2006-1, Brookings Institution.


                                             22
Guarino, C., Reckase, M. D. and Wooldridge, J. M. (2014). Can value-added measures of
 teacher performance be trusted?, Education Finance and Policy .

Kane, T. and Staiger, D. (2008). Estimating teacher impacts on student achievement: An
 experimental evaluation, Working Paper series 14607, National Bureau of Economic Re-
 search.

Kane, T., Staiger, D. and Bacher-Hicks, A. (2014). Validating teacher effect estimates using
 changes in teacher assignments in los angeles, NBER Working Paper series 20657, National
 Bureau of Economic Research.

Kremer, M., Chaudhury, N., Hammer, J., Muralidharan, K. and Rogers, H. (2005). Teacher
  absence in india: A snapshot, Journal of the European Economic Association 3(2-3): 658­
  67.

Lavy, V. and Boiko, A. (2017). Management quality in public education: Superintendent
  value-added, student outcomes and mechanisms, NBER Working Papers 24028, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Lazear, E. (1995). Personnel Economics, Vol. 1, 1 edn, The MIT Press.

Leaver, C., Ozier, O., Serneels, P. and Zeitlin, A. (2021). Recruitment, effort, and retention
  effects of performance contracts for civil servants: Experimental evidence from rwandan
  primary schools, American Economic Review forthcoming.

Lemos, R. and Scur, D. (2016). Developing management: An expanded evaluation tool for
  developing countries, Technical Report 007, RISE Working Paper Series.

Munoz, P. and Prem, M. (2020). Managers' Productivity and Labor Market: Evidence from
 School Principals, Working papers 40, Red Investigadores de Economia.

Muralidharan, K. and Kremer, M. (2008). School Choice International, MIT Press, Cam-
 bridge, MA, chapter title: Public and private schools in rural india.

Muralidharan, K. and Singh, A. (2020). Improving Public Sector Management at Scale? Ex-
 perimental Evidence on School Governance India, NBER Working Papers 28129, National
 Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Muralidharan, K. and Sundararaman, V. (2010). The impact of diagnostic feedback to
 teachers on student learning: experimental evidence from India, The Economic Journal
 120(546): F187­F203.


                                             23
Muralidharan, K. and Sundararaman, V. (2011). Teacher performance pay: Experimental
 evidence from India, Journal of Political Economy 119(1): 39­77.

Muralidharan, K. and Sundararaman, V. (2015). The aggregate effects of school choice:
 evidence from a two-stage experiment in India, The Quarterly Journal of Economics
 130(3): 1011­1066.

OECD (2019). PISA 2018 Results (Volume I).
 URL: https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/content/publication/5f07c754-en

Pritchett, L. (2015). Creating education systems coherent for learning outcomes, Working
  Paper Series 15/005, Research on Improving Systems of Education.

Rainey, H. G. and Chun, Y. H. (2007). Public and private management compared, in
  E. Ferlie, L. E. L. Jr. and C. Pollitt (eds), The Oxford Handbook of Public Management,
  The Oxford Handbook of Public Management, Oxford University Press.

Ramachandran, V., Beteille, T., Linden, T., Dey, S., Goyal, S. and Chatterjee, P. G. (2016).
  Teachers in the indian education system: How we manage the teacher work force in in-
  dia, NUEPA Research Reports Publications Series NRRPS/001/2016, National University
  ofEducational Planning and Administration.

Rockoff, J. (2004). The impact of individual teachers on student achievement: Evidence
  from panel data, American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 94: 247­252.

Romero, M., Sandefur, J. and Sandholtz, W. A. (2020). Outsourcing education: Experimen-
  tal evidence from liberia, American Economic Review 110(2): 364­400.

Schoellman, T. (2011). Education Quality and Development Accounting, The Review of
  Economic Studies 79(1): 388­417.

Scur, D., Sadun, R., Van Reenen, J., Lemos, R. and Bloom, N. (2021). The World Man-
  agement Survey at 18: lessons and the way forward, Oxford Review of Economic Policy
  37(2): 231­258.

Singh, A. (2015). Private school effects in urban and rural india: Panel estimates at primary
  and secondary school ages, Journal of Development Economics 113: 16­32.

Singh, A. (2019). Learning More with Every Year: School Year Productivity and Interna-
  tional Learning Divergence, Journal of the European Economic Association 18(4): 1770­
  1813.


                                             24
Syverson, C. (2011).   What determines productivity?, Journal of Economic Literature
  49(2): 326­365.

Tooley, J. (2009). The Beautiful Tree: A Personal Journey into How the World's Poorest
  People are Educating Themselves, Penguin, New Delhi.

Vennam, U., Komanduri, A. and Duggani, U. (2014). Changing schools in andhra pradesh,
  Working Paper 131, Young Lives.

Walsh, E. and Dotter, D. (2020). The impact on student achievement of replacing principals
 in district of columbia public schools, Education Finance and Policy 15(3): 518­542.

Woldehanna, T., Galab, S., Sanchez, A., Penny, M., Duc, L. T. and Boyden, J. (2018).
 Young lives: an international study of childhood poverty.

World Bank (2018). World Development Report 2018: Learning to realize education's
 promise, The World Bank, Washington DC.




                                           25
                                                                Figure 1: Global benchmarks
                                                    (a) Rank of comparable management z-scores


                                                  UK
                                      Sweden
                                       Canada
                                                  US
                                  Germany
                                                 Italy
                                              Brazil
                                             Mexico
                                 Colombia
                       AP (Private)
                                              India                                                             HIC Mean:
                          AP (Public)                                                                           0.975


                                                         -1.5       -1        -.5      0          .5        1          1.5
                                                                                Management z-score


                                 (b) Comparable management z-scores and GDP per capita
                                 1.5




                                                                                                      UK
                                                                                                         Canada
                                                                                                    Sweden      US
                                         1
                Overall Management Z-Score




                                                                                                  Germany
                   WMS Public Schools
                             0    .5




                                                                                                 Italy

                                                                               Brazil
                     -.5




                                                           AP (Private)            Mexico
                                                                           Colombia
                                                           India
               -1




                                                           AP (Public)
                                 -1.5




                                             8                         9                    10                    11
                                                                    Log of 10-yr average GDP per capita

                                                                     High income      Middle/low-income

Note: This figure includes only public secondary schools from the WMS dataset (UK, Canada, Sweden,
 US, Germany, Italy, Brazil and India) and public primary schools from the Development WMS dataset
 (Andhra Pradesh, Mexico and Colombia). The Development WMS scores were re-scaled to match the
 WMS scoring convention: all half points were downgraded to the next lowest whole point for each survey
 question (for example, all scores of 2.5 were re-cast to 2) before indices were built. Country averages
 for WMS countries were estimated using sampling weights (see Appendix B for details on the weights
 construction). For this figure, management scores are normalized relative to the cross-country sample.
 Number of WMS observations are as follows: Brazil = 373, Canada = 113, Colombia = 447, Great
 Britain = 78, Germany = 91, India = 130, Italy = 222, Mexico = 178, Sweden = 85, United States =
 193. The 10-year average GDP per capita comes from the IMF world tables, and include 2008-2018. We
 used India's GDP as a stand-in for Andhra Pradesh's
                                                  26 GPD in Panel (b). AP private school "raw" overall
 management score means are: DWMS = 2.15; WMS = 1.74. AP public school "raw" overall management
 score means are: DWMS = 1.81; WMS = 1.48.
 Figure 2: Distributions of the DWMS and the re-cast WMS scores in Andhra Pradesh


                                   Public                                  Private
                30




                                                           30
         Percent




                                                       Percent
         10 20




                                                       10 20
                0




                                                           0
                         1   1.5    2       2.5   3              1   1.5     2       2.5   3
                             Operations Score                        Operations Score

                                   Public                                  Private




                                                           30
         0 20 40 60 80
            Percent




                                                       Percent
                         1   1.5    2       2.5   3    10 20
                                                           0     1   1.5     2       2.5   3
                               People Score                            People Score

                                   DWMS score             WMS score
Note: This figure shows the distribution of operations and people management scores for public and private
 schools in our AP sample. The dashed line bars correspond to the Development WMS indices, which
 allows for the awarding of half scores for each measured topic. The blue solid bars correspond to the
 re-cast scores for each topic in the "original WMS" convention, where half scores are not allowed and
 thus half scores were downgraded to the next lowest integer. For example, scores of 2.5 were replaced
 with 2. See the Data sections and Data Appendix for more details.




                                                      27
             Figure 3: Distribution of management scores in Andhra Pradesh
                                  (a) Overall management scores




                2
                                                                       Public schools
                                                                       Private schools
                1.5
             Density
               1.5
                0




                       1         1.5        2         2.5                            3
                               Management DWMS Score (overall)

                             (b) People and operations management
               2




                                                                  Public: people
                                                                  Private: people
                                                                  Public: operations
               1.5




                                                                  Private: operations
            Density
              1.5
               0




                       1          1.5       2        2.5                           3
                                   Management DWMS Score
Note: This figure shows the distribution of the D-WMS overall management z-score index for public and
 private schools in Panel A and operations and people management z-score indices in Panel B. Standard-
 ization is relative to the full dataset, including public and private schools. Data for Andhra Pradesh
 (AP) is from the Development World Management Survey, with potential scores ranging from 1 to 5
 in increments of 0.5. The D-WMS AP data includes 109 public schools and 190 private schools. The
 average D-WMS overall management score for AP private schools is 2.15 (SD = 0.26). The average
 D-WMS overall management score for AP public schools is 1.81 (sd = 0.25).
                                                 28
                   Figure 4: Distribution of management: raw vs residual
                                             (a) Private




                                             (b) Public




Note: This figure plots the distribution of operations and people management D-WMS scores for private
 schools in Panel (a) and public schools in Panel (b). The "raw" score is the D-WMS score standardized
 relative to the full distribution. The residuals are from regressions of the standardized management
 indices on a set of student, teacher and school controls listed in Table 2. Standard deviations of each
 distribution are as follows. Private schools: operations raw score SD = 0.93; operations residual score
                                                   29
 SD = 0.85; people raw score SD = 0.55; people management score SD = 0.61. Public schools: operations
 raw score SD = 1.02; operations residual score SD = 0.99; people raw score SD = 0.39; people residual
 score SD = 0.53.
         Table 1: Management scores in Andhra Pradesh public and private schools

                                                           Public Schools           Private Schools
                                                                   10th 90th                 10th 90th
                                                          Mean                      Mean
                                                                    pct  pct                  pct  pct
  Overall management index                                 1.81    1.42     2.05    2.15     1.81    2.45

  Operations average index                                 2.04    1.58     2.38    2.16     1.76    2.46
  Standardisation of instructional processes               1.87    1.50     2.33    2.21     1.67    2.83
  Data driven planning and student transition              1.93    1.50     2.50    2.08     1.50    2.67
  Personalization of instruction and learning              1.98    1.50     2.50    2.25     1.67    2.83
  Adopting educational best practices                      2.22    1.33     3.17    2.12     1.67    2.67
  Continuous improvement                                   1.89    1.50     2.33    2.16     1.83    2.67
  Performance tracking                                     2.24    1.67     2.67    2.32     1.83    2.83
  Review of performance                                    2.45    1.83     3.33    2.39     1.83    3.00
  Performance dialogue                                     2.23    1.50     2.67    2.12     1.67    2.50
  Consequence management                                   2.05    1.50     2.50    2.23     1.67    2.83
  Type of targets                                          1.87    1.17     2.17    2.04     1.50    2.50
  Interconnection of goals                                 2.11    1.50     2.50    2.21     1.50    2.67
  Time horizon                                             2.10    1.17     3.17    2.22     1.67    2.83
  Goals are stretching                                     1.90    1.17     2.33    1.91     1.50    2.33
  Clarity of goals                                         1.73    1.33     2.33    2.00     1.50    2.50

  People average index                                     1.26    1.03     1.56    2.13     1.83    2.47
  Instilling a talent mindset                              1.14    1.00     1.50    2.48     2.00    3.00
  Incentives and appraisals                                1.51    1.00     1.83    2.00     1.50    2.50
  Making room for talent                                   1.32    1.00     1.83    2.31     1.83    2.83
  Developing talent                                        1.41    1.00     2.00    2.09     1.50    2.67
  Distinctive employee value                               1.05    1.00     1.17    1.96     1.50    2.33
  Retaining talent                                         1.14    1.00     1.33    1.97     1.67    2.33

  Number of schools                                        109                       191
Notes: The summary statistics in this table report the average and distributional statistics for the Devel-
opment WMS (D-WMS) scores. The D-WMS survey instrument measures the quality of management on a
scale of 1 to 5, in increments of 0.5 for each of the 20 topics. The expanded survey instrument measures the
level of adoption of management practices on a scale of 1 to 5, in increments of 0.5. A score of 1 means there
are no processes at all or very little processes in place, while a score of 2 means there are some informal
processes in place mainly adopted by the principal (as opposed to some formal "school policy"). A score
of 3 means there is a formal process in place, though it has weaknesses such as not being followed all the
time, or properly. A score of 4 indicate increasing levels of adherence and a score of 5 includes "grassroots"
engagement with the practices such that they are part of the culture of the school. For example, in the
question regarding data-driven planning and student transitions, a score of a 3 or below for this topic means
performance data is not be recorded systematically with a range of tools that would allow for a more thor-
ough understanding of a student's strengths and weaknesses. Further it is not integrated or easy to use or
shared with a range of stakeholders. See Data Appendix B for a full set of questions and explanations of the
survey tool.

                                                     30
   Table 2: Correlates of management quality: student, teacher and school characteristics
                           Table of coefficients: each cell is a bi-variate regression
                                                                 Public                                  Private
                                                     (1)            (2)           (3)         (4)           (5)           (6)
                                                   z-mgmt          z-ops       z-people     z-mgmt         z-ops       z-people
  Panel A: Student characteristics
  Share female                                       0.486        0.577         0.153         -0.114       -0.105        -0.092
                                                    (0.365)      (0.455)       (0.178)       (0.392)      (0.421)       (0.239)

  Share scheduled caste                              -0.145       -0.147        -0.092      0.726**       0.753**       0.434**
                                                    (0.225)      (0.275)       (0.101)      (0.299)       (0.314)       (0.205)

  Share literate parents                           0.623**       0.699**       0.273**        0.124        0.141         0.050
                                                   (0.259)       (0.317)       (0.117)       (0.278)      (0.294)       (0.172)

  Share laborer parents                            -0.565**     -0.684***       -0.154       -0.329*     -0.387**        -0.112
                                                    (0.219)      (0.255)       (0.127)       (0.171)      (0.184)       (0.114)

  Average household assets index                     0.185        0.222         0.054         0.044        0.065         -0.009
                                                    (0.136)      (0.166)       (0.065)       (0.114)      (0.123)       (0.073)

  Panel B: Teacher characteristics
  Share with a degree                                0.241        0.224        0.193*       0.656***     0.718***      0.323***
                                                    (0.317)      (0.385)       (0.112)       (0.180)      (0.195)       (0.119)

  Share with teacher training                        0.410        0.449         0.200        0.453*       0.501**        0.213
                                                    (0.544)      (0.669)       (0.185)       (0.230)      (0.245)       (0.148)

  Average teaching experience                        0.009        0.017         -0.007        -0.007       -0.009        -0.001
                                                    (0.015)      (0.018)       (0.006)       (0.021)      (0.023)       (0.013)

  Average number of workdays                         -0.008       -0.009        -0.002        0.000        -0.000        0.001
                                                    (0.008)      (0.009)       (0.005)       (0.006)      (0.007)       (0.003)

  Head teacher teaching experience                   0.003        0.008         -0.007        0.003        0.001         0.006
                                                    (0.014)      (0.017)       (0.005)       (0.027)      (0.028)       (0.018)

  Head teacher has degree                            -0.172       -0.235        0.004       0.809***     0.875***       0.414**
                                                    (0.238)      (0.291)       (0.102)       (0.273)      (0.281)       (0.188)

  Panel C: School characteristics
  School size (# students)                           -0.114       -0.128        -0.050      0.296***     0.304***      0.184***
                                                    (0.135)      (0.160)       (0.065)       (0.077)      (0.085)       (0.048)

  Log of total school fees                                                                  0.186**      0.203***       0.094**
                                                                                            (0.073)       (0.078)       (0.044)

  Number of schools                                   109           109          109           191          191           191
Notes: Standard errors are clustered by school. z-mgmt is the 31
                                                              overall standardized management score. z-ops is the standardized
index of operations questions and z-people is the standardized index of people management questions. Headteacher refers to
the teacher formally appointed as headteacher or the most senior teacher at the school.
                Table 3: School management practices and teacher practices

 Panel A: no controls                   Public schools                        Private schools
                                  (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)               (6)
                                           Dependent variable: teacher practice index
 z-management                 0.291***                                0.208***
                               (0.060)                                 (0.051)
 z-operations                               0.244***                             0.189***
                                             (0.049)                              (0.046)
 z-people                                                 0.329***                           0.269***
                                                           (0.118)                            (0.085)
 Observations                    740          740           740        1367        1367         1367
 # schools                       109          109           109        190          190         190
 Outcome variable SD             0.89         0.89          0.89       1.06        1.06         1.06

 Panel B: with controls                   Public schools                      Private schools
                                    (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)         (5)              (6)
                                            Dependent variable: teacher practice index
 z-management                    0.260***                             0.189***
                                  (0.061)                              (0.059)
 z-operations                                 0.218***                            0.168***
                                               (0.049)                             (0.052)
 z-people                                                   0.259**                            0.238**
                                                            (0.112)                            (0.097)
 Observations                      740          740          740        1367        1367        1367
 # schools                         109          109          109        190          190        190
 Outcome variable SD               0.89         0.89         0.89       1.06        1.06        1.06

Notes: Standard errors are clustered by school. Teacher practice index is an index of two audited
indicators (whether the teacher was present and whether the teacher was actively teaching at the time of
the audit), and fourteen self-reported classroom practices. The fourteen practices include: makes lesson
plans, has textbook/workbook, checks hygiene daily, % time teaching, % time on teaching activities, %
time "on task", and a series of indicators if the teacher spends above average time on a set of remedial
class activities (remedial attention in class, outside class, helping arrange private tuition, helping at
home, and other type of help). The teacher practice index is a standardized measure, built using the
Anderson (2008) weighted average method. z-management is the standardized overall management
index. z-operations and z-people are the standardized average scores of the operations questions and
people management questions. Controls include those listed in Table 2: teacher controls (share of
teachers with a degree, share with teacher training, average teaching experience, average number of
work days, head teacher teaching experience and head teacher education) and school controls (log
of number of students, average share of female students, of students from scheduled castes, of literate
parents and of laborer parents). Includes subject and year fixed effects.




                                                     32
                            Table 4: School management practices and student value added in each type of school

      Panel A: No controls                                   Public schools                                                      Private schools
                                          (1)         (2)         (3)                        (4)         (5)         (6)                         (7)         (8)
                                        student     student     student                    student     student     student                     student     student
                                      value added value added value added                value added value added value added                 value added value added
      z-management                      0.181***                                                               0.044
                                         (0.036)                                                             (0.0283)
      z-operations                                       0.142***                           0.077*                             0.030                             -0.017
                                                          (0.032)                           (0.040)                           (0.026)                           (0.035)
      z-people                                                            0.381***         0.265***                                            0.103**          0.123**
                                                                           (0.069)          (0.089)                                            (0.041)          (0.057)
      Observations                        7157             7157              7157             7157            28807            28807            28807             28807
      # schools                            109             109                109             109              190              190              190               190

      Panel B: with controls                                   Public schools                                                      Private schools
33




                                            (1)         (2)         (3)                        (4)         (5)         (6)                         (7)         (8)
                                          student     student     student                    student     student     student                     student     student
                                        value added value added value added                value added value added value added                 value added value added
      z-management                        0.169***                                                               0.044
                                           (0.044)                                                             (0.0277)
      z-operations                                         0.130***                           0.081**                            0.024                              -0.029
                                                            (0.037)                           (0.039)                           (0.025)                            (0.034)
      z-people                                                              0.336***          0.225**                                            0.127***         0.156***
                                                                             (0.087)          (0.096)                                             (0.042)          (0.056)
      Observations                          7157             7157             7157              7157            28807            28807            28807            28807
      # schools                              109             109              109                109             190              190              190              190
     Notes: Standard errors are clustered by school. The dependent variable, student value added, is estimated by using the residuals of a regression of the end-line test score
     on the baseline test score for each student. z-management is the standardized overall management index. z-operations and z-people are the standardized average scores
     of the operations questions and people management questions. Controls include those listed in Table 2: student controls (indicators for female student, scheduled
     caste, parents are literate, parents are manual laborers, and a household assets index), teacher controls (share of teachers with a degree, share with teacher training,
     average teaching experience, average number of work days, head teacher teaching experience and head teacher education) and school controls (log of number of
     students, average share of female students, of students from scheduled castes, of literate parents and of laborer parents). Includes subject and year fixed effects.
Table 5: School management practices and student value added in public and private schools

  Panel A: no controls                                 Public and private schools
                                    (1)              (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)
                                  student          student     student     student     student
                                value added      value added value added value added value added
  Private = 1                      0.348***       0.250***          0.311***         0.059            0.101
                                    (0.057)         (0.059)          (0.054)        (0.083)          (0.098)
  Scholarship = 1                 -0.234***       -0.245***        -0.239***       -0.262***        -0.258***
                                    (0.076)         (0.077)          (0.078)        (0.073)          (0.074)
  z-management                                     0.089***
                                                    (0.024)
  z-operations                                                     0.070***                           0.026
                                                                    (0.022)                          (0.030)
  z-people                                                                          0.160***         0.129**
                                                                                     (0.036)         (0.050)
  Observations                      35964           35964            35964            35964           35964
  # schools                          299             299              299              299             299

  Panel B: with controls                                 Public and private schools
                                       (1)         (2)         (3)                       (4)         (5)
                                     student     student     student                   student     student
                                   value added value added value added               value added value added
  Private = 1                        0.490***         0.395***        0.455***         0.203**          0.233**
                                      (0.086)          (0.086)         (0.084)         (0.098)          (0.106)
  Scholarship = 1                   -0.242***        -0.258***       -0.252***        -0.273***        -0.272***
                                      (0.074)          (0.073)         (0.074)         (0.070)          (0.071)
  z-management                                        0.090***
                                                       (0.025)
  z-operations                                                        0.068***                           0.022
                                                                       (0.022)                          (0.028)
  z-people                                                                             0.166***        0.142***
                                                                                        (0.036)         (0.046)
  Observations                        35964            35964            35964           35964            35964
  # schools                            299              299              299             299              299
 Notes: Standard errors are clustered by school. The dependent variable student value added is estimated by using
 the residuals of a regression of the end-line test score on the baseline test score for each student. z-management
 is the standardized overall management index. z-operations and z-people are the standardized average scores of
 the operations questions and people management questions. Private refers to an indicator for private school, and
 scholarship is an indicator for whether the student received a scholarship in the Muralidharan and Sundararaman
 (2015) school choice experiment. Controls include those listed in Table 2: student controls (indicators for female
 student, scheduled caste, parents are literate, parents are manual laborers, and a household assets index), teacher
 controls (share of teachers with a degree, share with teacher training, average teaching experience, average number
 of work days, head teacher teaching experience and head teacher education) and school controls (log of number
 of students, average share of female students, of students from scheduled castes, of literate parents and of laborer
 parents). Includes subject and year fixed effects.



                                                         34
                    Table 6: School management practices and teacher wages

 Panel A: No controls                         Public                                   Private                       All
                                  (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)
                               ln(wages)     ln(wages)     ln(wages)      ln(wages)    ln(wages)    ln(wages)     ln(wages)
 Value added
 Teacher value added              -0.227        -0.218         -0.124     0.424***     0.353***     0.378***        -0.217
                                 (0.222)       (0.222)        (0.235)      (0.119)      (0.117)      (0.118)       (0.230)
 Private=1                                                                                                        -1.912***
                                                                                                                   (0.049)
 Private=1 × TVA                                                                                                  0.681***
                                                                                                                   (0.260)
 Management
 z-operations                                   -0.005                                 0.101***
                                               (0.032)                                  (0.031)
 z-people                                                      -0.154                                0.125**
                                                              (0.115)                                (0.063)
 # Teachers                        234          234            234          1059         1059          1059         1245
 # Schools                         104          104            104           190          190           190          277
 Mean wages (Rs)                  14097        14097          14097         2655         2655          2655         6334

 Panel B: with controls                         Public                                   Private                       All
                                    (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)
                                 ln(wages)     ln(wages)      ln(wages)    ln(wages)    ln(wages)     ln(wages)    ln(wages)
 Value added
 Teacher value added                -0.285       -0.289         -0.272      0.258**      0.246**       0.257**       -0.267
                                   (0.197)      (0.197)        (0.205)      (0.102)      (0.101)       (0.102)      (0.207)
 Private=1                                                                                                         -1.522***
                                                                                                                    (0.078)
 Private=1 × TVA                                                                                                    0.538**
                                                                                                                    (0.228)
 Management
 z-operations                                    0.002                                    0.028
                                                (0.026)                                  (0.027)
 z-people                                                       -0.025                                  0.003
                                                               (0.096)                                 (0.049)
 # Teachers                         227           227            227         1018          1018         1018          1245
 # Schools                           99            99             99          178           178          178           277
 Mean wages (Rs)                   14097         14097          14097        2655          2655         2655          6334
Notes: Standard errors are clustered by school. Teacher value added is estimated using the Chetty et al. (2014) method and vam
Stata command. Private refers to an indicator for private school. Private x TVA is an interaction between the private indicator
and the teacher value added measure. z-operations and z-people are the standardized average scores of the operations questions
and people management questions. Controls include those listed in Table 2: teacher controls (share of teachers with a degree,
share with teacher training, average teaching experience, average number of work days, head teacher teaching experience and head
teacher education) and school controls (log of number of students, average share of female students, of students from scheduled
castes, of literate parents and of laborer parents). Data is collapsed across all years of data to build teacher averages.



                                                         35
                  Table 7: School management practices and teacher flows

 Panel A: no controls                 All                   Public                          Private
 Dependent variable:                (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
 good HR outcome                 Transfers        Transfers       Transfers       Transfers       Transfers
 Private = 1                      -0.213***
                                   (0.043)
 Management
 z-operations                                       -0.009*                         0.039**
                                                    (0.004)                         (0.014)
 z-people                                                            0.001                          0.058**
                                                                    (0.009)                         (0.015)
 # Teachers                           543              53              53             490             490

 Panel B: with controls                  All                   Public                          Private
 Dependent variable:                   (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)
 good HR outcome                    Transfers       Transfers       Transfers        Transfers       Transfers
 Private = 1                         -0.214***
                                      (0.038)
 Management
 z-operations                                           -0.013                          0.031
                                                       (0.009)                         (0.015)
 z-people                                                               -0.015                         0.046**
                                                                       (0.021)                         (0.015)
 # Teachers                              514              51              51             463             463
Notes: Standard errors are clustered by school. The sample uses only schools which had data about teacher
transfers during year 2 of the Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2015) experiment (2009). The dependent
variable, "good HR outcome", is a binary outcome. It takes a value of 1 if a high value added teacher was
transferred in or retained in the school, or if a low value added teacher is transferred out of the school. It takes
a value of 0 otherwise. Teacher value added is estimated using the Chetty et al. (2014) method and vam Stata
command. A teacher is coded as "high value added" when their year 1 value added is the highest within their
school. A teacher is coded as "low value added" when their year 1 value added is the lowest within their school.
Private refers to an indicator for private school. z-operations and z-people are the standardized average scores
of the operations questions and people management questions. Controls include school controls listed in
Table 2: log of number of students, average share of female students, of students from scheduled castes, of
literate parents and of laborer parents.




                                                       36
                          ONLINE APPENDIX
    "Personnel Management and School Productivity: Evidence from India,"
                               July 8, 2021


A     Additional figures and tables




                                   App. 1
                                                                    Figure A1: Global benchmarks
                                                  (a) Rank of comparable people management z-scores


                                                      UK
                                          Sweden
                                                      US
                                           Canada
                                     Germany
                                                     Italy
                          AP (Private)
                                                  Brazil
                                                 Mexico
                                                  India
                                    Colombia                                                                          HIC Mean:
                             AP (Public)                                                                              1.027


                                                             -1.5      -1      -.5      0       .5                1        1.5
                                                                               People Management z-score


                                    (b) Comparable management z-scores and GDP per capita

                                                                                                             UK
                                           1.5




                                                                                                       Sweden
                 People Management Z-Score




                                                                                                                   US
                                                                                                            Canada
                                       1
                    WMS Public Schools




                                                                                                      Germany
                                .5




                                                                                                     Italy
                           0




                                                               AP (Private)
                     -.5




                                                               India               Brazil
                                                                                       Mexico
                                                                               Colombia
               -1




                                                               AP (Public)
                                     -1.5




                                                 8                         9                    10                         11
                                                                        Log of 10-yr average GDP per capita

                                                                         High income      Middle/low-income

Note: This figure includes only public secondary schools from the WMS dataset (UK, Canada, Sweden,
 US, Germany, Italy, Brazil and India) and public primary schools from the Development WMS dataset
 (Andhra Pradesh, Mexico and Colombia). The Development WMS scores were re-scaled to match the
 WMS scoring convention: all half points were downgraded to the next lowest whole point for each survey
 question (for example, all scores of 2.5 were re-cast to 2) before indices were built. Data for the WMS
 for all countries except for Mexico and Colombia can be found at www.worldmanagementsurvey.org.
 Distribution of overall management indices standardized within countries. Country averages for all other
 countries were estimated using sampling weights (see Appendix B for details on the weights construction).
 Number of WMS observations are as follows: Brazil = 373, Canada = 113, Colombia = 447, Great Britain
 = 78, Germany = 91, India = 130, Italy = 222, Mexico = 178, Sweden = 85, United States = 193. The
 10-year average GDP per capita comes from App.  the IMF
                                                       2 world tables, and include 2008-2018. We used
 India's GDP as a stand-in for Andhra Pradesh's GPD in Panel (b).
         Figure A2: Difference between across public and private: India vs OECD
                                                    (a) Operations management




                         2.5
                                                                                                 Public (AP)
                                                                                                 Private (AP)
                                                                                                 Public (high inc)
                         2
                                                                                                 Private (high inc)


                                             Med = 1.71
                  Kernel Density
                            1.5




                                                     Med = 1.79
                   1




                                                                   Med = 2.5
                                                                                   Med = 2.71
                         .5
                         0




                                    1        1.5          2         2.5        3         3.5                    4
                                                     Average operations management score


                                                          (b) People management
                      2.5




                                                                                                Public (AP)
                                                                                                Private (AP)
                                                                                                Public (high inc)
                      2




                                                                                                Private (high inc)
               Kernel Density
                         1.5




                                   Med = 1
                1




                                               Med = 1.66
                                                              Med = 2.33
                                                                               Med = 2.5
                      .5
                      0




                                   1         1.5          2          2.5        3                   3.5              4
                                                      Average people management score
Note: This figure includes only public secondary schools from the WMS dataset (UK, Canada, Sweden,
 US, Germany, Italy) and public primary schools from the Development WMS dataset (Andhra Pradesh).
 The Development WMS scores were re-scaled to match the WMS scoring convention: all half points were
 downgraded to the next lowest whole point for each survey question (for example, all scores of 2.5 were
 re-cast to 2) before indices were built. Data for the WMS for all high income countries can be found at
 www.worldmanagementsurvey.org. Country averages for WMS countries were estimated using sampling
 weights (see Appendix B for details on the weights construction). Number of WMS observations are as
 follows: Brazil = 510, Canada = 129, Colombia = 468, Great Britain = 89, Germany = 102, Italy = 284,
 Mexico = 157, Sweden = 85, United States = 263. Number of AP observations = 300. Squares mark the
 median point of the AP distributions, and circles mark the median points of the high-income countries
 distribution.                                   App. 3
              Table A1: Public and private schools are different on observables

                                                     (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)
                                                   Private      Public                        Table
                                                   schools      schools      Difference     reference
 Panel A: School characteristics
    Total enrollment                                296.21        74.04       222.17***      Table 3
    Total working days                              229.81       218.66       11.15***       Table 3
    Pupil-teacher ratio                             17.62        25.28         -7.67***      Table 3
    Observations                                     289           346

      Annual cost per child (Rs/child)             1,848.88     8,390.00      -6,542***      Table 3
      Observations                                    211          325

      Student time spent in school (minutes)        423.53       380.25       43.28***       Table 4
      Observations                                   652          1,839

      Multi-grade teaching                            0.24        0.79         -0.55***      Table 5
      Observations                                   2,738       2,784

 Panel B: Teacher characteristics
    Male                                             0.24         0.46         -0.21***      Table   3
    Age                                             27.58        40.00        -12.42***      Table   3
    Years of teaching                                5.14        14.96         -9.82***      Table   3
    Completed at least college or masters            0.69         0.88         -0.19***      Table   3
    Teacher training completed                       0.34         0.99         -0.65***      Table   3
    Come from the same village                       0.44         0.13          0.32***      Table   3
    Current gross salary per month (Rs)            2,606.66    14,285.94    -11,679.27***    Table   3
    Observations                                    2,000        1,358

      Teacher is absent                               0.09       0.24          -0.15***      Table 4
      Teacher is actively teaching                    0.50       0.35           0.15***      Table 4
      Observations                                   6,577       5,552
Notes: Table reproduced from Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2015), Tables 3, 4 and 5.




                                              App. 4
         Table A2: Correlates of management quality: teacher and student observables

                                                            Public                                   Private
                                                 (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)
                                               z-mgmt          z-ops      z-people      z-mgmt         z-ops      z-people
  Student characteristics
  Share female                                   0.246         0.301         0.062   -0.318            -0.259       -0.324
                                               (0.696)       (0.840)       (0.373)  (0.834)           (0.899)      (0.536)
  Share scheduled caste                          0.156        0.225         -0.024 3.405***          3.526***     2.043***
                                               (0.414)       (0.518)       (0.197)  (0.749)           (0.813)      (0.513)
  Share literate parents                       0.968**       1.145**         0.315   -0.793            -0.920       -0.291
                                               (0.455)       (0.555)       (0.219)  (0.646)           (0.698)      (0.404)
  Share laborer parents                       -1.379***     -1.592***     -0.522** -1.446*            -1.470*     -0.917**
                                               (0.456)       (0.565)       (0.231)  (0.750)           (0.834)      (0.427)
  Average household assets index                -0.264        -0.290        -0.127   0.342             0.376        0.164
                                               (0.261)       (0.319)       (0.111)  (0.307)           (0.333)      (0.201)
  Teacher characteristics
  Share with a degree                          1.133**        1.330*         0.387        0.310         0.344        0.142
                                               (0.566)        (0.678)      (0.307)      (0.236)       (0.261)      (0.150)
  Share with teacher training                   0.070          -0.002       0.182         0.160        0.180         0.069
                                               (0.543)        (0.671)      (0.203)      (0.203)       (0.222)      (0.133)
  Average teaching experience                   -0.009         -0.005       -0.015       -0.015        -0.014       -0.013
                                               (0.035)        (0.042)      (0.017)      (0.032)       (0.037)      (0.015)
  Average # workdays                            -0.008         -0.011       -0.000       0.003         0.003         0.002
                                               (0.009)        (0.011)      (0.004)      (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.003)
  Head teacher teaching experience               0.031          0.035       0.012         0.020        0.018         0.019
                                               (0.041)        (0.050)      (0.019)      (0.037)       (0.041)      (0.022)
  Head teacher has degree                     -1.042**       -1.269**       -0.271        0.557         0.582        0.325
                                               (0.515)        (0.621)      (0.260)      (0.368)       (0.398)      (0.235)
  School characteristics
  School size (# students)                      -0.246        -0.271        -0.118     0.337***      0.340***     0.219***
                                               (0.156)       (0.190)       (0.075)      (0.079)       (0.086)      (0.053)
Notes: Standard errors are clustered by school. z-mgmt is the overall standardized management score. z-ops is the standardized
index of operations questions and z-people is the standardized index of people management questions. Headteacher refers to the
teacher formally appointed as headteacher or the most senior teacher at the school.




                                                         App. 5
Table A3: Residualized school management practices and student value added

                                                         Public schools
                                      (1)         (2)                    (3)         (4)
                                    student     student                student     student
                                  value added value added            value added value added
  z-management (residual)           0.168***
                                     (0.047)
  z-operations (residual)                             0.130***                          0.080*
                                                       (0.040)                          (0.046)
  z-people (residual)                                                  0.334***         0.224**
                                                                        (0.096)         (0.107)
  Observations                         7157             7157             7157             7157
  # schools                            109              109              109              109

                                                         Private schools
                                      (1)         (2)                    (3)         (4)
                                    student     student                student     student
                                  value added value added            value added value added
  z-management (residual)             0.046
                                     (0.034)
  z-operations (residual)                               0.026                            -0.026
                                                       (0.030)                          (0.040)
  z-people (residual)                                                  0.127**          0.154**
                                                                       (0.052)          (0.066)
  Observations                        28807            28807            28807             28807
  # schools                            190              190              190               190

                                                 Public and private schools
                                      (1)         (2)                    (3)         (4)
                                    student     student                student     student
                                  value added value added            value added value added
  Private (residual)                 0.414***         0.475***         0.221**          0.253**
                                      (0.089)          (0.088)         (0.104)          (0.116)
  Scholarship (residual)            -0.283***        -0.277***        -0.298***        -0.296***
                                      (0.079)          (0.079)         (0.075)          (0.076)
  z-management (residual)            0.091***
                                      (0.029)
  z-operations (residual)                             0.070***                            0.023
                                                       (0.026)                           (0.034)
  z-people (residual)                                                  0.167***         0.142***
                                                                        (0.041)          (0.052)
  Observations                        35964            35964            35964             35964
  # schools                            299              299              299               299
 Notes: Standard errors are clustered by school. The dependent variable student value added is
 estimated by using the residuals of a regression of the endline test score on the baseline test score
 for each student. All specifications include year
                                               App. and 6
                                                        subject dummies. The management scores are:
 z-management is the standardized average of the z-scores of each individual management practice. z-
 operations and z-people are the standardized average of the z-scores of each individual management
 practice relating to operations and people, respectively. All management scores are residualized on
 the full set of controls. Controls include those listed in Table 2.
 Table A4: School management practices and student value added in each type of school
                          (lagged test score specification)

 Panel A:                              Public schools                                      Private schools
 No controls               (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)
                         endline      endline      endline      endline       endline      endline      endline      endline
                          score        score        score        score         score        score        score        score
 z-management           0.183***                                               0.041
                         (0.037)                                              (0.028)
 z-operations                        0.143***               0.078*                          0.028                     -0.018
                                      (0.032)               (0.041)                        (0.026)                   (0.035)
 z-people                                         0.381*** 0.264***                                    0.099**       0.119**
                                                   (0.069)  (0.090)                                     (0.041)      (0.056)
 Lagged test score 0.451***          0.451***     0.463*** 0.455*** 0.306***              0.307***     0.304***     0.304***
                    (0.040)           (0.040)      (0.041)  (0.041)  (0.019)               (0.019)      (0.019)      (0.019)
 Observations              7157         7157         7157         7157        28807        28807        28807         28807
 # schools                  109          109         109          109          190          190          190           190

 Panel B:                              Public schools                                      Private schools
 With controls             (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)
                         endline      endline      endline      endline       endline      endline      endline      endline
                          score        score        score        score         score        score        score        score
 z-management           0.170***                                               0.042
                         (0.045)                                              (0.028)
 z-operations                        0.132***               0.083**                         0.022                 -0.029
                                      (0.037)               (0.040)                        (0.025)               (0.033)
 z-people                                         0.336*** 0.223**                                     0.124*** 0.153***
                                                   (0.087)  (0.097)                                     (0.041)  (0.055)
 Lagged test score 0.444***          0.443***     0.456*** 0.448***          0.293***     0.295***     0.290*** 0.290***
                    (0.040)           (0.040)      (0.040)  (0.040)           (0.018)      (0.018)      (0.018)  (0.018)
 Observations              7157         7157         7157         7157        28807        28807        28807         28807
 # schools                  109          109         109          109          190          190          190           190
Notes: Standard errors are clustered by school. The dependent variable, student value added, is estimated by using the residuals
of a regression of the end-line test score on the baseline test score for each student. z-management is the standardized overall
management index. z-operations and z-people are the standardized average scores of the operations questions and people
management questions. Controls include those listed in Table 2: student controls (indicators for female student, scheduled
caste, parents are literate, parents are manual laborers, and a household assets index), teacher controls (share of teachers
with a degree, share with teacher training, average teaching experience, average number of work days, head teacher teaching
experience and head teacher education) and school controls (log of number of students, average share of female students, of
students from scheduled castes, of literate parents and of laborer parents). Includes subject and year fixed effects.




                                                       App. 7
Table A5: School management practices and student value added -- pooled across public
                  and private schools (lagged test score specification)

      Panel A: No controls                             Public and private schools
                                          (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)
                                        endline       endline        endline       endline        endline
                                         score         score          score         score          score
      Private = 1                       0.353***      0.255***       0.317***       0.061         0.105
                                         (0.059)       (0.060)        (0.056)      (0.084)       (0.099)
      Scholarship = 1                  -0.245***     -0.259***      -0.253***     -0.278***     -0.274***
                                         (0.079)       (0.080)        (0.082)      (0.075)       (0.076)
      z-management                                    0.090***
                                                       (0.025)
      z-operations                                                  0.071***                       0.026
                                                                     (0.022)                      (0.030)
      z-people                                                                    0.162***       0.131***
                                                                                   (0.037)        (0.050)
      Lagged test score                0.315***       0.309***      0.310***      0.307***       0.307***
                                        (0.018)        (0.018)       (0.018)       (0.018)        (0.018)
      Observations                       35964         35964          35964         35964          35964
      # schools                           299           299            299           299            299

      Panel B: with controls                             Public and private schools
                                            (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)
                                          endline       endline        endline       endline        endline
                                           score         score          score         score          score
      Private = 1                         0.501***      0.406***       0.467***      0.211**   0.241**
                                           (0.087)       (0.087)        (0.085)      (0.099)   (0.108)
      Scholarship = 1                    -0.258***     -0.278***      -0.271***     -0.295*** -0.294***
                                           (0.078)       (0.077)        (0.078)      (0.073)   (0.074)
      z-management                                      0.092***
                                                         (0.026)
      z-operations                                                    0.070***                       0.022
                                                                       (0.023)                      (0.028)
      z-people                                                                      0.170***       0.146***
                                                                                     (0.036)        (0.046)
      Lagged test score                  0.304***       0.298***      0.300***      0.296***       0.296***
                                          (0.018)        (0.018)       (0.018)       (0.017)        (0.017)
      Observations                         35964         35964          35964         35964          35964
      # schools                             299           299            299           299            299
     Notes: Standard errors are clustered by school. The dependent variable student value added is esti-
     mated by using the residuals of a regression of the end-line test score on the baseline test score for each
     student. z-management is the standardized overall management index. z-operations and z-people are
     the standardized average scores of the operations questions and people management questions. Private
     refers to an indicator for private school, and scholarship is an indicator for whether the student received
     a scholarship in the Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2015) school choice experiment. Controls in-
     clude those listed in Table 2: student controls (indicators for female student, scheduled caste, parents
     are literate, parents are manual laborers, and a household assets index), teacher controls (share of
     teachers with a degree, share with teacher training, average teaching experience, average number of
                                                      App. 8
     work days, head teacher teaching experience and head teacher education) and school controls (log
     of number of students, average share of female students, of students from scheduled castes, of literate
     parents and of laborer parents). Includes subject and year fixed effects.
Table A6: School management practices and teacher flows: alternative outcomes

                                 All                 Public                    Private
                                (1)     (2)     (3)     (4)     (5)
                             good HR good HR good HR good HR good HR
                             outcome outcome outcome outcome outcome
        Private = 1           -0.117**
                               (0.029)
        Management
        z-operations                          -0.013                      0.017
                                             (0.009)                     (0.011)
        z-people                                            -0.015                      0.017
                                                           (0.021)                     (0.020)
        # Teachers               514            51            51           463           463

                                 All                 Public                    Private
                                (1)     (2)     (3)     (4)     (5)
                             good HR good HR good HR good HR good HR
                             outcome outcome outcome outcome outcome
        Private = 1             0.034
                               (0.016)
        Management
        z-operations                          0.013                       0.004
                                             (0.009)                     (0.011)
        z-people                                            0.015                       -0.007
                                                           (0.021)                     (0.013)
        # Teachers               514            51            51           463           463
       Notes: The Good HR outcome alternative measure 1 is defined in the same way as
       the original variable, but a high value added teacher is defined as the top 2 within
       schools that have 5 or more teachers. A low value added teacher is the defined as
       either of the bottom 2 within schools that have 5 or more teachers. The Good HR
       outcome alternative measure 2 defines high value added teachers as those above the
       median teacher value added within the school, and low value added teachers are defined
       as below the median. Standard errors are clustered by school. The sample uses only
       schools which had data about teacher transfers during year 2 of the Muralidharan and
       Sundararaman (2015) experiment (2009). The dependent variable, "good HR outcome",
       is a binary outcome. It takes a value of 1 if a high value added teacher was transferred in
       or retained in the school, or if a low value added teacher is transferred out of the school.
       It takes a value of 0 otherwise. Teacher value added is estimated using the Chetty et al.
       (2014) method and vam Stata command. A teacher is coded as "high value added" when
       their year 1 value added is the highest within their school. A teacher is coded as "low
       value added" when their year 1 value added is the lowest within their school. Private
       refers to an indicator for private school. z-operations and z-people are the standardized
       average scores of the operations questions and people management questions. Controls
       include school controls listed in Table 2: log of number of students, average share of
       female students, of students from scheduled castes, of literate parents and of laborer
       parents.




                                               App. 9
B       Data Appendix
B.1     World Management Survey sampling weights
The World Management Survey average scores used in this paper include survey weights.
These are calculated as the inverse probability of being interviewed on log of number of
students, public status, and population density by state, province, or NUTS 2 region as a
measure of location). Samples include both public and private schools, with the exception
of Colombia where data is only available to public primary schools.

B.2     The Development World Management Survey methodology
In original WMS, the survey is administered by highly trained interviewers who ask a series
of scripted and unscripted questions until they gather all the information they need to score
the practices. The interviewers are generally graduate students in business and economics
programs from highly ranked institutions, and undergo a week-long intensive WMS training
program. This program teaches them how to ask the WMS questions in open-ended format,
and how to arrive at a score that combines the various facets of a manager's answer into one
score. In the D-WMS, however, we remove a large portion of the discretion interviewers have
by separating the three types of questions and requiring separate scores for each sub-question.
This reduces measurement error as the interviewers have an almost-checkbox style grid, and
is more appropriate for settings where very high quality interviewers are not available or not
feasible due to budget constraints. Below we include all the original WMS topics and the
three factors (implementation, usage, monitoring) along with the example questions asked
by the interviewers.

B.2.1    Scoring example and interpretation
We use an example to illustrate the type of information included in the interviews and
codified in the survey, and how the expansions aid in identifying bottlenecks. On the topic
of data-driven student transition to higher grades, principals are asked open-ended questions
such as "What type of information about the individual students is available to teachers at
the beginning of the academic year?" and "What do you think are the main points of
transition/promotion for students and how is this communicated to your teachers?". Higher
scores are awarded to principals who can discuss an array of data relevant in their school and
context, and ensure the information is collected regularly, communicated to teachers well,
and used to inform student transitions.
    For the first factor, implementation, a school would receive a score of 1 if there is no data
available. A score of 1.5 means that the school has some limited information for students,
and while it may be of lower quality relative to official examinations, still constitutes a better
practice than having nothing at all. A score of a 2 means there is some data is available, such
as end-of-year examinations and teacher impressions. A score of a 3 means the schools uses
a range of data, including results for quarterly, mid-year and end of-the year examinations
plus health information, teacher impressions and baseline tests. The score of 2.5 would sit


                                            App. 10
somewhere in the middle, if the school has a range of academic and behaviour data (an
improvement on simply collecting end-of-year examinations or teacher impressions) but not
quite a large enough range collected over multiple instances with different instruments.
    For the second factor, usage, a score of 1 means that the principal does not understand
basic transition points for students (such as progress between units). A score of 1.5 recognizes
that the principal has a personal understanding of these points but does not communicate
with teachers about these points. A score of 2 means that the principal internalizes the im-
portant transition points but also communicates with teachers to build shared understanding,
though very informally and infrequently. A score of 2.5 means that this communication is
more regular, albeit still informal. For a score of 3 or above, the understanding of critical
transitions needs to be formally acknowledged and understood by the principal as well as
the main teaching staff.
    For the third factor, monitoring, a score of 1 would imply teachers have no knowledge of
prior achievement, and thus cannot consider this data in critical transitions. A score of 1.5
means teachers are at least given progress cards, but no real action is taken. A score of 2
means teachers are made aware of past performance and there is an expectation that issues
should be addressed, but the approach is unstructured. A score of 2.5 is awarded when there
is an informal communication structure in place to link prior teachers and inform critical
transition moments. For a score of 3 or above, the school needs to have a process to formally
verify student outcomes at critical stages, regularly, and have a structured way to address
weaknesses.
    Overall, a score of a 3 or below for this topic means performance data is not be recorded
systematically with a range of tools that would allow for a more thorough understanding of
a studentâs strengths and weaknesses. Further it is not integrated or easy to use or shared
with a range of stakeholders. The importance of the D-WMS for measurement in our context
stems from nearly all public schools having scores below 3.




                                           App. 11
         Table B1: Survey questions: Operations management questions
                               Process                        Process usage                    Process monitoring
                            implementation
       Topic                                                       Questions
1.   Standardization    How do you ensure that all       Why did you and the teach-        How do you keep track of what
of      Instructional   students of a given grade are    ers decide on the current cur-    teachers are doing in the class-
Planning Processes      learning the same topics in      riculum, textbooks and other      rooms?
                        the same way within a similar    materials and lesson plans used
                        timeframe?                       throughout the year?
2.    Personalization   How much does the school try     How do you make sure stu-      How do you keep track of what
of        Instruction   to identify individual student   dents and parents are engaged  teachers are doing in the class-
and Learning            needs and accommodate these      in the students' learning?     rooms to ensure that different
                        needs within in the classroom?                                  student needs are taken care
                                                                                        of?
3. Data-driven Plan-    What type of information What do you think are Does the school use any data
ning and Student        about the individual students the main points of transi- to consider student promo-
Transitions             is available to teachers at tion/promotion for students tions through critical transi-
                        the beginning of the academic and how is this communicated tions (such as grade promo-
                        year?                           to your teachers?               tions or unit progressions)?
4. Adopting Educa-      How do you encourage the How do you make sure the By what means and how of-
tional Best Practices   teachers to incorporate new teachers are using the new ten are these learnings shared
                        teaching practices into the techniques you are trying to in- across teachers and subjects
                        classroom?                      troduce?                        and how often?
5.   Continuous Im-     When you have a problem in Who is involved in improv- Who is involved in resolving
provement               the school, how do you come ing/suggesting improvements these issues, that is, in decid-
                        to know about them and what to the process so these issues ing what course of action will
                        are the steps you go through to do not happen again?            be taken to resolve the issue?
                        fix them?
6.       Performance    What kind of main parameters How often are these main pa- If I were to walk through your
Tracking                do you use to track school per- rameters measured?              school, how could I tell how it
                        formance and what documents                                     is doing compared to its main
                        are you using to inform this                                    parameters?
                        tracking?
7. Performance Re-      How often do you have meet- Who is involved in these meet- After reviewing these parame-
view                    ings to review the parameters? ings and who gets to see the ters, what is the action plan,
                                                        results of these meetings?      that is what steps do people
                                                                                        take after leaving the meeting?
8. Performance Dia-     Can you tell me about a recent What kind of data or informa- What type of feedback do you
logue                   review meeting you have had? tion about the parameters do get during these meetings and
                                                        you normally have with you?     how do you get to solving the
                                                                                        problems raised?
9. Consequence Man-     After a review meeting, how How would you make sure How long does it typically go
agement                 are people aware of their re- this problem does not happen between when a problem starts
                        sponsibilities and actions that again?                          and you realize this and start
                        must be taken?                                                  solving it?
10. Balance of Tar-     What goals do you have set for Can you tell me about any How are your school goals
gets/Goal Metrics       your school?                    specific goals for departments, linked to student outcomes
                                                        teachers and staff?             and to the goals of the
                                                                                        school board system (govern-
                                                                                        ment/ICSE/CBSE)?
11.   Interconnection   How do you learn of the goals If I were a teacher or another How do you communicate to
of Targets/Goals        the school system expects of member of the school, what your teachers and staff what
                        you?                            kind of goals would I have?     their goals are?
12. Time Horizon of     Which goals would you say get What kind of time-scale are Could you meet all your short
Targets/Goals           the most emphasis?              you looking at with your goals? term goals but miss your long-
                                                                                        run goals?
13. Stretch of Tar-     How are your goals bench- Do you feel that all the depart- On average, how often would
gets/Goals              marked?                         ments/areas have goals that you say that the school meets
                                                        are just as hard or would some their goals?
                                                   App.areas/departments
                                                         12                  get easier
                                                        targets?
14. Clarity and Com-    What are the goals based on? If I asked one of the teach- How do people know about
parability of Goals                                     ers directly about their indi- their own performance when
                                                        vidual goals, what would they compared to other people's
            Table B2: Survey questions: People management questions
                               Process                        Process usage                    Process monitoring
                            implementation
                        formulating, adopting and        carrying out and using man-       monitoring the appropriate-
                        putting into effect manage-      agement practices frequently      ness and efficient use of man-
                        ment practices                   and efficiently                   agement practices
       Topic                                                        Questions
1. Building a High Can you tell me about the cri-        What types of monetary or         By what means and how often
Performance   Cul- teria that you use in your ap-        non-monetary rewards are          do you evaluate and rate your
ture/    Rewarding praisal (evaluation) system?          given to teachers and how are     teachers?
High Performers                                          these linked to the ranking
                                                         teachers get?
2.    Making Room What criteria do you use and           If you had a teacher who is       How long does it take to ad-
for Talent/ Removing how often do you identify your      struggling or who could not do    dress the issue once you come
Poor Performers      worst teachers?                     their job properly, what would    to know that a teacher is per-
                                                         you do? What if you had a         forming badly?
                                                         teacher who would not do their
                                                         job, as in slacking off, what
                                                         would you do then?
3. Promoting High       What criteria do you use and     What types of career and          How do you make decisions
Performers              how often do you identify your   teacher development opportu-      about promotion/progression
                        best teachers?                   nities are provided?              of teachers and additional op-
                                                                                           portunities within the school,
                                                                                           such as performance, years of
                                                                                           service, etc.?
4. Managing Talent      Who decides how many and Where do you seek out and                 How do you decide which
                        which teachers (full-time regu- find teachers and how do you       teachers should be hired?
                        lar members of staff) to hire? ensure you have the teachers
                                                         you need for the subjects you
                                                         have?
5. Retaining talent     When one of your best teachers Could you give me an example        How would you know if your
                        wants to leave the school, what of what you would be able to       best teachers are happy work-
                        do you do?                       offer to try and keep that best   ing in this school?
                                                         teacher in your school?
6.       Creating a     What are the professional ben- How do teachers come to know        How do you check to see if
Distinctive Employee    efits of working at your school? that working at your school is    teachers are aware of the bene-
Value Proposition                                        better than others?               fits of working at your school?




                                                  App. 13
      Figure B1: Sample report card from an AP school




Note: Report card from an AP school produced to us during a field visit.




                              App. 14
B.3      Teacher Value Added
For the sake of clarity, we reproduce here the essence of the statistical model underlying
the teacher value added model from Chetty et al. (2014) in Equation 8, below. It shows
how the authors suggest estimating teacher value added to extract the teacher effect, µjt
from a panel of student-level data. Ai(t) and Ai(t-1) are the standardized end-of-year test
score for student i in years t and t - 1. Controlling for students' prior year test scores (or,
lagged test scores) captures "most of the sorting of students to teachers that is relevant for
future test achievement."30 Further, there is some consensus in the literature that including
a student's prior test scores is the best proxy available for the cumulative learning and other
characteristics (such as parent's input and individual motivation) up to the point where the
"new" teacher is matched with the student.31 Our data includes subject-specific test scores
administered by the APSC project team for English, Telugu, Science and social studies and
Hindi. As only Math and Telugu tests are administered in all the primary school grades
(1 through 5 in Andhra Pradesh), we focus on these two subjects. The vector Xit includes
student and classroom characteristics as controls, namely gender, caste, religion, whether
parents are labourers and whether parents are literate. Each student can be matched to a
teacher, year, class and subject. The equation is as follows:

                           Ai(t) = Ai(t-1) + Xit + it
                                                                                                          (8)
                                             where it = µjt + c + it
    and the residual term ijt is expressed by Chetty et al. (2014) as a composite of teacher
value added (µjt ), exogenous class shocks (c ) and idiosyncratic student-level variation (it ).32
The individual "teacher effect" is not assumed to be fixed over time but rather is allowed to
fluctuate stochastically over time. They do not place restrictions on the stochastic process
except that they must follow a stationary process.33
    In short, Chetty et al. (2014) predict each teacher's value added in a school year based
on the mean test scores of students she taught in other (prior and later) years. However,
their innovation is that they allow teacher quality to vary over years by essentially regressing
student scores in year t on the average scores in other years, "allowing the coefficients to
vary across different lags." They then estimate the autocovariance of scores across classrooms
  30
      Chetty et al. (2014)
  31
      For example, Guarino et al. (2014)
   32
      Chetty et al. (2014) note that their approach is similar to Kane and Staiger (2008), except that it
accounts for drift. In Kane and Staiger (2008), the authors use "the student residuals  to form empirical
Bayes estimates of each teacher's value added." Essentially, this approach uses the noisy estimate of teacher
value added multiplied by an estimate of its reliability, that is, the mean residual multiplied by ratio of
(signal)-variance to (signal + noise)-variance. In a simulation exercise, however, Guarino et al. (2014) found
that empirical Bayes estimates were not the most reliable estimators among the six most common studied.
Another common approach is to treat two of the components of it , namely the teacher and classroom effects
as fixed effects, for example, as in Gordon et al. (2006), Rockoff (2004).
   33
      As Chetty et al. (2014) explain, it thus requires an assumption that mean teacher quality does not
vary across calendar years and that the correlation of teacher quality, class shocks and student shocks
across pairs of years depends only on the time elapsed between the years. Formally: E[µjt |t] = E[it] = 0,
Cov (µjt , µj (t+s) ) = µs , Cov (it , i(t+s) ) = s t.



                                                  App. 15
taught by each teacher non-parametrically and use that information to account for "drift"
in teacher quality.
    They construct the estimator in three steps: The first is to run the regression in Equa-
tion 8 to recover the residuals, ijt . They use variation across students taught by the same
teacher, which is a departure from previous techniques that used both within-teacher and
between-teacher variation. The second step is to estimate mean test score residuals in class-
rooms in year t based on mean test score residuals in prior years. If we let the mean
                                                                               1
residual test score in the class teacher j teaches in year t be Ajt = i{i:j (i,t)=j } it , and
                                                                               n
A-  t
  j = (Aj 1 , ..., aj (t-1) ) is the vector of mean residual scores prior to year t in classes taught
by teacher j , then a regression of Ajt on A-        t
                                                    j results in a set of coefficients that are the
best linear predictors of Ajt based on prior scores.34 The third step is using the coefficients
recovered from the "best linear predictor" to predict the teachers' value added for year t,
using a leave-year-out approach.
    Their results using US data suggest that a 1 standard deviation improvement in teacher
quality leads to higher test scores of approximately 0.14 SD for maths and 0.1 SD in English.
In their measure, they scale teacher value added such that "the average teacher has value
added µjt = 0 and the effect of a 1 unit increase in teacher value added on end-of-year test
scores is 1."35 It is this methodology that we use to calculate teacher value added in the
context of the data available for this paper.36

B.4     Teacher classroom practices
We use a set of fourteen indicators related to classroom practices in self-reported teacher
questionnaires administered to all teachers by enumerators, along with two indicators in audit
data from classroom observation visits. These were collected independent of the student tests
and the D-WMS management survey.

Survey questions: The fourteen self-reported indicators include information on classroom
preparedness (teacher makes lesson plans, has textbook and/or workbook, checks hygiene
daily), time spent teaching (the % time teaching, % time on teaching activities, % time "on
task"), and time spend on remedial activities (time spent on remedial activities as well as
above average time spent remedial attention in class, outside class, helping arrange private
tuition, helping at home, and other type of help). The two audit indicators include whether
the teacher was present in the school and whether they were actively teaching in class. We
describe each teacher practice and how it is coded below.

Index construction: We aggregated all sixteen items into a single index using the Ander-
son (2008) method. This methodology weights the impact of the included variables by the
  34
     We mention the OLS equivalent here for ease of exposition, but the technique used by Chetty et al.
(2014) is analogous to the OLS regression method and describe it in detail in their paper.
  35
     Chetty et al. (2014)
  36
     To implement their method we used the accompanying Stata command vam.



                                               App. 16
                                   Table B3: Teacher practices index
         Variable                                       Question                                        Coding


Has lesson plan            Do you prepare a lesson plan (teaching plan) before teaching? (1) = 1 if (1)
                           Yes, (2) No
Has                  text- Do you have a copy of the textbook for each class you teach? Do = 1 if (1) in both ques-
book/workbook              you have a copy of the workbook for each class you teach? For each tions
                           question: (1) All, (2) Some, (3) None
Checks daily hygiene       How often are the children observed for health/hygiene related = 1 if (1)
                           habits, like cleanliness of nails, teeth and washing hands before
                           meals, of the children by you? (1) Daily, (2) Few times a week, (3)
                           Few times a month, (4) Few times a year, (5) Never
Share time teaching ac- How much time do you spend in a typical day on each of the follow- share of total time
tivities                   ing activities? (A) Teaching Activity, (B) Preparing for Classes, (C) spent in (A), (B), (C),
                           Correcting Homework, (D) Maintaining Order and Discipline, (E) and (I).
                           Administrative/Paper work, (F) Breaks during School, (G) Getting
                           children to attend school, (H) Mid-day meals, (I) Extra Classes, (J)
                           Others
Share time on task         How much time do you spend in a typical day on each of the follow- share of total time
                           ing activities? (A) Teaching Activity, (B) Preparing for Classes, (C) spent in (B), (C), (I)
                           Correcting Homework, (D) Maintaining Order and Discipline, (E) .
                           Administrative/Paper work, (F) Breaks during School, (G) Getting
                           children to attend school, (H) Mid-day meals, (I) Extra Classes, (J)
                           Others
Share time teaching How much time do you spend in a typical day on each of the follow- share of total time
only                       ing activities? (A) Teaching Activity, (B) Preparing for Classes, (C) spent in (A) .
                           Correcting Homework, (D) Maintaining Order and Discipline, (E)
                           Administrative/Paper work, (F) Breaks during School, (G) Getting
                           children to attend school, (H) Mid-day meals, (I) Extra Classes, (J)
                           Others
Remedial time attention Do you get time to provide remedial teaching to the students? (1) = 1 if (1)
                           Yes, (2) No
Time spent in remedial Do you get time to provide remedial teaching to the students?
attention:
...   taking extra class If yes, mention time in hours per week for this topic                   = 1 if time spent is
time                                                                                             above average of dis-
                                                                                                 tribution
... paying extra atten- If yes, mention time in hours per week for this topic                    = 1 if time spent is
tion in the class itself                                                                         above average of dis-
                                                                                                 tribution
... paying extra atten- If yes, mention time in hours per week for this topic                    = 1 if time spent is
tion outside the class                                                                           above average of dis-
                                                                                                 tribution
... help children by ar- If yes, mention time in hours per week for this topic                   = 1 if time spent is
ranging private tuition                                                                          above average of dis-
                                                                                                 tribution
... helping children in If yes, mention time in hours per week for this topic                    = 1 if time spent is
studies at home                                                                                  above average of dis-
                                                                                                 tribution
... others                 If yes, mention time in hours per week for this topic                 = 1 if time spent is
                                                                                                 above average of dis-
                                                                                                 tribution
Observed:          Active What is the teacher doing when you look for him/her? (A) Actively = 1 if (A)
Teaching                   Teaching or engaged with the children, (B) Passive teaching, (C) In
                           the class, but not teaching, (D) Out of class, and not teaching, (E)
                           Doing administrative/ paper work, (F) Talking to/accompanying
                           the MC, (G) Cannot find the teacher (absent)
Observed:         Teacher What is the teacher doing when you look for him/her? (A) Actively = 1 if (A)
Present                    Teaching or engaged with App.    17 (B) Passive teaching, (C) In
                                                      the children,
                           the class, but not teaching, (D) Out of class, and not teaching, (E)
                           Doing administrative/ paper work, (F) Talking to/accompanying
                           the MC, (G) Cannot find the teacher (absent)
                           =0 if (G), =1 otherwise
  Figure B2: Coefficient plot: teacher practices and correlation with student value added


                                                                         Public                         Private
                            Share time teaching activities
                                 Remedial: provides time
                      Remedial: >avg time spent in class
                                  Has textbook/workbook
                   Remedial: >avg time spent in remedial
                         Remedial: >avg extra class time
                 Remedial: >avg time spent outside class
             Remedial: >avg time arranging private tuition
                    Remedial: >avg time helping at home
                               Observed: active teaching
                             Remedial: >avg time in other
                                      Share time on-task
                                 Share time teaching only
                                         Has lesson plan
                                    Checks daily hygiene
                               Observed: teacher present

                                                             -.4   -.2     0      .2   .4   -.4   -.2      0      .2   .4

 Note: This figure plots the coefficient of the simple relationship between each teaching practice and average
  student value added (SVA). SVA for each student is the residual from a regression of endline test score on
  baseline test scores for all years of available APSC data. The data is collapsed at the school-teacher-year
  level, such that each teacher is assigned an average of their students' value added for each year. The
  coefficients reported here are from a simple regression of each practice on student value added within
  each type of school (public on the left panel and private on the right panel), clustering standard errors at
  the school level. Statistically significant coefficients at the 90 percent level are marked in red diamonds,
  while coefficients that are not statistically significant are marked by blue squares.



sum of their row in the inverse variance-covariance matrix, thereby assigning greater weight
to questions that carry more "new information". Figure B2 shows the correlation between
each individual teacher practice we have in our survey and student value added. We included
all practices in our index.




                                                             App. 18
