                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            PLACE-BASED REDISTRIBUTION

                                        Cecile Gaubert
                                       Patrick M. Kline
                                        Danny Yagan

                                     Working Paper 28337
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28337


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2021




We thank David Atkin, Alan Auerbach, Roger Gordon, Nathan Hendren, Louis Kaplow,
Emmanuel Saez, Ben Sprung-Keyser, Nancy Stokey, Juan Carlos Suarez-Serrato, Dmitry
Taubinsky, Damian Vergara, and Matthew Weinzierl for helpful discussions and Akcan Balkir,
Katie Donnelly Moran, Clancy Green, and Damian Vergara for outstanding research assistance.
Thanks also go to seminar participants at Yale, Stanford, MIT, TSE, Dartmouth, Brown,
Wharton, the Harris School, the Paris Trade Seminar, Oslo, the Women in Macro Conference, the
Paris-London Public Economics Conference, the NBER Cities, Labor Markets, and the Global
Economy Conference, the 2020 UEA meetings and the NBER Summer Institute. This research
was funded by the Berkeley Opportunity Lab and the Smith Richardson Foundation. Cecile
Gaubert acknowledges support from NSF CAREER grant #1941917 and the Clausen center at
UC Berkeley. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Cecile Gaubert, Patrick M. Kline, and Danny Yagan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Place-Based Redistribution
Cecile Gaubert, Patrick M. Kline, and Danny Yagan
NBER Working Paper No. 28337
January 2021
JEL No. H20,R10

                                          ABSTRACT

Governments around the world redistribute to distressed areas by conditioning taxes and transfers
on location. We show that when poor households are spatially concentrated, transfers from one
location to another can yield equity gains that outweigh their efficiency costs, even when income-
based transfers are set optimally. Expressions for the optimal transfer size depend on the mobility
of households, the earnings responses of movers, and sorting patterns. Surveys find support for
targeting tax credits to poor Americans who live in distressed places. A calibration exercise finds
optimal transfers of the same order of magnitude as prominent American zone policies.


Cecile Gaubert                                   Danny Yagan
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley               University of California, Berkeley
687 Evans Hall                                   530 Evans Hall, #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720                               Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER                                         and NBER
cecile.gaubert@berkeley.edu                      yagan@berkeley.edu

Patrick M. Kline
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
pkline@econ.berkeley.edu
1     Introduction

Place-based policies tie economic benefits to geographic locations and are prevalent throughout the world

(Glaeser and Gottlieb, 2008; Kline and Moretti, 2014b; Ehrlich and Overman, 2020). For example, U.S.

Empowerment Zones provide a capped earnings subsidy for eligible full-time workers who live and work

in one of forty urban and rural areas. The espoused rationale for such programs is often redistributive:

because poor people are concentrated in certain places, targeting these areas helps disadvantaged households.

However, national governments already redistribute to such households through progressive income taxes and

income-based transfers like food stamps. Should poor residents of poor places receive an extra transfer based

on their location?

    Glaeser (2008) articulates the traditional answer of economists that have studied these programs:


      "Help poor people, not poor places"...is something of a mantra for many urban and regional

      economists... [Place-based] aid is inefficient because it increases economic activity in less productive

      places and decreases economic activity in more productive places.


In line with this view, most academic research on place-based policies has focused either on their efficiency

costs (e.g., Glaeser and Gottlieb, 2008; Albouy, 2009; Fajgelbaum et al., 2018; Gaubert, 2018; Austin et al.,

2018) or the potential for such programs to correct market failures by internalizing productivity spillovers

or other local externalities (e.g., Kline, 2010; Kline and Moretti, 2014a; Fajgelbaum and Gaubert, 2020;

Rossi-Hansberg et al., 2019; Austin et al., 2018; Fu and Gregory, 2019). To date, however, little effort has

been devoted to formalizing the redistributive goals that often motivate these policies in the first place.

    In this paper, we study conditions under which place-based redistribution (henceforth, PBR) schemes

are able to improve on the equity-efficiency tradeoffs posed by "place-blind" transfers implemented through

income taxation. At a high level, there are two reasons why PBR might improve on place-blind taxation.

First, conditioning transfers on place may lower the efficiency costs of redistributing between households with

different levels of pre-tax earnings. Second, PBR may generate welfare gains that income-based redistribution

cannot, if society values targeting transfers to residents of distressed areas, even within earnings levels.

    We study these two rationales formally through the lens of a spatial equilibrium model. To connect our

results to the urban economics literature, we work with a standard discrete choice formulation of household

location decisions (McFadden, 1978; Bayer et al., 2007; Busso et al., 2013; Kline and Moretti, 2014b; Ahlfeldt


                                                        2
et al., 2015). Households choose to live in one of two locations: Distressed or Elsewhere, the latter of which

may have better amenities, greater labor productivity (i.e., higher wages), and a higher cost of living.

Households differ in their skill and in their relative tastes for the Distressed location. Each household

chooses where to live, how much housing to consume, and how much to earn given the national tax system

and locational characteristics. A utilitarian planner designs policy instruments to maximize a weighted

average of household utilities. As in classic optimal tax problems (e.g., Mirrlees, 1971), household types are

private information but the planner observes each household's earnings level and choice of location.1 The

planner redistributes across earnings levels using a conventional place-blind income tax schedule and can

also implement a PBR scheme whereby a lump-sum tax is levied on residents of Elsewhere and rebated to

residents of Distressed. When poor households sort to Distressed, transferring a dollar from the average

Elsewhere resident to the average Distressed resident will tend to raise welfare. However, spatial targeting

yields efficiency costs by inducing Elsewhere residents to move to Distressed, which can entail a reduction

in earnings and thereby tax revenue.

   Our first result explains how the planner resolves the equity-efficiency tradeoff presented by PBR under

a fixed (potentially sub-optimal) income tax system. At an optimum, the equity gains of the place-based

subsidy equal its corresponding efficiency costs. The optimal subsidy to Distressed grows large when less

skilled households are concentrated in Distressed, when few households are indifferent between the two

locations, when productivity differences across areas are small, or when the marginal utility of consumption

declines slowly with income. The formula highlights the earnings effects associated with migration responses

as a "sufficient statistic" ­ in the sense described by Chetty (2009) and Kleven (2020) ­ for the efficiency

costs of place-based policies, providing guidance for future empirical research on place-based transfers.

   An important question left unanswered by this formula is whether PBR can improve on an optimal

income tax system. Classic results in public economics establish conditions under which redistribution via

differential taxation of commodities ­ e.g., taxes on expensive watches ­ can improve welfare over and above

redistribution via optimal non-linear income taxes and transfers (Atkinson and Stiglitz, 1976; Saez, 2002).

The prototypical result in this literature is that differential commodity taxation will tend to be superfluous

whenever heterogeneity in consumption bundles across earnings groups is entirely attributable to the causal

effect of earnings. In this polar case, commodity taxes distort labor supply as much as income taxes, while
   1 Our perspective therefore differs from Albouy (2012) and Fajgelbaum and Gaubert (2020), who derive optimal spatial

transfers when the types of all households are observed by the planner.



                                                          3
also distorting consumption choices, thereby generating excess efficiency costs.

   However, place-based taxation differs from traditional commodity taxation problems in several respects.

First, locational choice may directly affect the wage faced by households, as productivity varies across space.

Second, while commodity taxes are typically constrained to be linear to prevent tax avoidance via resale,

place-based taxes can be nonlinear, as place of residence is a discrete choice that is typically straightforward

for governments to verify (Moretti and Wilson, 2019). Third, location choice affects the price of other

goods in the consumption basket, specifically housing, the rental price of which covaries strongly with

productivity. Finally, there are good reasons to believe that poor households locate in poor places for

reasons other than that they are poor. Indeed, microeconometric models designed explicitly to recover

income effects in the demand for neighborhood quality typically cannot explain empirical sorting patterns

without allowing locational tastes to covary with earnings ability (e.g., Epple and Sieg, 1999; Epple et al.,

2020). Other modern empirical approaches to locational choice attribute the segregation of income groups

to taste heterogeneity (Bayer et al., 2007), mobility costs (Kennan and Walker, 2011; Bayer et al., 2016;

Fu and Gregory, 2019), comparative advantage (Dahl, 2002; Baum-Snow and Pavan, 2011; De La Roca and

Puga, 2017) or combinations of these factors (Bayer et al., 2014; Diamond, 2016) ­ possibilities that are all

encompassed by our framework.

   To determine whether PBR improves on optimally chosen income taxes in this modeling environment,

we compare PBR to the income tax reform that yields the same equity gains across pre-tax earnings levels

as a small lump-sum transfer to Distressed. The income tax reform can induce some households to move

and can also affect the labor supply of households that do not change location. We show that the efficiency

costs of redistributing across earnings levels via income taxation can exceed those generated by PBR when

migration responses are small compared to income-tax-induced labor supply distortions. Furthermore, even

when the income tax reform entails lower efficiency costs than PBR, the optimal transfer to Distressed may

still be positive if the planner has a motive to transfer from residents of Elsewhere to residents of Distressed

who have the same earnings. In this case, PBR is desirable because it yields unique equity benefits that

income-based tools cannot achieve.

   Extending the latter argument, we discuss several reasons why a planner might favor spatial redistribution

among households with identical earnings. One is that a dollar spent on residents of Distressed goes

further due to the lower cost of living there, an idea we show can be formalized with standard preference



                                                       4
specifications. A second motive for within-income group redistribution arises when amenities and consumption

are q-substitutes, in which case the residents of Distressed will tend to exhibit higher marginal utilities of

consumption than residents of Elsewhere with the same earnings. For example, disamenities like crime and

pollution can raise the marginal utility of consumption goods that help families avoid crime or treat asthma.

Finally, place-based policies are sometimes motivated on non-utilitarian grounds, such as to redress past

injustices, concerns which can be formalized with generalized social welfare weights (Saez and Stantcheva,

2016).

   Whether PBR in fact yields unique equity benefits depends ultimately on the nature of social preferences

regarding spatial redistribution. To advance the measurement of such preferences, we conducted a survey on

Amazon's Mechanical Turk platform. The survey asks respondents to choose between three equally costly

policies offering tax credits to poor households: a transfer to all poor households, a transfer targeted to

poor households living in "distressed" areas, and a transfer targeted to poor households living in "thriving"

areas. Remarkably, we find that about half the respondents support targeting tax relief to poor households

in distressed locations. Our findings suggest social motives exist not only for redistribution across earnings

levels, but also within earnings levels across space.

   We conclude our analysis with a detailed quantitative calibration, investigating the potential magnitude

and direction of optimal place-based transfers. To avoid stacking the deck in favor of PBR, we consider

a conventional utilitarian planning problem exhibiting no motives for spatial redistribution within earnings

levels. Hence, our analysis effectively studies the potential of PBR to reduce the efficiency costs of redistributing

across earnings levels.    Household preferences are chosen to exhibit isoelastic labor supply, additively

separable valuations of locational amenities, and extreme value taste shocks. We calibrate the model to

match Census data on rents and income distributions across groups of U.S. census tracts classified according

to their poverty rates. Spatial productivity differences are calibrated according to the estimates of Hornbeck

and Moretti (2019).

   Using the calibrated model, we solve numerically for the optimal place-blind income tax as well as the

optimal lump-sum transfer to residents of the poorest 1% of U.S. Census tracts. We find that the optimal per

capita transfer to these tracts, when the optimal place-blind income tax system is also implemented, ranges

between $3,000 and $6,000 depending on the specification. In our baseline calibration, sorting is driven

by heterogeneous preferences for locational amenities and the optimal transfer is approximately $5,500 per



                                                         5
resident. The optimal place-based transfer falls somewhat when the wage-migration elasticity is quadrupled,

when productivity differences are doubled, or when the planner is constrained to finance the place-based

transfer through increases in the top tax rate only. When, as in U.S. Empowerment Zones, the transfer is

restricted to take the form of a capped subsidy to earnings, the optimal subsidy rate ranges from 24% to

39%, depending on the parameter values used. Finally, we show that introducing additional sorting motives

into the model by allowing plausible complementarities between worker skill and locational productivity or

income effects in housing consumption leads to an optimal subsidy that lies between $3,100 and $4,200. We

also find that PBR continues to complement an optimal income tax when comparative advantage and income

effects are the only motives for sorting (i.e., when skill-taste correlation is eliminated).

    While our calibration results are only suggestive, they concur strongly with the theoretical message

of our paper that PBR may serve as a useful complement to place-blind taxation when income groups are

geographically segregated by easing the efficiency costs of redistributing across household earnings levels. The

benefits of PBR are arguably even greater if, as our survey suggests, society also favors spatial redistribution

within earnings levels. The urban economist's mantra warrants revision: there is good reason to consider

helping poor people and poor places.


2     Motivating Facts

To set the stage for a theoretical analysis, we begin by briefly highlighting some simple stylized facts regarding

the uneven spatial distribution of economic outcomes in the United States. The key motivation underlying

place-based redistribution is that disadvantage is spatially concentrated. Consider U.S. Census tracts, which

are spatially contiguous land areas with typically between 2,500 and 8,000 people. A number of prominent

place-based policies have been defined in terms of Census tracts including Empowerment Zones and most

recently Opportunity Zones. The tendency of poor households to cluster into particular Census tracts has

been extensively documented (Jargowsky, 1997; Reardon and Bischoff, 2011; Reardon et al., 2018). For

example, according to pooled estimates from the 2013-2017 waves of the American Community Survey,

Census tracts in the top centile of poverty rates have an average poverty rate of 65%, despite a national

poverty rate over this period of only 15%.

    Figure 1a illustrates the spatial concentration of poverty in Chicago, Illinois ­ America's third largest

city. Darker areas indicate higher poverty tracts in the 2013-2017 ACS. Tracts on the West Side and on


                                                        6
                               FIGURE 1: Poverty Is Spatially Concentrated



              A. Poverty Rates by Chicago Census Tract                                   B. Poverty Rates by Mid-Atlantic County
                                                                       23 - 65
                                                                       18 - 23
                                                                       15 - 18
                                                                       13 - 15
                                                                       10 - 13
                                                                       2 - 10




              35 - 74
              25 - 35
              15 - 25
              10 - 15
              1 - 10




    C. Rates of Paying Negative Income Taxes by Chicago ZIP Code                 D. Rates of Paying Negative Income Taxes by Mid-Atlantic
                                                                                                          County
                                                                       25 - 52
                                                                       20 - 25
                                                                       16 - 20
                                                                       14 - 16
                                                                       11 - 14
                                                                       0 - 11




             35 - 55
             25 - 35
             15 - 25
             10 - 15
             1 - 10




Notes : Panels A and B use the 2013-2017 American Community Survey to plot the share of households
below the poverty line, for each Census tract in the city of Chicago and for each county in the Mid-Atlantic
region. Panels C and D use 2016 Internal Revenue Service ZIP-level aggregates to plot the share of tax filers
receiving a net transfer from the federal income tax due to the refundable Earned Income Tax Credit, for
each Chicago ZIP code and for Mid-Atlantic county.




                                                                   7
the South Side have poverty rates exceeding 50%, while tracts in and around the Gold Coast neighborhood

in the northeast of the city have near-zero poverty rates. Clearly, place-based redistribution from the Gold

Coast to the West and South Sides has the potential to yield equity gains. In fact, Chicago's Empowerment

Zone comprises a contiguous section of the West Side and a separate contiguous section of the South Side.

   Similar patterns exist at the regional level. Figure 2b shows county-level poverty rates in Mid-Atlantic

states. Poverty is heavily clustered in the rural Appalachian Mountain area of Eastern Kentucky, with rates

comparable to those found in Chicago's West and South Sides. Place-based redistribution to residents of

these heavily impoverished Eastern Kentucky counties has the potential to yield equity gains. Three of these

counties compose the Kentucky Highlands Empowerment Zone.

   Of course, place-blind transfers based on household income also redistribute to residents of poor areas.

Figure 1c uses a ZIP-code map of Chicago to plot the share of tax filing units paying negative federal income

taxes due to the Earned Income Tax Credit. Half of tax filers in parts of the West and South Sides have

negative income tax bills. Similar rates of negative income tax filing are present in the Appalachian region,

as shown in Figure 1d. Whether or not place-based transfers can usefully complement these place-blind

transfers hinges in particular on their relative efficiency costs, as we examine in detail in the next section.

   While both place-based and income-based redistribution can generate equity gains across earnings groups,

place-based redistribution may additionally yield spatial equity gains. To the extent that society values

redistribution from households in low-poverty areas to households with the same earnings levels that reside in

high-poverty areas, place-based policies provide a targeting advantage over income-based transfers. Motives

for within-earnings-group redistribution can stem from several sources. One channel is that disamenities

in high-poverty areas can raise the marginal utility of consumption of neighborhood residents. Potentially

relevant examples include local crime risks raising the value of car rides home and local pollution levels

raising the value of asthma medication.

   The next set of figures illustrates that high-poverty areas tend to also be high-disamenity areas, suggesting

in turn that the marginal utility of consumption may be elevated there. Specifically, Figure 2a uses the precise

geographic coordinates of crimes committed in America's five largest cities ­ New York City, Los Angeles,

Chicago, Houston, and Philadelphia ­ to plot violent crime rates versus tract poverty rate. The figure

shows that violent crimes are five times more prevalent per capita in the highest-poverty tracts than in

the lowest poverty tracts. Figure 2b further illustrates this fact using a map of murder rates in Chicago.



                                                       8
    FIGURE 2: High-Poverty Areas Have Disamenities and Histories of Discrimination

                                                                                                                                                                          B. Murder Rate by Chicago Census Tract
                                                   A. High-Poverty Tracts Have Higher Crime Rates
                                    25
     Annual violent crimes per 1K residents

                                      20
        in America's five largest cities
             10          15




                                                                                                                                                                           48 - 177
                                    5




                                                                                                                                                                           24 - 48
                                                                                                                                                                           11 - 24
                                                                                                                                                                           4 - 11
                                                   0        10         20             30        40    50                                                                   2-4
                                                                            Poverty rate                                                                                   0-2




                                                   C. High-Poverty Tracts Have Higher Air Pollution                                                                        D. High-Poverty Tracts Were Redlined



                                                                                                                                                                 50
                                            11.2




                                                                                                                     Share designated a hazardous neighborhood
                                                                                                                       for mortgage lending in 1935 ('redlined')
     particulate pollution per cubic meter)
     Air pollution (micrograms of ambient




                                                                                                                                                        40
                                  11




                                                                                                                                          30
          10.6        10.8




                                                                                                                               20
                                    10.4




                                                                                                                    10




                                                   0         10        20                  30    40        50                                                         0       10      20       30         40       50   60
                                                                            Poverty rate                                                                                                   Poverty rate




Notes : Panel A uses publicly released lattitudes and longitudes of every crime committeed in America's five
largest cities ­ New York City (2006-2019), Los Angeles (2012-2016), Chicago (2001-2019), Houston (2011,
2013, 2015, and 2018), and Philadelphia (2006-2019) ­ and tract populations from the 2013-2017 American
Community Survey to plot annual violent crimes per 1,000 residents in ventiles of tracts ranked by 2013-2017
ACS poverty rate. Panel B uses the Chicago data from Panel A to plot annual murders per 100,000 residents.
Panel C uses satellite data on ambient air pollution (Fowlie et al. 2019) to plot mean pollution by ventile of
tracts ranked by 2013-2017 ACS poverty rate. Panel D plots the share of tracts in 239 American cities that
were redlined by ventile of tracts ranked by 2013-2017 ACS poverty rate. We define a tract as having been
redlined if and only if over half of its land area was labeled as "hazardous" (and therefore colored in red)
for mortgage risk in the 1935 Home Owners' Loan Corporation maps digitized by Nelson et al.'s (2020); see
the text for more detail.




                                                                                                                9
Figure 2c repeats Figure 2a for the outcome of air pollution, as measured from satellite data for the entire

United States (Fowlie et al., 2019). The figure shows that high-poverty tracts have substantially elevated air

pollution levels relative to low-poverty tracts, a pattern that has persisted for decades (Colmer et al., 2020).

    A desire to right place-based wrongs or other identifiable causes of hardship can also raise the marginal

social value of redistribution to high-poverty areas. A prominent example is redlining, the now-prohibited

practice of using borrower race or neighborhood racial composition in mortgage lending decisions.2 Concern

over the legacy of redlining and potential ongoing housing discrimination has served as the impetus for a

host of local and federal efforts to increase investment in predominantly minority neighborhoods (Ross and

Tootell, 2004; Squires, 2011). Figure 2d plots the share of urban tracts in which at least half of the tract's

land area was redlined by the 1935 Home Owners' Loan Corporation using digitized maps from Nelson et al.

(2020). Today's high-poverty tracts are ten times as likely to have been redlined in the 1930s as today's

low-poverty tracts.


3     A Model of Place-Based Redistribution

Against this backdrop, we characterize in this section the fundamental equity-efficiency trade-off posed by

place-based redistribution. Redistributing to places where lower income households are segregated enhances

equity. The cost of PBR comes from migration responses to the policy, as spatial subsidies lead some

households to move to areas where they are less productive. Optimal PBR schemes balance the equity

advantages of redistributing between areas with the efficiency costs of doing so.

    To connect with traditional results on income taxation, we model PBR schemes as transferring income

directly to households. In practice, place-based policies often channel spatial transfers through capital or

wage subsidies to businesses (Slattery and Zidar, 2020) or through federal transfers to local governments

(Oates, 1999). To the extent that the incidence of such policies falls on households, the guiding principles we

derive here will hold. An additional goal of business tax incentives can be to correct market imperfections, for

example by exploiting agglomeration economies (Kline and Moretti, 2014a; Fajgelbaum and Gaubert, 2020;

Bartik, 2020); likewise, grants to local governments can be designed to correct fiscal externalities (Flatters

et al., 1974; Albouy, 2012). We leave to future work the task of integrating such Pigouvian corrections with
   2 The name derives from 239 city maps commissioned in 1935 by the federally sponsored Home Owners' Loan Corporation.

The maps used red shading to delineate areas deemed "hazardous" for mortgage lending, often with explicit reference to the
racial makeup of the neighborhood (Jackson, 1987). The federal government banned redlining via the 1968 Fair Housing Act,
but concerns regarding unequal treatment persist (e.g., Avenancio-Le´
                                                                    on and Howard, 2019).



                                                           10
the redistributive motives we study here into a common theoretical framework.


3.1    Preliminaries

Household preferences We consider an economy where a unit mass of households, who may differ in

their skill level, choose to live in one of two communities, 1 ("Distressed") or 0 ("Elsewhere"). Households

are characterized by a three-dimensional type  = (, 0 , 1 ). The parameter  indexes the household's skill,

while (0 , 1 ) are idiosyncratic preference (or cost) shocks for living in location j  {0, 1}. These types are

distributed according to a continuous three-dimensional cdf F : R3  [0, 1].

   Households have preferences over the consumption of a homogeneous traded good c and local housing h,

over the level of amenities a of their community of residence, as well as over labor supply . Their preferences

are captured by a concave utility function U, with Uc > 0, Uh > 0, Ua > 0, and U < 0. The price of the

traded good is common in both locations and taken as the numeraire. Locations may differ in three ways:

their level of amenities aj , their rental cost of housing rj , and their productivity, as reflected in local wage

rates. Specifically, each location j has a wage schedule wj : R  R+ that is an increasing function of
                                                                                                            z
household skill. A household of type  that resides in location j must therefore supply                =   wj ( )   units of

labor to generate pre-tax earnings z . This formulation allows for some skill levels to possess a comparative

advantage in producing in a given location.

   We impose the restriction that each household's preference shock j for living in location j impacts their

utility additively, so that the utility of a household of type  living in location j can be written:3

                                                                       z
                                         uj () = U      c, h, aj ,           + j .                                     (1)
                                                                     wj ()

Households choose where to live by maximizing (1) subject to the following budget constraint:


                                                c + rj h = z - Tj (z ) ,


where Tj (z ) is the tax schedule, which may depend on place and income. Consequently, the indirect utility

for a type  household of residing in location j is:

                                                                                  z
                              vj () = max U       z - Tj (z ) - rj h, h, aj ,           + j .
                                         z,h                                    wj ()
   3 We discuss more general formulations in the Appendix, including non-additive preference shocks, as well as shocks on

city-specific wage rates, and show how our results extend to these cases.




                                                           11
Realized indirect utility is therefore v () = max {v1 () , v0 ()}.


Household behavior        Let the symbol j  () = arg max {v1 () , v0 ()} denote the choice of location

made by a household of type . For every choice variable x  {c, h, z, v } we use xj () to denote the

value of x that would be chosen by a household of type  if forced to reside in location j , while x () =

j  () x                   
       1 () + [1 - j ()] x0 () gives the value of x actually chosen by such a household. To economize

on integral notation, we introduce the expectations operator E [x (·)] =     x () dF (). The corresponding
                                                                        :y  ()=y
                                                                                   x ()dF ()
conditional expectations operator is defined E [x (·) |y  (·) = y ] =                dF ()
                                                                                               . In what follows, we
                                                                          :y  ()=y


suppress the (·) notation when it is unambiguous to do so.

   A key feature of our setup is that locational choice may exert a causal effect on household earnings.
                                                    
A type- household's optimal earnings in Distressed z1 () may differ from its optimal earnings level in
           
Elsewhere z0 () for three reasons. First, the household's wage wj () may vary across locations. Second,

the household's marginal utility of leisure is potentially shaped by the quality of local amenities (aj ), which

may differ across locations. High quality amenities and entertainment options may encourage more leisure

time; on the other hand, low amenity locations may depress hours of work if they lead to poor health, for

instance. A third reason why earnings may differ across places for the same household is through income

effects on labor supply: higher cost of living locations should induce longer working hours, all else equal.

   The empirical literature has established that earnings do adjust when workers move between cities

(Glaeser and Mare, 2001; Baum-Snow and Pavan, 2011; Dauth et al., 2018). A typical finding is that

earnings fall when moving to smaller, less dense, metropolitan areas, which suggests employing assumptions
               h    h
that generate z1 < z0 . When thinking about place-based redistribution between residential neighborhoods of

a given city that provide the same access to jobs, however, it might be reasonable to instead invoke primitives
            h    h                                                                           h   h
that yield z1 = z0 . To fix ideas, we frame the discussion below focusing on the case where z1  z0 for all

households, but the formulas we derive apply more generally.


Planner's preferences A planner evaluates allocations subject to the welfare function:


                                  SW F =       () v  () dF () = E [v  ] ,                                        (2)


where  () gives the Pareto weight assigned to a household of type . These weights capture any additional

preference for redistribution across types  the planner may have beyond that driven by concavity in utility.


                                                       12
The planner can redistribute using two instruments: a place-blind income tax schedule T : R0  R, as well

as a place-based transfer indexed by . Letting S denote the share of households who live in Distressed

under a place-blind tax regime, we consider a very simple PBR scheme in which the 1 - S households in
                                                                                                                
Elsewhere face a lump-sum tax     1-S   while the S households in Distressed receive a lump sum subsidy         S.

The place-based tax faced by a household of type  is:

                                                 S - j  (, )
                                                              ,                                                 (3)
                                                   S (1 - S )

where we have indexed the function j  by  in order to highlight the potential influence of the PBR scheme
                                                                                   S -j
on location choices. Overall, the tax schedule is therefore Tj (z ) = T (z ) +   S (1-S ) .   Formally, the planner

faces the budget constraint:
                                                        S - j
                                        E T (z  ) +               = R,
                                                       S (1 - S )

where R is an exogenous revenue requirement faced by the government. The amount E [T (z  )] is the net
                                                                  
                                                          -j
fiscal revenue of the place-blind income tax, while E  SS
                                                        (1-S ) is the net fiscal revenue generated by the

PBR scheme.

   Letting  denote the Lagrange multiplier on the government budget constraint, transferring a dollar to
                                                            
a household of type  leads to a welfare gain of  () vI
                                                     ()
                                                        (where I is unearned income) at a cost of .

We define
                                                               

                                                  () vI
                                                      ()
                                             ()                                                                 (4)
                                                    

as the social marginal welfare weight assigned to a household of type  by the planner at the initial

equilibrium we are considering. This weight measures the dollar value (in terms of public funds) of increasing

the consumption of a type  household by $1. Note that the social marginal welfare weight  is, in general,

a function of the whole vector of household characteristics , not just household skill . Even when the

Pareto weights  only depend on , locational preferences may shape marginal utility of income because

location choice impacts earnings choice, cost of living, and amenities.


3.2    Welfare consequences of place-based redistribution

Consider an economy with a place-blind income tax T (·). Can adding a place-based redistribution scheme to

this place-blind redistribution system improve welfare in this economy? To answer this question, we study

the desirability of the simple PBR scheme defined in (3) and compute the welfare effect of an infinitesimal

                                                       13
place-dependent tax reform of this nature. Despite its simplicity, this case is rich enough to highlight the

key tradeoffs that characterize place-based redistribution. Of course, if redistribution that takes this simple

form is desirable, then further efficiency gains can be achieved by fully indexing the income tax schedule to

place. To simplify exposition, we make from now on the assumption that the optimal earnings function z 
                                         dz 
exhibits no income effects (i.e., that    dI   = 0), as this complication yields few insights in itself. The case of

income effects on labor supply is fully covered in the Appendix.
                                                                                                                 dW
   We decompose the total welfare effect of the tax reform into two effects: a direct impact on welfare          d

                                                                                                       dB
and the corresponding fiscal cost of the reform attributable to behavioral household responses         d .   Because
                                                                          dSW F       dW       dB
the tax reform we consider is ex-ante budget neutral, we can write         d      =   d    +   d .



Welfare impact Implementing the PBR reform (3) generates a net transfer of utility from residents of

Elsewhere to those of Distressed, measured by:

                                   dW                 j   1 - j        ¯1 - ¯0,
                                      = E               -             =                                          (5)
                                   d                  S   1-S

where ¯ j = E [ |j  = j ] is the average social marginal welfare weight of households located in community

j . The expression in (5) is the equity gain from the transfer. PBR generates an equity gain so long as the

average social marginal welfare weight of Distressed inhabitants is higher than that of residents of Elsewhere.

When the weights depend only on pre-tax earnings, a sufficient condition for ¯1 > ¯ 0 is that the earnings

distribution in Elsewhere first-order stochastically dominates that of Distressed (Atkinson, 1970).

   Two caveats are in order here. First, we have assumed so far that rents are not affected by the reform.

Endogenizing rents would strengthen the case for PBR if housing supply in Elsewhere is less elastic than

in Distressed. On the other hand, some of the equity gains associated with PBR could be capitalized into

rents if Distressed has highly inelastic housing supply. These channels are explored more rigorously in the

Appendix. Second, recall that we do not account in this model for any localized externalities that PBR may

exacerbate or help internalize. Fajgelbaum and Gaubert (2020), who, in contrast, focus on these market

failures as a rationale for place-based taxation, find that it is optimal to subsidize low wage areas and tax

high wage areas that are too congested. In this case, the equity and efficiency motives for PBR arguably go

in the same direction.




                                                           14
Efficiency cost The equity gain of a PBR reform must be weighed against its corresponding efficiency

loss, as this tax reform comes at a fiscal cost. Although the tax reform is ex ante budget neutral, there

are two types of behavioral responses to the PBR reform that may generate fiscal externalities. First, some

households change their location. These moves do not mechanically generate a first order fiscal externality

when starting from a place-blind economy ( = 0). However, workers who move may change their earnings,

which does generate a first order fiscal effect. Second, households who do not move may adjust their labor

earnings in response to the tax reform. Since PBR taxes are lump-sum from the perspective of households

who do not move, this second effect is ruled out by our maintained assumption that labor supply fails to

exhibit income effects.

    To compute the impact of movers on social welfare, we define the share of households with skill-level 

who live in Distressed when the transfer is of size  as:

                                                (0 ,1 )R2
                                                            j  (, 0 , 1 , ) dF (, 0 , 1 )
                                 S (, ) =                                                   .                             (6)
                                                        (0 ,1 )R2
                                                                    dF (, 0 , 1 )

                                                                    dS (,0)
At each skill level , the number of movers to Distressed,             d        0, depends on the density of households

initially indifferent between the two locations, and therefore on the distribution of their idiosyncratic shocks.

However, since preference shocks are additively separable, movers to Distressed change earnings in a way
                                                                                               
that depends only on their skill , not on locational preference heterogeneity ­ i.e., zj () = zj ().4 Hence,

the overall fiscal cost of movers is:

                                         dB          dS (·, 0)                
                                            =E                 [T (z1 ) - T (z0 )] .                                      (7)
                                         d             d

                                                                                                              dS (·,0)
The fiscal cost of movers depends on the density of movers in response to the tax change E                      d        0 ,
                                                                                          
which may vary by skill level, and on the tax revenue losses of each mover (T (z1 ) - T (z0 ) < 0), which are

driven by either the productivity gap or difference in labor supply behavior between the two locations.


Equity-Efficiency Tradeoff The following result summarizes the equity-efficiency tradeoff in place-based

redistribution:5
   4 We consider in the Appendix the more general case where preference shocks are not additively separable. Results analogous

to the ones we derive here are shown to hold at the expense of substantially more cumbersome notation.
   5 The SW F is expressed here in dollar value.




                                                              15
Lemma. The first order effect on welfare of a small PBR reform starting from a place-blind system is:

                                 dSW F  ¯1 - ¯0 + E          dS (·, 0)                
                                       =                               [T (z1 ) - T (z0 )] .                                     (8)
                                  d                            d

   It is clear from this expression that PBR to a location where disadvantaged households sort is unambiguously

welfare improving when the last term is zero rather than negative. This condition is verified in three
                                                                                                                       dS (,0)
specific cases: first, if there are no marginal households indifferent between locations, we have                        d        =
                                                                                         
0; second, if earnings do not differ across locations for households, then T (z1 ) - T (z0 ) = 0; third, if

movers are a selected sample of households for whom there is no earnings differences across locations then
dS (,0)                  
  d       [T (z1 ) - T (z0 )] = 0. Hence, PBR is more likely to be beneficial when mobility responses are low,

productivity differences between locations are limited, or mobility responses are dominated by households for

which earnings differences across space are small. To illustrate these ideas, we briefly discuss three stylized

examples encompassed by our modeling framework that capture situations in which PBR fails to generate

any fiscal costs.


Example 1 (Neighborhood Zones). Many place-based policies subsidize particular neighborhoods. Consider

a city in which workers live in one of two residential neighborhoods (Elsewhere or Distressed). All households

work in the same business district, to which they may commute from either residential neighborhood at equal

time cost  . In this model, so long as amenities and housing prices have no independent effect on labor supply,

location of residence does not impact job productivity or earnings.6 In this case, a within-city PBR scheme

that subsidizes Distressed entails no fiscal cost: movers who change neighborhoods in response to the subsidy

do not lose productivity or adjust their earnings.


Example 2 (Mobility costs). Mobility costs are an important determinant of household migration decisions

(Sjaastad, 1962; Kennan and Walker, 2010, 2011; Bayer et al., 2016) that can lead to a dampening of the

efficiency costs of PBR. To illustrate this point, suppose households inelastically demand a single unit of
                                                                                                              +1
                                                                                              1       z
housing and have quasi-linear preferences taking the form uj () = c + aj -                    +1    wj ( )         + j , where

j  0 now captures a pecuniary moving cost rather than an idiosyncratic taste. Each household must pay

$M to locate in a community other than the one in which it is "born," so that either (1 = -M, 0 = 0) or

(1 = 0, 0 = -M ) . To fix ideas, assume that a0 - r0 = a1 - r1 +1000, so that each household is willing to pay
                                                                                                              +1
  6 This                                                                                    1       z
           invariance of earnings choices to location arises for instance when U = g c -    +1   (1- )w( )
                                                                                                                   + u (h, a)    for
some g weakly concave.


                                                             16
$1,000 to avoid living in Distressed. When M > 1, 000, every household born in Distressed will stay there,

while every household born Elsewhere will strictly prefer to reside in Elsewhere. Hence, a small subsidy to

Distressed will yield no migration response and therefore no fiscal cost.


Example 3 (Comparative advantage). The technically demanding jobs at which skilled workers excel are

increasingly spatially concentrated (Moretti, 2012; Autor, 2019). Consider a model with two skill levels

 >  and bounded idiosyncratic taste shocks (1 , 0 ). Suppose Elsewhere has only low skill jobs while

Distressed has high and low skill jobs. We formalize this idea with the following assumption on community

wages: w0  > w0 () = w1 () = w1  . For sufficiently large values of the ratio w0  /w0 (), no type
¯ households will choose to locate in Distressed. If Distressed is subsidized, only type  households will


migrate in response to the PBR scheme 3. When preferences are such that earnings depend only on wages

(see Example 1), this type  migration entails no earnings losses.


3.3        Optimal PBR

Equation (8) gave conditions under which a place-blind tax system can be improved upon by introducing

a small place-based transfer. We now derive some results characterizing the magnitude of an optimal PBR

scheme. Starting from an optimal  , a small place-based reform will have no first order effect on welfare.

Relative to the expression in (7), an additional first order fiscal externality arises in this analysis due to

starting at an optimal  = 0. Movers from Elsewhere to Distressed generate a fiscal loss per capita of
   
S (1-S )   as they go from being net contributors to becoming net beneficiaries of the PBR scheme. Equating
dSW F
 d       ( ) to zero leads to the following formula for the optimal place-based transfer  .


Proposition 1. The optimal place-based transfer  obeys:

                                 ¯ 1 ( ) - ¯ 0 ( ) + E       dS (·, )                  
                                                                d       [T (z1 ) - T (z0 )] .
                             
                            =
                                             dS (·, )
                                         E      d       / [S ( ) (1 - S ( ))]

    The size of the optimal transfer is increasing in the degree of inequality between Elsewhere and Distressed,

as measured by the difference ¯ 1 ( ) - ¯ 0 ( ) in the average social marginal welfare weight of their

inhabitants evaluated at the optimal value of the transfer. All else equal, the optimal transfer is larger if the

two communities are of roughly similar size, if mobility is low, or if the earnings responses to migration are

small.



                                                        17
     A limitation of the above formula is that all of the quantities are evaluated at the optimal transfer level

 . A non-recursive representation of the optimal transfer level can be had by linearizing                         dSW F
                                                                                                                   d        ( ) around

the point  = 0. This approximation yields the following expression:

       dSW F
             ( )   ¯ 1 (0) - ¯ 0 (0) + E dS (·, 0) [T (z  ) - T (z  )]
                                                         1        0
        d                                     d
                                                       2
                 + 
                           d ¯
                               1 (0) -  ¯ 0 (0) + E d S (·, 0) (T (z  ) - T (z  )) -     1      dS
                                                                                                                                   .
                                                            2          1      0
                          d                              d                           S (1 - S ) d

Relative to (8), starting at a point  = 0 leads to additional distortions that are summarized in the second

line of this expression. First, the more households move to Distressed, the lower the remaining equity motive,

as captured by        d    ¯ 1 (0) - 
                                     ¯ 0 (0) . Second, the fiscal externality of movers will be convex in the transfer
                     d

                   d2 S  (.,0)
size whenever         d2         > 0, i.e., when mobility accelerates with . Finally, the last term captures the direct

fiscal externality of movers, who change from being contributors to being beneficiaries of PBR. Manipulating

the above expression further leads to the following non-recursive expression for the optimal PBR scheme.

                                                         2 
                                     ()
Corollary 1. Let  () =               I       =1
                                                 ()       v ()
                                                          I 2    and ¯ j = E [ (·) |j  = j ], both evaluated at  = 0. Then

the optimal place-based transfer  obeys:

                                                ¯ 1 (0) - ¯ 0 (0) + E   dS (·,0)                  
                                                                          d        [T (z1 ) - T (z0 )]
  
                                                                                                                                                ,
            1      dS             dS (.,0)                                     ¯ 1 (0) + ¯ 0 (0) - E          d2 S (·,0)         ) - T (z  )]
        S (1-S )   d    -C          d , (1   - S ) 1 (·, 0) + S0 (·, 0)      -                                  d2         [T (z1        0


where for two optimized variables x and y  , C (x , y  )  E [x (·) y  (·)]-E [x (·)] E [y  (·)] denotes covariance.


     The first term in the denominator captures the impact of the transfer on movers. Each additional
                                                                                                    1
dollar of the place-based transfer mechanically yields a windfall gain of                       S (1-S )   to movers. As discussed
                   dS
above, when        d    is large, there are many movers, which raises the fiscal cost of PBR. The covariance
          dS (.,0)
term C      d , (1      - S ) 1 (·, 0) + S0 (·, 0) captures whether movers have above average marginal utilities of

consumption, in which case transfers are more effective at raising the welfare of movers. The second term in

the denominator, - ¯ 1 (0) + ¯ 0 (0) , measures the concavity of household utility and must be non-negative.

When this term is large, the marginal utility of income is capable of being equalized across locations with

small transfers. The final term captures the acceleration of efficiency costs due to migration, as discussed

above, which limits the optimal size of the transfer.




                                                                  18
4      When Can PBR Complement an Optimal Place-Blind Tax?

We have established conditions under which using place as a "tag" for redistribution can lead to welfare

gains. It remains to be shown that these conditions can be satisfied when place-blind taxes are chosen

optimally. To shed light on this more stringent question, we now study whether expression in (8) can be

positive when T (·) has been optimally chosen.


4.1      Place-blind tax reform design

Suppose the planner has implemented an optimal place-blind income tax T (·). We aim to compare the effect
                                          ° : R0  R of the income tax schedule, where the post-reform
of a PBR reform to that of a small reform T

schedule is denoted:
                                                ~ (·) = T (·) + q T
                                                T                 ° (·) ,                                       (9)

with q      1. The place-blind tax reform is designed in such a way that the corresponding equity gains are

easily compared to those of the PBR reform (3). Given that the PBR scheme imposes a net tax proportional
     S -j  ()
to   S (1-S )   on household , it is natural to define the place-blind tax reform at earnings level z as:


                                           ° (z ) = E    S - j
                                           T                       |z  = z .
                                                        S (1 - S )

              ° (z ) is defined as the pointwise tax reform that, absent a behavioral response, has exactly the
     That is, T

same average tax effect on individuals with earnings level z as the PBR scheme (3). In particular, this tax

perturbation is ex-ante budget neutral, as is the proposed PBR scheme. Letting  (z )  E [j  |z  = z ] denote

the share of households with earnings level z residing in Distressed, the tax perturbation is simply:


                                                 ° (z ) = S -  (z ) .
                                                 T                                                             (10)
                                                          S (1 - S )

We note that in the empirically relevant case where  (·) is monotone decreasing with income, there exists

an earnings threshold z such that the tax perturbation (9) is a subsidy for z  z and a tax for z > z .


4.2      Welfare impact

                             ° (·), the direct impact of the reform on household welfare is positive for
For a small tax perturbation T
                                                                                    ° (·) is a tax. The
those households that receive a subsidy, and negative for those households for whom T
                                                                                 
                                                                           -(z )
corresponding impact on the social welfare function is       dW
                                                              dq   = -E  S
                                                                         S (1-S ) , which differs slightly from the



                                                           19
equity impact of the PBR reform in (5). In terms of equity gains, the PBR scheme compares to the income

tax perturbation as follows:

                                          dW   dW    E [C ( , j  |z  )]
                                             -     =                    ,                                       (11)
                                          d     dq      S (1 - S )

where C (x , y  |z  = z ) = E [x y  |z  = z ] - E [x |z  = z ] E [y  |z  = z ] denotes the covariance between choices

x and y  among households with optimized earnings level z . That is, whether or not a PBR scheme yields

additional equity gains relative to an income tax reform hinges on the conditional covariance in (11): PBR

yields specific equity gains if households located in Distressed tend to have higher social marginal welfare

weights than households with the same pre-tax earnings that reside in Elsewhere. The sign of this conditional

covariance term depends on the planner's preferences and on how location impacts the marginal utility of

income. Because within-income group equity considerations have received little formal attention in the

literature on place-based policies, we defer the discussion of microfoundations for such spatial equity motives

to the next section.

   The PBR scheme and the income tax reform also differ in their efficiency cost, which we now compute.

The income tax reform triggers two behavioral responses. First, the change in the tax schedule leads to

a change in potential earnings in the two locations, and hence a change in their relative utilities. As a

result, some households switch communities, leading to a change in earnings and a corresponding fiscal cost
              
T (z1 ) - T (z0 ) for households who move from Elsewhere to Distressed. Second, the change in marginal tax

rates generates earnings responses for households who do not change location through a substitution effect.

Taken together, we show in the Appendix that the fiscal cost of the income tax reform is:


                      1                            Z1-                     dS
                             E T (z  )  (z  )                       +E             
                                                                              [T (z1         
                                                                                     ) - T (z0 )] ,             (12)
                  S (1 - S )                  1 + Z1- T (z  )              dq
                                        substitution effect                  movers response
                       
                    z ()
where Z1- () =       (1- )   > 0 denotes the compensated labor earnings response to a change in the marginal

net of tax rate 1 - T (z  ).

   The net efficiency cost of the PBR scheme relative to the income tax perturbation is:

                             dB   dB        dS (·, 0) dS (·, 0)                   
                                -    =E               -            [T (z1 ) - T (z0 )]                          (13)
                             d    dq          d            dq
                                                     (z  )         Z1-
                                       - E T (z  )
                                                   S (1 - S ) 1 + Z1- T (z  )


                                                              20
    To discuss the sign of (13), we focus on the plausible setting where  (z ) < 0 for all z  R+ , so that

the probability of living in Distressed decreases with earnings.7 In this case, the last term is unambiguously

positive because the income tax reform yields an increase in the marginal tax rate at all earnings levels, which

distorts the labor supply of all infra-marginal households. In contrast, the place-based reform only affects the

behavior of marginal households indifferent between the two communities. The first term in (13) captures

the net cost of any PBR-induced moves relative to the corresponding moves induced by the tax reform. This

term is weakly negative: PBR generates more moves from Elsewhere to Distressed than does a corresponding

income tax, as PBR acts directly upon the relative attractiveness of the two locations. Because these two

terms have opposite signs, the sign of (13) is theoretically ambiguous, implying that whether PBR generates

efficiency costs larger or smaller than a corresponding income tax reform depends on the specific structure

of household preferences and technology present in the economy.8

    Overall, the welfare gain from PBR relative to a corresponding income tax reform hinges on the sign of

the following expression:

                                 dSW F   dSW F              dW   dW              dB   dB
                                       -       =               -            +       -          .                             (14)
                                  d        dq               d     dq             d    dq
                                                                equity            efficiency


Place-blind income taxation will be dominated whenever the relative equity benefits of PBR outweigh the

policy's relative efficiency costs.

    To develop intuition for how PBR can improve upon an optimal income tax, consider a world where the

equity term in (14) is zero, so that the planner only values redistribution between households with different

pre-tax earning levels. Suppose further that PBR entails no efficiency costs, as in the examples of the

previous section. Then, a sufficient condition for PBR to improve upon an optimal income tax is that there

be spatial sorting, so that PBR deliver equity gains. What follows is a simple illustrative example of this

argument.


Example 4 (Sorting based on skill-taste correlation). Suppose households have unit housing consumption
                                                                            z 
(i.e., c = z - T (z ) - rj ) and maximize utility u(c, z, j ; ) = c -            + aj () , where a1 () = 0 and a0 () > 0.
   7 Note that this assumption implies that the distribution of pre-tax earnings in Elsewhere first order stochastically dominates

the distribution in Distressed.
   8 If, in addition, there are income effects in labor supply, we show in the Appendix that under the assumptions invoked by

Saez (2002) on the distribution of these income effects in labor supply conditional on pre-tax earnings, the PBR scheme and
the income tax reforms would have the same impact on stayers. Consequently, adding income effects on labor supply to the
analysis yields limited additional insight.




                                                               21
The higher skilled value the amenities of Elsewhere more, yielding a0 () > 0. Following Kleven et al. (2009),

we introduce a preference for redistribution by having the planner maximize SW F = E [G (v  )], where G(·)

is a concave function. It is straightforward to verify that the optimal earnings choices of a type- household
                                                   
are identical in the two locations (i.e., z1 () = z0 ()) and that there exists a skill threshold above which

all workers sort to Elsewhere. PBR generates equity gains ¯1 - ¯ 0 > 0 because residents of Elsewhere have

both higher earnings and higher utility than those in Distressed. PBR yields no efficiency costs, however, as

movers do not change their earnings. We now show that these features allow PBR to generate welfare gains

even in the presence of optimal income taxes.


Proof. To compute the welfare effect of implementing a small reform to an initially optimal place-blind income

tax that delivers
                  the same equity gain as the PBR scheme above, consider the income tax perturbation
          - d if z  z
dT~(z ) =     S
                            , where z is the earnings threshold above which households choose to reside in
           d       if z > z
           1-S
Elsewhere. This reform targets exactly the same households as PBR, and, absent behavioral responses of

households, imposes the same taxes and subsidies as the PBR scheme. In contrast to PBR, however, this

reform generates a behavioral response. Specifically, households with initial income in the range [z, z + dz ]

will bunch at earnings level z to avoid this tax. The earnings reductions associated with this bunching
                                                              dBT
generate a fiscal loss for the government, which we denote     d    < 0. Given that we are considering a reform

of an optimal tax system, this reform cannot yield a first order effect on welfare, as ¯1 - ¯0 +     dBT
                                                                                                           = 0 by
                                                                                                      d

construction. Hence, PBR yields a positive first-order welfare gain ¯1 - ¯ 0 even in the presence of optimal

income taxes.


   We conclude this section by moving away from the case above where PBR yields no efficiency cost and

noting that, in general, the presence of spatial sorting is not in itself sufficient to justify PBR. For instance,

in accord with the commodity taxation logic of Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976), PBR can be dominated by

income taxation when spatial sorting is only driven by income effects, as the following example illustrates.


Example 5 (Income-based sorting). Suppose that households exhibit unit housing consumption and maximize

preferences given by
                                                                        1+
                                                                    z    
                                      uj () = aj · (c) -                     .
                                                            1+      

Because locational preferences are homogeneous (i.e., j = 0 for all households), spatial sorting is only driven

by income effects. The high  will sort into Elsewhere to benefit from higher amenities, while the low ,


                                                       22
who are more sensitive to the cost of living, will sort into Distressed. If PBR generates equity gains, it also

yields efficiency losses because movers change their earnings. We show formally in Appendix A.1.5 that these

efficiency costs lead PBR to be dominated by the income tax. The proof applies standard arguments from

Kaplow (2006) and Laroque (2005). The key features of this example that allow those results to be applied
                                                                                                           
are that labor supply is weakly separable from consumption and the sub-utility of consumption aj · (c) is

homogeneous across individuals.


5     Spatial Equity Motives

In this section we turn to exploring in more depth the factors generating possible net equity gains of PBR

over and above those that can be achieved with income taxation. The income tax generates equity gains

from redistributing across earnings levels. Depending on individual and social preferences, there can also

be equity gains from redistributing within earnings levels from Elsewhere to Distressed that the income tax

cannot achieve.

    From (5), the equity gains of PBR are proportional to the covariance C ( , j  ). We can decompose this

covariance into between-earnings and within-earnings components as follows:


                            C ( , j  ) = C (E [ |z  ] , E [j  |z  ]) + E [C ( , j  |z  )] .
                                               between earnings          within earnings


The between-earnings component is positive if Distressed has an over-representation of low-income households,

as discussed above. However, this component can also be directly targeted by income-based redistribution.

Therefore, in the presence of an optimally designed income tax, any unique equity gains of PBR must emanate

from the within-earnings term. This within-earnings term makes PBR from Elsewhere to Distressed more

desirable if and only if households residing in Distressed tend to have higher social marginal welfare weights

than their peers in Elsewhere with the same pre-tax earnings z  .

    We now discuss microfounded rationales for such conditional differences in social welfare weights. The

first rationale emphasizes the role played by cost of living differences in making PBR desirable, while the

second highlights the role played by heterogeneous amenities in making PBR desirable. To isolate these

motives, we focus on preferences that are separable in leisure and assume that preferences over amenities




                                                          23
are weakly separable from housing and consumption as follows:

                                                        z                                  z
                                    U    c, h, aj ,          =  (g (c, h) , aj ) - e             ,                            (15)
                                                      w ()                               w ()

where g = g (c, h) is a homothetic consumption goods index,  (.) is a weakly concave aggregator, and e(.)

captures disutility of labor.


5.1        A dollar goes further in Distressed

To isolate the role of cost of living differences, we temporarily ignore amenity differences by assuming that

a0 = a1 . Supposing that the planner values households with equal Pareto weights in (2), the corresponding

social marginal welfare weight of a household with earnings level z and location choice j is

                                                              1 1        z
                                                        j
                                                        z =                     ,                                             (16)
                                                               Pj        Pj

where Pj is the cost-of-living index in location j corresponding to g (·, ·). By assumption, this price index is

higher in Elsewhere than in Distressed (P0 > P1 ).

    We are interested in conditions under which, conditional on earnings z , the social marginal welfare
                                                                                                     1
weight j
       z is higher in Distressed. Two opposite effects are at play. The quantity                     Pj   is higher in Distressed,

capturing the fact that a (nominal) dollar spent by the federal government always goes further in buying

consumption in the low-price location. By contrast, among households with the same income, the term
      z
      Pj     tends to be higher in Elsewhere, as households are poorer in real terms in the high-price location.

Which effect dominates depends on the concavity of  (·). Specifically, 1   0
                                                                       z > z if and only if the mapping

x  x (x) is increasing.9 Hence, if  is not too concave, the "dollar goes further" argument motivates

redistribution towards low cost-of-living places.


5.2        Households in Distressed are worse off, conditional on income

Heterogeneous amenities may also play a role in motivating redistribution between households with the same

earnings. In general, this effect comes in addition to the cost-of-living effect above. To isolate the role of

amenities, we assume that Distressed is a low amenity area (a1 < a0 ) but we ignore cost-of-living differences,

i.e. we assume that P0 = P1 .
   9 For                                                               x1-
           CRRA utility with coefficient of risk aversion  ,  (x) =    1-
                                                                             and the condition is satisfied so long as   1.




                                                                  24
    Since social marginal welfare weights are given by:

                                                             1  g
                                                       =          ,
                                                              g z

                                                 2
it follows that 1   0
                z > z if and only if             ga     < 0, i.e. if consumption and amenities are q-substitutes.

With q-substitutability, the low level of amenities in Distressed raises the marginal utility of consumption

there, all else equal.      The assumption of q-substitutability captures well the notion that consumption

disamenities can raise the marginal utility of consumption. For example, pollution-induced asthma can

raise the marginal utility of health care expenditures. Standard CES preferences of the form U (g, aj ) =
                             
         -1       -1
                       (1- ) - 1
 1                                                1
1-    aj  + g                      , with         ,1     capture such behavior. Interestingly, empirical models of

spatial equilibrium (e.g., Moretti, 2011, 2013; Diamond, 2016; Su´
                                                                 arez Serrato and Zidar, 2016) typically

restrict preferences to obey a Cobb-Douglas functional form between amenities and consumption, which
                                          2U
rules this channel out by imposing        ga    > 0.


5.3     Equality and justice

Thus far, our discussion of spatial equity motives has followed the logic of utilitarianism, whereby policies

aim to equalize the marginal utility of consumption across households in order to maximize social welfare.

However, place-based policies are sometimes motivated by additional considerations such as concerns over

inequality in levels of well-being across space, even if levels do not correspond to marginal utilities.10 A

conceptually distinct (but often empirically overlapping) concern has to do with the righting of perceived

wrongs involving unequal treatment of places. For example, the 1992 Los Angeles riots are often cited as

a motivation for the passage of the federal legislation authorizing the U.S. Empowerment Zones in 1993

(Liebschutz, 1995; Katz, 2015), perhaps because of a sense that living conditions in distressed urban areas

were unacceptably poor or that the residents of these areas had been subjected to unfair treatment by police

and other parties. Likewise, Gulf Opportunity Zones (GOZs) were instituted in 2005 for areas devastated

by Hurricane Katrina.11 Finally, as mentioned in Section 2, many poor communities may continue to bear

the burden of unfair historical practices.

    Formally, the policy implications of a variety of redistributive motives can be explored rigorously in a
  10 Concern   over inequality in well-being levels can be accommodated by making the planner value a concave function of
indirect utilities as in Kleven et al. (2009) (see also Example 4).
  11 While the GOZs and other post-Katrina initiatives may be viewed as a means of addressing externalities involving rebuilding

(Fu and Gregory, 2019), they can also plausibly be viewed as valuing redistribution to families with low levels of utility for
reasons outside their control.



                                                              25
utilitarian framework by choosing high Pareto weights  () and thus high social marginal social welfare

weights  for households to which concerns pertain, as Saez and Stantcheva (2016) note. This approach

has not traditionally been followed by the commodity taxation literature (e.g., Atkinson and Stiglitz, 1976;

Saez, 2002), which typically assumes that social welfare weights  depend only on pre-tax earnings, thereby

avoiding utilitarian dilemmas where the planner must redistribute to high income households with expensive

tastes (Kaplow, 2008). While this stance may be reasonable for many, if not most, consumption goods, it

is our impression that place-based policies are often motivated by spatial equality and justice motives.

Unfortunately, little systematic evidence exists on such social preferences. Therefore, we now turn to

exploring this question empirically.


5.4     Social preferences

To assess social preferences for distribution within earnings groups across space, we conducted a survey on

Amazon's Mechanical Turk (MTurk) online labor market platform. MTurk has increasingly been used by

social scientists to conduct surveys that have proven concordant with the General Social Survey and other

representative national surveys (Paolacci et al., 2010; Horton et al., 2011; Weinzierl, 2014; Kuziemko et al.,

2015; Fisman et al., 2020).

   On July 9-10, 2020, we posted requests on MTurk for a cumulative total of 1,100 survey respondents

with U.S. billing addresses and positive ratings from at least 90 percent of past requestors.12 Compensation

for our ten-minute survey was $2, which exceeds the typical MTurk wage. As in Fisman et al. (2020), we

find that answers to a GSS question on redistributive preferences broadly conforms to representative survey

data. Appendix B provides additional details on the survey.

   In order to elicit relative social preferences for distribution within earnings levels across local areas,

we asked respondents two main questions about government transfers, in random order and with randomly

ordered answer choices. One question elicited within-earnings distributional preferences across neighborhoods

with the following vignette:
  12 Thirty respondents had invalid MTurk IDs or failed an attentiveness question, yielding a final analysis sample of 1,070

respondents. We surveyed 1,100 in order to ensure at least 1,000 valid attentive responses.




                                                            26
We have written a survey to try to understand how people think about the economy in relation to where people
live. There are no right or wrong answers.
Background:
Think about America's cities and towns, which are divided into neighborhoods.
To keep things simple, let's think of there being only three kinds of neighborhoods.
A few neighborhoods are "distressed" and have low housing costs but also high poverty, high crime, high pollution,
and struggling schools.
Many other neighborhoods are "thriving" and have high housing costs but also low poverty, low crime, low
pollution, and great schools.
The remaining neighborhoods have typical housing costs, poverty, pollution, schools, and economies.
Also to keep things simple, let's think of there being only two income levels: rich and poor. Rich families earn
$90,000 per year. Poor families earn $30,000 per year.
One percent of poor families live in the many thriving neighborhoods, mostly around rich families.
One percent of poor families live in the few distressed neighborhoods, in concentrated poverty.
The government uses a large tax credit to help poor families everywhere.
Question:
Let's pretend that the government has some extra money for new tax credits. It might target the tax credits based
on where people live.
The government is deciding between three equally costly options. It wants you to choose the option that
would do the most good. Which option would you choose?
(No one will work less or move as a result of your choice.)
­ A $1 tax credit for poor families everywhere
­ A $100 tax credit for poor families in the distressed neighborhoods
­ A $100 tax credit for poor families in the thriving neighborhoods


   In telling the respondent that no one will work less or move as a result their choice, we aimed to remove

efficiency considerations from their policy choice and therefore home in on social marginal welfare weight

considerations.

   A second question was identical to the above vignette, except that it elicited within-earnings distributional

preferences across regions by replacing the first background sentence with "Think about American regions

that are larger than cities but smaller than states." The distressed and thriving regions were described

similarly to the distressed and thriving neighborhoods, except that a history of job losses/growth replaced

high/low crime.

   Figure 3a displays the frequency of each response option. Interestingly, we find that about half of

respondents chose to target the benefit to poor families in distressed neighborhoods or regions (51% in the

neighborhood question and 48% in the region question). Roughly a quarter of respondents chose to distribute

the benefit equally to all poor families, irrespective of where they live (25% and 24%), while the remaining

quarter chose to distribute the benefit to poor families in the thriving neighborhoods or regions (25% and

28%). Hence, the survey evidence suggests social preferences that, on average, favor transfers to residents of


                                                         27
                     FIGURE 3: Survey Results on Distributive Preferences

                               A. Where Should the Government Direct New Tax Credits for the Poor?

                                                                   51%
                                                                              48%




                                                                                                                    28%
                        25%        24%                                                                      25%




                      A $1 tax credit for                      A $100 tax credit for                    A $100 tax credit for
                        poor familes                           poor families in the                     poor families in the
                         everywhere                             distressed areas                           thriving areas

                                               Neighborhood question                       Regional question




                     B. Why Should the Government Direct New Tax Credits to the Poor in Distressed Areas?

                          78%




                                                 44%
                                                                        39%
                                                                                              34%




                                                                                                                   3%

                      Poor families in      Poor families in      An extra dollar goes    An extra dollar    An explanation not
                       the distressed    distressed areas are         further in the      goes further in       listed above
                    area are worse off, more deserving, since distressed area, since      the distressed      (please specify)
                      since they deal they are more likely to be poor families there        area, since
                     with high poverty,       poor due to      have greater spending      housing costs
                         high crime,    circumstances beyond           needs like            and other
                       high pollution,        their control     supplementing school       services are
                    struggling schools,                          instruction, replacing       cheaper
                        and a history                               stolen goods, or
                        of job losses                            treating asthma from
                                                                     high pollution




Notes : This figure presents results from our non-representative survey of 1,100 Americans (1,070 valid
responses) on Amazon's Mechanical Turk (MTurk) online labor market platform. We told respondents to
think of three types of neighborhoods (and separately regions) ­ "distressed", "thriving", and "typical" ­
with two types of residents: rich families who earn $90,000 and poor families who earn $30,000. We then
asked them to choose the option among three equally costly potential tax credits that would do the most
good, under the assumption of no behavioral responses: $1 to every poor family everywhere, $100 to every
poor family in the distressed areas, or $100 to every poor family in thriving areas. Panel A plots the results
along with 95% confidence intervals. Panel B presents results from a follow-up question to respondents who
chose to give $100 to poor families in distressed neighborhoods as well as in distressed regions, which asked
them to select all options that explain their choice. See Online Appendix B and Online Appendix Tables
1-2 for more details and results.

                                                                          28
distressed areas conditional on earnings levels.

    To understand the motives underlying these responses, we asked each respondent to explain their distributive

choices. We focus here on the explanations provided by the respondents who chose to target the benefit to

both distressed neighborhoods and distressed regions (Appendix B provides additional results). We prompted

those respondents with the following question, the first four options of which were presented in random order:

In response to the previous questions, you chose a $100 tax credit for poor families in distressed areas. Which of
the following explains your choice? Select all that apply.
­ An extra dollar goes further in distressed areas, since rent and other services are cheaper
­ An extra dollar goes further in distressed areas, since poor families there have greater spending needs like
supplementing school instruction, replacing stolen goods, or treating asthma from high pollution
­ Poor families in distressed areas are worse off, since they deal with high poverty, high crime, high pollution,
struggling schools, and a history of job losses
­ Poor families in distressed areas are more deserving, since they are more likely to be poor due to circumstances
beyond their control
­ None of the above (please specify)


    Figure 3b displays the frequency with which each option was selected. A large majority (78%) of

respondents choosing within-earnings level transfers to distressed areas state that they do so because residents

there lack basic amenities such as public safety, school quality, and environmental health. The view that

poor households living in poor places are especially disadvantaged is notably consistent with a wide array

of highly influential qualitative research on poor neighborhoods and regions (Wilson, 1987, 2011; Anderson,

2000; Vance, 2016). That this relative disadvantage is often cited as a justification for spatial targeting is

suggestive of an aversion to extreme geographic inequality in certain local amenities.13 A near majority

(44%) of respondents cite the poverty of distressed area residents as being due to circumstances beyond

their control, a form of the justice logic of Section 5.3. Slightly fewer (39%) cite a higher marginal utility

of consumption due to local disamenities as in the q-substitutes logic of Section 5.2, and 34% cite a higher

marginal social value due to lower local prices, as in the dollar-goes-further logic of Section 5.1. Only 3%

cite none of the above. In sum, these findings suggest that many Americans favor fostering spatial equity

within earnings groups.
  13 Reconciling the normative view that Americans are entitled to certain basic amenities with the fact that many households

willingly sort to distressed neighborhoods in order to economize on rent presents a challenge for quantitative spatial equilibrium
models. One reason for favoring residents of distressed areas is that they may be "trapped" by a mix of pecuniary and non-
pecuniary moving costs (Bergman et al., 2019). These mobility costs may be captured in our framework as described in Example
2 above. Likewise, information frictions (Bergman et al., 2020; Fujiwara et al., 2020) may lead households to make suboptimal
location choices. Finally, children and some elderly and disabled individuals are dependent on the neighborhood choices of
caregivers, who may not be fully altruistic.




                                                               29
6      How Large Might Optimal Place-Based Transfers Be?

The theoretical analysis of Section 4 revealed that the ability of PBR to improve on income-based redistribution

relied on a number of behavioral and normative factors. The desirability of PBR is therefore ultimately a

quantitative question. In order to gauge what level of PBR might be optimal in the United States, we turn

now to a quantitative calibration of a locational choice model and consider a lump-sum place-based transfer

to the poorest 1% of local areas, which is roughly the population share of U.S. Empowerment Zones.14


6.1     Model primitives

In the quantification exercise, households choose one of 100 locations in which to live and work.                         To

operationalize the model, we equate each community with an amalgamation of potentially non-contiguous

Census tracts. Specifically, we rank tracts in the 2013-2017 American Community Survey (ACS) by their

poverty rate and group them into communities j  {1, ..., 100} that each have one percent of the U.S.

population.


Preferences Household preferences for living in community j take the form:
                                                                             1+
                                          1-         
                                c              h-h                    z       
                                                                                                 1
                uj () = ln                              -                           + aj () +      j .                (17)
                               1-                         1+        wj ()                        

The quantity h  0 gives a minimum subsistence level of housing services that agents require for survival.

The parameter   (0, 1) governs how many cents of each dollar of disposable income, above the minimum

necessary to purchase h, is spent on housing. The parameter  > 0 gives the Frisch labor supply elasticity.

The wage level in community j for a worker of skill type  is wj () and the mean valuation of community

j 's amenities by a household of skill type  is governed by aj (). The idiosyncratic locational preferences
      100
{j }j =1 are iid draws from a Type I Extreme Value (EV1) distribution and  > 0 is a scale parameter that

governs the migration elasticity of households to local wage levels.

    A few comments are in order here. First, we have followed the convention in urban economics of allowing

high-skilled and low-skilled households to disagree on the valuation aj () of locational amenities (Moretti,

2013; Diamond, 2016). Second, in the special case where  = 0 and h = 0, labor supply is completely

inelastic and consumption is homothetic, yielding a formulation equivalent (via a log-transformation) to
  14 A  list of the forty active U.S.     Empowerment    Zones   (thirty   urban   and   ten   rural)    is   available   at
https://www.irs.gov/instructions/i8844.



                                                        30
the preference specifications used in workhorse quantitative spatial economics models (Ahlfeldt et al., 2015;

Redding and Rossi-Hansberg, 2017). Third, restricting amenities and locational preferences to be additively

separable ensures that social marginal welfare weights do not depend directly on these factors, which are

typically only identified up to a constant (see the discussion in Appendix A.2.4). When  > 0, our preference

formulation imposes that leisure and consumption are closer substitutes than amenities and consumption.

We consider this restriction plausible given the substantial share of expenditures that are for services that

could be produced at home (Becker, 1965; Hurst, 2008; Aguiar et al., 2012).


Household budget Households maximize utility subject to the budget constraint:


                                      c + rj h = z - T (z ) + 1 {j = 1} ,


where rj denotes community j 's rental cost of housing, T (·) is a place-blind tax schedule, and  is the

subsidy to residents of the poorest community j = 1 ("Distressed").


Wages and skills Skill types  are drawn from a lognormal distribution with parameters (µ ,  ) that we

discretize into fifty equal-sized bins, each with two percent of the population. Borrowing the formulation of

spatial comparative advantage adopted in Combes et al. (2012) and De La Roca and Puga (2017), we allow

wages to depend on skill as follows

                                          ln wj () = ln Wj + bj ln ,                                    (18)

where Wj is a labor productivity shifter common to all skills in community j and bj governs the degree to

which skilled households possess a comparative advantage in community j . For calibration purposes, we

model the community specific parameters as follows:

                                                   1                                 2
                            Wj /W100 = (rj /r100 )     ,        bj /b100 = (Wj /W100 )   .


For convenience, we set rent in the lowest-poverty community (j = 100) to one, yielding the normalization

r100 = W100 = b100 = 1. In our baseline specification 2 = 0, which eliminates comparative advantage

but leaves absolute productivity differences across communities such that wages simply equal the product of
                                                 1
community productivity and skill: wj () = Wj  = rj . Hence, the parameter 1 measures the productivity

to rent elasticity.



                                                           31
Social welfare function and government budget constraint Social preferences are utilitarian (i.e.,

SW F = E [v  ]) and the planner faces an exogenous revenue requirement R:


                                                E [T (z  ) - 1 {j  = 1} ] = R.                                           (19)


For computational simplicity, we restrict the place-blind tax system T (z ) to be piecewise-linear with a

lump-sum transfer and kinks at annual earning levels of $20,000 and $80,000.


6.2       Implied sorting behavior

Because place-based redistribution is motivated by the concentration of low-income households into particular

geographic areas, it is instructive to characterize sources of skill sorting in our model. Absent taxes, the

share of skill type- workers living in community j can be written:

                                                  -             1-         (1+ )
                                           wj () rj - (1 +  ) hrj                  exp (aj ())
                             sj () =                                                               .
                                          100          -                 1- (1+ )
                                          i=1   wi () ri   - (1 +    ) hri           exp (ai ())

               log sj ( )
Note that      log wj             =  (1 +  ) (1 - sj ()). Consequently, under our homothetic baseline calibration
                            h=0

(h = 0), the migration-wage elasticity is approximately  (1 +  ) for a community with 1% of the population.

    There are three key drivers of skill sorting captured in our preference formulation. The first is skill-

taste correlation. In our baseline specification, which fixes h = 0 (no income effects in location choice) and

2 = 0 (no comparative advantage), sorting of skill types across space arises solely due to skill variation in

the community amenities aj ().15 It is also important to note that this specification avoids spatial equity

motives within earnings levels. Specifically, in the absence of income taxes, the planner's welfare weight can

be written  (j, )  (1 +  ) /zj
                             
                               . Hence, welfare weights vary across households with different earnings, but

not across households with the same earnings.16 Recall that there are two broad classes of motives for PBR:

(i) reducing the efficiency cost of redistributing between households with different pre-tax earnings levels;

and (ii) redistributing between households with the same earnings who live in different locations. Although
                                                           (1+ )
  15 To                                               Wj
          see this, note that sj ()  exp (aj ())       
                                                      rj
                                                                   , which only depends on  through the amenities term. In
particular, the city-skill premium plays no role in incentivizing high-skill households to sort into high rent communities, as
all skill types benefit proportionally from locating in high productivity (high-Wj ) communities. We have abstracted, however,
from non-linear income taxes, which can provide additional sorting incentives.
  16 Davis and Gregory (2020) consider a planner that values redistribution only between skill types  , but not across space
                                                         -1 (1+ )
within skill types. In our setup  (j, )  -(1+) rj                  where 1 is the productivity-rent gradient. Therefore, when
           
1 =  1+ , the planner values redistribution only between  types. We explored a robustness check with this alternative
calibration and find an optimal PBR that is slightly smaller but of the same order of magnitude as in our baseline.




                                                              32
our survey results suggest that (ii) may indeed be aligned with social preferences in the U.S., such motives

may remain controversial; we therefore opt in our baseline specification to evaluate the desirability of PBR

based upon (i) alone, with spatially neutral social preferences. Incorporating (ii) as an additional motive

would yield greater optimal PBR.

   A second potential driver of sorting is income effects in community choice. This phenomenon arises

when housing is modeled as a necessity (h > 0), in which case the higher cost of housing in Elsewhere

disproportionately hurts poorer households, leading the low skilled to sort into lower-rent locations. Formally,
         2 log sj ( )
since      rj           > 0, skilled households sort differentially into higher-rent communities, which can help to

rationalize the empirical fact that low income households are over represented in Distressed.

   A last potential driver of locational sorting is comparative advantage, which emerges when 2 = 0. In

the absence of income-based sorting (h = 0) and skill-taste correlation (aj () = aj ), one can show that
                                     (1+ )
                           Wj  b j                                   2 log sj ( )
sj ()  exp (aj )             
                            rj               , which implies that      bj           > 0. Hence, higher skilled households sort

into higher bj locations where their wage premium is disproportionately large.

   These three forces shape the heterogeneous location choices of households with different skill levels ,

resulting in observed sorting by income. Note, however, that when communities differ in their productivity

Wj , earnings will tend to be greater in high-Wj communities even when all communities have the same

distribution of skill types.


6.3      Baseline calibration

Our baseline calibration features a constant elasticity of labor supply, a constant wage-migration elasticity,

and constant expenditure shares, in line with quantitative specifications typically adopted in the economic

geography literature. Specifically, we set h = 0 and  = 0.3, which yields a 30% housing expenditure share

(Davis and Ortalo-Magne, 2011). We choose  = 1/2 to yield a labor supply elasticity of 1/2 (Chetty et al.,

2011). The scale parameter  is set to 1/2 to match the long run wage-migration elasticities of roughly 3/4

reported in Kennan and Walker (2011, Figure 1).

   We set the rental rate rj of each community equal to the population-weighted average of its tract-

level median rents, as reported in the ACS. As noted earlier, we normalize the rent of the lowest-poverty

community (j = 100) ­ which happens to have the highest rent ­ to one. The highest poverty community

("Distressed") has the lowest rent, which after normalization we write as r1 = 0.38. To calibrate productivity



                                                                33
differences between communities, we use the relationship between Metropolitan Statistical Area rent and

productivity in Hornbeck and Moretti (2019), which yields a productivity-to-rent elasticity (1 ) of 0.254.

Since rj  [0.38, 1], average labor productivity (Wj ) ranges from 0.78 in Distressed to one in the lowest-

poverty community. Hence, each skill type's wage is 22% lower in Distressed than it is in the lowest-poverty

community. We set 2 = 0 and explore comparative advantage in alternative calibrations, as detailed below.

    To choose the remaining parameters {µ ,  , aj ()}, we minimize the distance between the model's

predicted moments and an equivalent set of empirical moments. Specifically, these parameters are chosen to

exactly match each community's share of each of nine nationwide household earnings bins based on the ACS

tract-level aggregates. We furthermore minimize the sum of squared deviations between model predicted

and actual values of the share of the nationwide population with earnings in the bottom two ACS-based bins

(i.e., below $19,500) and the share with earnings in the top three ACS-based bins (i.e., above $88,000). The

resulting communities each have approximately 1% of the nationwide population, by construction.17
                                                                                          TABLE 1
                                                                           Parameters for the Baseline Calibration

    A. Community-Invariant Parameters
                                                                                             Value                                                             Sources
                                                                                              (1)                                                                (2)
    Housing expenditure share ( )                                                             0.3                                                    Davis-Ortalo-Magne (2011)
    Labor supply elasticity ( )                                                               0.5                                                Chetty-Guren-Manoli-Weber (2011)
    Scale ( ) governing migration elasticity                                                  0.5                                                      Kennan-Walker (2011)
    Current place-blind lump-sum transfer (T(0) )                                           11,300                                                  Piketty-Saez-Zucman (2018)
    Current marginal tax rate below $20K                                                     43.8%                                                  Piketty-Saez-Zucman (2018)
    Current marginal tax rate $20K-$80K                                                      16.1%                                                  Piketty-Saez-Zucman (2018)
    Current marginal tax rate above $80K                                                     27.1%                                                  Piketty-Saez-Zucman (2018)
    Mean of the lognormal skill dist. (  )                                                    2.73                                                 Calibrated to ACS earnings dist.
    Std. dev. of the lognormal skill dist. (  )                                               0.67                                                 Calibrated to ACS earnings dist.

    B. Community-Varying Parameters
                                                            Poorest
                                                          community      25th-poorest    50th-poorest    75th-poorest     Least-poor
                                                          (Distressed)    community       community       community       community                            Sources
                                                               (3)            (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)                                (8)
    Rent (r j )                                               0.38            0.50            0.59           0.72              1              2013-2017 American Community Survey
    Community productivity (W j )                             0.78            0.84            0.87           0.92              1                       Hornbeck-Moretti (2019)
    Community amenity level, least-skilled (aj())             2.48            0.78            0.00           -0.81           -3.06               Calibrated to ACS tract pop. shares
    Community amenity level, most-skilled (aj())             -3.77           -1.21            0.00           0.78            2.81                Calibrated to ACS tract pop. shares

    Notes - This table lists the parameters underlying our baseline numerical exercise and their sources. Our numerical exercise considers 100 communities j , each of which is a
    collection of tracts grouped into centiles by poverty rate in the 2013-2017 American Community Survey (ACS). The lognormal skill distribution is discretized into 50 skill types ( ).
    Amenity levels a j ( ) have been recentered within skill types to equal zero in the 50th-poorest community. See Online Appendix C for details.




    When solving the model for the purpose of the calibration, we assume, based on Piketty et al. (2018),

that the current income tax system is place-blind and involves a $11,300 lump-sum transfer with effective

marginal tax rate brackets of 43.8% up $20,000, 16.1% up to $80,000, and 27.1% above $80,000.18 We set
  17 Community populations deviate slightly from 1% because the nine-bin nationwide earnings distribution cannot be matched

exactly with the two-parameter lognormal skill distribution.
  18 We estimate the tax system on the 2013-2017 sample of prime-age laborers in Piketty et al.'s distributional national accounts.

Following Piketty et al.'s primary conventions, the tax system includes all taxes paid to and individualized transfers received



                                                                                           34
R in the constraint (19) equal to 10.1% of national income E [z  ] in order to hold fixed the net surplus that

we find under this tax system in the calibration.19

   Table 1 summarizes the calibrated parameters in our baseline specification, while Online Appendix Figure

1 illustrates calibrated parameters graphically. Poverty is highly skewed: the Distressed community has a

poverty rate of 59%, while the median community has a poverty rate of only 11% (Online Appendix Figure

1a). In order to generate strong sorting patterns across locations, the calibration requires strong differences

in community-skill amenity levels and in particular requires strong skill-taste correlation: the high-skilled

have a stronger taste aj () for affluent high-rent communities than for poorer lower-rent communities,

while the low-skilled have a stronger taste for poor low-rent communities than for more-affluent higher-rent

communities. See Appendix C for further calibration details.


6.4     Optimal policy

For every candidate level of  in $100 increments between -$2,000 and $8,000, we search numerically using

a Nelder-Mead algorithm for the optimal income tax and transfer system consistent with optimal household

behavior. Table 2 summarizes the equilibrium attained at the level of PBR that maximizes social welfare.

The first row corresponds to our baseline calibration. Social welfare is maximized when every resident of

Distressed receives a transfer  of $5,500. Hence, we find that substantial PBR is desirable even under

the optimally chosen income tax. Our baseline calibration has no within-earnings redistributive motive;

consequently, PBR improves social welfare by generating cross-earnings equity gains at lower efficiency cost

than corresponding income-based transfers.

   The optimal place-based transfer of $5,500 is sizable relative to the place-blind lump-sum transfer of

$22,357.20 It is also somewhat larger than the U.S. Empowerment Zone program, which provides a subsidy

of about $3,000 per eligible worker to zone firms. Absent PBR, the average social marginal welfare weight in

Distressed would be 29% higher than the average social marginal welfare weight in Elsewhere. The optimal

level of  sharply reduces this gap to 9% while modestly increasing the population of Distressed by 9% to

approximately 1.1% of the U.S. population. The approximate efficiency cost of the transfer is summarized in
from all levels of government, except for contributory social insurance (e.g., Social Security) taxes which are excluded from
pre-tax and post-tax income and their benefits which are included in pre-tax and post-tax income. The lump-sum transfer to
zero-earners reflects transfers like food stamps and Medicaid.
  19 This net surplus can be thought of as representing government expenditures on public goods like national defense rather

than individual benefits like food stamps. Setting R = 0 would yield larger optimal levels of PBR.
  20 Mankiw and Weinzierl (2010) similarly find an optimal lump-sum transfer to all Americans of over $21,000.




                                                             35
column 3 of Table 2 by the marginal value of public funds (MVPF) (Mayshar, 1990; Hendren, 2016), which

gives the willingness to pay for a small transfer (starting from  = 0) divided by the budgetary impact of

the transfer when holding the tax system fixed. PBR's MVPF of .98 implies that 2 cents of every dollar of

 are "lost" due to migration responses that yield reductions in earnings. For comparison we also report

in column 4 the MVPF of an income tax reform that replicates the mechanical effects of PBR. This reform

has a substantially lower MVPF than that of PBR, which corroborates the intuition that PBR lowers the

efficiency costs of targeting poor households relative to an optimal income tax system.



                                                                                         TABLE 2
                                                                     How Large Might Optimal Place-Based Transfers Be?

                                                                   Under Optimal Income Tax and No PBR                               Under Optimal Income Tax and Optimal PBR
                                                                  Value of                                           Value of
                                                                redistributon Marginal value     MVPF of           redistributon                                                       Place-blind
                                                                    from      of public funds   analogous              from                        Increase in         Place-blind     marginal tax
                                              Optimal level     Elsewhere to    (MVPF) of      income tax          Elsewhere to    Redistribution population of        lump-sum        rate above
                                                of PBR           Distressed         PBR           reform            Distressed     value narrowed   Distressed           transfer         $80K
                                                    (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)              (6)             (7)              (8)              (9)
A. Lump-Sum PBR
  Baseline                                        $5,500             1.29            0.98             0.72              1.09             71%              9%            $22,357           46.5%
  No productivity differences                     $5,800             1.30            1.01             0.72              1.08             74%              9%            $22,325           46.4%
  2x productivity differences                     $4,800             1.29            0.94             0.65              1.11             63%              8%            $22,309           46.3%
  2x migration                                    $4,000             1.29            0.97             0.72              1.14             53%              13%           $22,378           46.4%
  No prod. diffs. + 4x migration                  $3,200             1.30            1.03             0.62              1.17             42%              23%           $22,380           46.4%
  Change top income tax bracket only              $3,600             1.29            0.98             0.72              1.15             49%              6%            $22,447           47.0%
  Targeting the bottom 10%                        $4,700             1.24            0.98             0.78              1.07             69%              6%            $21,716           46.2%

B. Capped Earnings Subsidy PBR
  Baseline                                         36%               1.29            0.98             0.77              1.14             54%              7%            $22,383           46.5%
  No productivity differences                      39%               1.31            1.01             0.71              1.13             58%              7%            $22,344           46.4%
  2x productivity differences                      29%               1.29            0.93             0.70              1.16             44%              5%            $22,332           46.3%
  2x migration                                     25%               1.29            0.96             0.77              1.18             39%              10%           $22,399           46.4%
  No prod. diffs. + 4x migration                   24%               1.30            1.03             0.67              1.19             37%              19%           $22,363           46.3%
  Change top income tax bracket only               30%               1.29            0.98             0.76              1.16             46%              6%            $22,447           47.0%
  Targeting the bottom 10%                         26%               1.24            0.98             0.83              1.12             48%              4%            $21,963           46.4%

Notes - This table lists results of our numerical exercises of place-based redistribution (PBR) to the poorest simulated community ("Distressed"), which corresponds to the poorest 1% of U.S.
Census tracts. Panel A lists results for lump-sum PBR: a flat dollar amount to every Distressed resident. Panel B lists results capped earnings subsidy PBR: a percentage subsidy to Distressed
residents for their first $15,000 of earnings. The Baseline rows denote the calibrated economy based on Table 1's parameters. The other rows correspond to single variations to the baseline
calibration. "Targeting the bottom 10%" refers to offering PBR to residents of the ten communities (i.e. 10% of the population in the calibrated economy) with the highest poverty rate, rather than
the one community with the highest poverty rate. Column 1 lists the PBR level that maximizes social welfare. Column 2 lists the relative value to the planner of distributing an extra dollar to the
average resident of Distressed to the average resident elsewhere, when the planner maximizes social welfare using place-blind taxes but not PBR. Column 3 lists the marginal value of public
funds (MVPF) of a non-budget-balanced $100 lump-sum PBR reform (panel A) or 1% earnings subsidy PBR reform (panel B), while holding the income tax and transfer system fixed at its
optimum under no PBR. MVPF equals the receipients' willingness to pay (i.e., the dollars distributed via the reform) divided by the net cost to the government (i.e., the dollars distributed via the
reform plus lost tax revenue due to behavioral responses). Column 4 lists the MVPF of the income tax reform that transfers the same dollars on average to each earnings level as the non-budget-
balanced PBR reforms, while holding PBR fixed at zero. Column 5 repeats column 2, when the planner maximizes social welfare using both place-blind taxes and PBR. Column 6 lists the share
of the no-PBR social value difference between distibuing a dollar to Distressed and distributing a dollar elsewhere that is narrowed by the use of PBR. Column 6 equals one minus [column 5
minus one]/[column 2 minus one]. Column 7 lists the percentage increase in the population of Distressed under the optimal PBR. Columns 8 and 9 list the place-blind lump-sum transfer and the
top-bracket income tax rate under the optimal PBR.




Robustness to parameterization We now consider some alternative parameterizations of our quantitative

model, each of which deviates from the baseline in either one or two dimensions. Recall that our baseline

parameterization of the productivity-rent gradient 1 adopts the Hornbeck and Moretti (2019) gradient,

which is estimated using differences across metropolitan areas over time.                                                                       It is possible that the true

productivity-rent gradient is steeper across regions or flatter across neighborhoods. We therefore consider


                                                                                              36
two extreme differences in this productivity gradient: the second row of Table 2 assumes that all communities

have the same productivity, while the third row allows productivity differences to be twice as high as those in

the baseline. The optimal level of PBR rises to $5,800 under no productivity differences and falls to $4,800

when productivity differences are doubled, as productivity differences exacerbate the fiscal externalities

associated with migration. In the absence of productivity differences, the MVPF of PBR actually rises

slightly above 1, as moving to Distressed entails a slight increase in the real wage (relative to the cost of

living), which yields a small increase in earnings.

   Our baseline parameterization of the dispersion of idiosyncratic community tastes  is benchmarked to

Kennan and Walker (2011)'s finding that the elasticity of a state's population with respect to the offered wage

is roughly 3/4. To gauge the sensitivity of optimal policy to , the fourth row of Table 2 reports the results

of doubling the migration elasticity. As expected, increasing the migration elasticity raises the efficiency

costs of PBR, which lowers the optimal level of  to $4,000. In the fifth row of Table 2, we aim to capture a

within-city PBR scheme, where productivity differences between locations are muted, and migration is likely

more responsive. To do so, we eliminate productivity differences and quadruple the migration elasticity.

This change lowers the optimal level of  to $3,200.

   Our baseline parameterization allows the planner to fund PBR through any change in place-blind taxes.

Political and other considerations may make it desirable to fund PBR only through raising taxes on high

earners. The sixth row of Table 2 therefore constrains the planner to finance the lump-sum place-based

subsidy to Distressed residents by adjusting only the top bracket of the place-blind tax system (which

applies to earnings over $80,000). Doing so lowers the optimal level of  to $3,600.

   The final row of Table 2a redefines Distressed as the ten poorest communities, thereby expanding the share

of the population mechanically targeted by the PBR scheme by an order of magnitude from approximately

1% to approximately 10%. Because this policy is less targeted to the most disadvantaged,  falls to $4,700.

In sum, the finding of a large optimal transfer to Distressed is robust to deviations we consider from our

baseline parameterization.


A place-based earnings subsidy Political considerations may make earnings subsidies more attractive

than lump sum transfers.      We therefore consider a capped earnings subsidy, rather than a lump-sum

transfer, to every resident of Distressed. This formulation of the transfer is meant to mimic the current



                                                      37
U.S. Empowerment Zone program, which provides a 20% firm-side earnings subsidy on the first $15,000 in

earnings of zone residents who work at zone firms.

   Table 2b reports the optimal subsidy rate on each Distressed household's first $15,000 of earnings under

various assumptions. The first row of the panel reveals that, under our baseline calibration, the optimal

subsidy rate is 36%. For households earning over $15,000, the 36% subsidy rate happens to yield $5,400 ­

nearly the same amount as the optimal lump-sum transfer amount reported in Table 2a. However, the capped

earnings subsidy provides less aid to the poorest Distressed households and consequently eliminates less of

the gap in social marginal welfare weights between Distressed and Elsewhere than the lump-sum transfer.

The other rows of Table 2b report a sensitivity analysis, which yields findings similar to the corresponding

exercises reported in Table 2a. Notably, the "within-city" specification with no productivity differences and

four times the baseline migration elasticity yields an optimal subsidy rate of 24%, which is not too far from

the 20% subsidy rate of actual Empowerment Zones.
                                                         TABLE 3
                             Exploration of Mechanisms for Large Optimal Place-Based Transfers

                                                                                           Optimal Level of PBR
                                                                                                           Eliminate skill-taste correlation
                                                                            Calibration                            after calibration
                                                                                 (1)                                         (2)

   Baseline                                                                    $5,500                                       $400
   Income effects                                                              $3,700                                       -$400
   Comparative advantage                                                       $4,200                                      $1,600
   Income effects + Comparative advantage                                      $3,100                                       $700

   Notes - This table explores variations to the Baseline calibration. This table's upper-left cell refers to the calibration underlying the first
   row of Table 2a. Column 2 repeats column 1, except that skill-taste correlation is eliminated by setting each type's valuation a j () to
   zero. The remaining rows correspond to variations to the Baseline calibration. "Income effects" refers to income effects in location
   choice to the calibration. "Comparative advantage" refers to the wage ratio between high and low skill types being larger in high-rent
   communities than in low-rent communities.




6.5    Alternative sorting motives

Our baseline calibration explains the sorting of high  households to expensive communities in terms of taste

differences across skill groups, as captured by our parameterization of aj (). We now consider two alternative

explanations for sorting: income effects in locational choice and spatial comparative advantage. Before doing

so, we begin by examining the effects of removing skill-taste correlation by setting aj () = 0 for all skill




                                                                       38
groups. In our baseline calibration, this exercise nearly eliminates all skill differences in sorting behavior.21

The first row of Table 3 shows that zeroing out amenities lowers the optimal place-based transfer  from

$5,500 to $400. Additional details on this counterfactual equilibrium are provided in Online Appendix Table

2. The transfer is not driven by the composition of locations: all communities have nearly the same skill

composition in this counterfactual. Rather, the $400 transfer serves to compensate residents of Distressed for

the inferior living conditions they endure as a result of the low local productivity levels present in Distressed.

Specifically, the lower wage in Distressed forces households to work more and reduce their level of leisure,

which creates a motive for the planner to redistribute from Elsewhere to Distressed.


Income effects in location choice Income effects provide a potential explanation for the sorting of high

skilled households to more expensive communities. Recall from Example 5 that income-based sorting need

not provide a motive for indirect taxation, a point which has been studied extensively in the commodity

taxation literature (Atkinson and Stiglitz, 1976; Saez, 2002). We therefore expect that income effects will

tend to dampen the optimal place-based transfer size compared to the baseline calibration.

   To capture income effects quantitatively we set h = 6, 000 and  = 0.15, which yields a minimum

possible housing expenditure share of 15% and a maximal empirical expenditure share of 52%. Doing so

generates non-homotheticity in consumption and a motive for higher-skilled households to sort into higher

rent locations, while skill-taste correlation serves as the residual explanation for the skill sorting not captured

by income effects.

   This non-homotheticity mechanically yields social preferences that are no longer space-neutral. Specifically,

the non-homotheticity generates a motive for the planner to redistribute within earnings levels away from

Distressed residents and toward Elsewhere residents who pay higher rent and therefore have higher marginal

utilities of consumption. Note that this within-earnings redistributive motive is in the opposite direction of

the motive suggested by Section 5's online survey. Nevertheless, the second row of Table 3 shows that in

this calibration, the optimal transfer to Distressed is still quite high, with  = $3,700. However, shutting

down the remaining skill-taste correlation yields  of -$400 because of the within-earnings redistributive

motive.
 21 The   only remaining force generating sorting is the fact that the income tax is non-linear.




                                                                39
Comparative advantage Another reason why high-skilled households might sort to expensive communities

is that they enjoy a comparative advantage in production there. Indeed, results in De La Roca and Puga

(2017) suggest that the earnings of higher-skilled households are disproportionately elevated in large cities.

To capture comparative advantage, we set 2 = 0.88 to match the estimates in De La Roca and Puga.22

We recalibrate the model in order to match the same moments as in the baseline; in particular, skill-taste

correlation is recalibrated to explain the residual sorting patterns not captured by comparative advantage.

The third row of Table 3 reveals that, relative to the baseline, this modification lowers  to $4,200, primarily

because the distortionary earnings responses to migration are elevated.

    As above, it is also interesting to study a counterfactual in which sorting attributable to comparative

advantage is isolated by shutting down skill-taste correlation. Eliminating skill-taste correlation yields a

fairly substantial optimal transfer of $1,600, which suggests that comparative advantage, in itself, provides

a motive for PBR. This finding extends the indirect taxation literature which, to the best of our knowledge,

has not studied situations in which commodity choice impacts the marginal productivity of labor.23

    Finally, the last row of Table 3 recalibrates the model allowing both income effects in location choice

and comparative advantage. Under this calibration, residual skill differences in the valuation of amenities

are dramatically smaller than in the baseline (illustrated in Online Appendix Figure 2): income effects

and comparative advantage are now the main driving force behind locational sorting. We find that the

resulting optimal place-based transfer to Distressed is still large, with  = $3,100. After shutting down the

residual skill-taste correlation, we again find a positive optimal transfer of $700. In sum, we conclude that

while alternative motives for skill-sorting can dampen the optimal transfer size, plausible calibrations with

substantially dampened skill-taste correlation still yield a role for sizable place-based transfers.


7     Conclusion

While the literature has focused on studying efficiency motives for place-based policies, we study the equity

rationale for place-based policies. We ask whether it makes sense to index redistribution on place, beyond

indexing it on income alone. If tagging on dimensions other than income has traditionally been viewed with
  22 We use De La Roca and Puga's estimate of the relative labor productivity in large vs small cities (relative W in our
                                                                                                                   j
notation), and of the difference in comparative advantage in the same cities (relative bj in our notation). This yields our
                   ln blarge -ln bsmall
estimate of 2 =   ln Wlarge -ln Wsmall
                                        .
 23 Rothschild and Scheuer (2013) study optimal income taxation in the Roy model but do not allow for sector specific taxes,

which would be the labor market analogue of PBR.




                                                            40
skepticism in the public finance literature (Mankiw and Weinzierl, 2010), we note that tagging based on place

is highly policy-relevant: unlike height and almost all other potential "tags" (Akerlof, 1978), governments

around the world actually condition transfers on place.

   We find that place-based redistribution is justified, first, if it lowers the efficiency costs of redistribution.

In that sense, PBR will tend to be desirable when spatial transfers induce few moves, when productivity

is uniform across space, when labor supply is especially elastic, and when incomes differ substantially

across locations. Second, PBR can be also justified if it provides unique equity gains that income-based

redistribution cannot achieve. A survey suggests that social preferences may align with this motive for

place-based redistribution.

   Ultimately, the desirability of place-based redistribution is a quantitative question that depends on the

empirical context. We conduct a quantitative calibration and find that the optimal lump sum transfer for

the poorest U.S. Census tracts may be sizable, over and above an optimally chosen income-based tax system.

While the calibration results are necessarily specific to our modeling of household preferences, they accord

closely with the broader theoretical message of our paper that the efficiency costs of place-based policies need

to be weighed carefully against the corresponding equity gains of these programs. Household sorting generates

tremendous geographic segregation of income groups, which makes location a natural tag. When living in

poor areas signals disadvantage over and above one's own income, the case for place-based redistribution as

a supplement to progressive income taxation is only strengthened. An important question for future research

is how implementation features such as statutory incidence, program salience, and compliance monitoring

alter the equity-efficiency tradeoffs presented by actual place-based policies.


References

Aguiar, M., E. Hurst, and L. Karabarbounis (2012). Recent developments in the economics of time use.

  Annu. Rev. Econ. 4 (1), 373­397.


Ahlfeldt, G. M., S. J. Redding, D. M. Sturm, and N. Wolf (2015). The economics of density: Evidence from

  the berlin wall. Econometrica 83 (6), 2127­2189.


Akerlof, G. A. (1978). The economics of "tagging" as applied to the optimal income tax, welfare programs,

  and manpower planning. The American economic review 68 (1), 8­19.



                                                        41
Albouy, D. (2009). The unequal geographic burden of federal taxation. Journal of Political Economy 117 (4),

  635­667.


Albouy, D. (2012). Evaluating the efficiency and equity of federal fiscal equalization. Journal of Public

  Economics 96 (9-10), 824­839.


Anderson, E. (2000). Code of the street: Decency, violence, and the moral life of the inner city. WW Norton

  & Company.


Atkinson, A. B. (1970). On the measurement of inequality. Journal of economic theory 2 (3), 244­263.


Atkinson, A. B. and J. E. Stiglitz (1976). The design of tax structure: direct versus indirect taxation.

  Journal of public Economics 6 (1-2), 55­75.


Austin, B., E. Glaeser, and L. Summers (2018). Jobs for the heartland: Place-based policies in 21st-century

  america. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity , 151­232.


Autor, D. (2019). Work of the past, work of the future, Volume 109.


Avenancio-Le´
            on, C. and T. Howard (2019). The assessment gap: Racial inequalities in property taxation.

  Available at SSRN 3465010 .


Bartik, T. J. (2020). Using place-based jobs policies to help distressed communities. olume 34, Number 3 ,

  99.


Baum-Snow, N. and R. Pavan (2011). Understanding the city size wage gap. The Review of economic

  studies 79 (1), 88­127.


Bayer, P., H. Fang, and R. McMillan (2014). Separate when equal? racial inequality and residential

  segregation. Journal of Urban Economics 82, 32­48.


Bayer, P., F. Ferreira, and R. McMillan (2007). A unified framework for measuring preferences for schools

  and neighborhoods. Journal of political economy 115 (4), 588­638.


Bayer, P., R. McMillan, A. Murphy, and C. Timmins (2016). A dynamic model of demand for houses and

  neighborhoods. Econometrica 84 (3), 893­942.


Becker, G. S. (1965). A theory of the allocation of time. The economic journal , 493­517.

                                                    42
Bergman, P., E. W. Chan, and A. Kapor (2020). Housing search frictions: Evidence from detailed search

  data and a field experiment. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bergman, P., R. Chetty, S. DeLuca, N. Hendren, L. F. Katz, and C. Palmer (2019). Creating moves

  to opportunity: Experimental evidence on barriers to neighborhood choice. Technical report, National

  Bureau of Economic Research.

Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (1995). Automobile prices in market equilibrium. Econometrica:

  Journal of the Econometric Society , 841­890.

Busso, M., J. Gregory, and P. Kline (2013). Assessing the incidence and efficiency of a prominent place based

  policy. American Economic Review 103 (2), 897­947.

Chetty, R. (2009). Sufficient statistics for welfare analysis: A bridge between structural and reduced-form

  methods. Annu. Rev. Econ. 1 (1), 451­488.

Chetty, R., A. Guren, D. Manoli, and A. Weber (2011). Are micro and macro labor supply elasticities

  consistent?   a review of evidence on the intensive and extensive margins.           American Economic

  Review 101 (3), 471­75.

Colmer, J., I. Hardman, J. Shimshack, and J. Voorheis (2020). Disparities in pm2. 5 air pollution in the

  united states. Science 369 (6503), 575­578.

Combes, P.-P., G. Duranton, L. Gobillon, D. Puga, and S. Roux (2012). The productivity advantages of

  large cities: Distinguishing agglomeration from firm selection. Econometrica 80 (6), 2543­2594.

Dahl, G. B. (2002). Mobility and the return to education: Testing a roy model with multiple markets.

  Econometrica 70 (6), 2367­2420.

Dauth, W., S. Findeisen, E. Moretti, and J. Suedekum (2018). Matching in cities. Technical report, National

  Bureau of Economic Research.

Davis, M. A. and J. Gregory (2020). Planning problems and redistribution of income in models of urban

  economics. Available at SSRN 3637555 .

Davis, M. A. and F. Ortalo-Magne (2011, April). Household Expenditures, Wages, Rents. Review of

  Economic Dynamics 14 (2), 248­261.

                                                     43
De La Roca, J. and D. Puga (2017). Learning by working in big cities. The Review of Economic Studies 84 (1),

  106­142.


Diamond, R. (2016). The determinants and welfare implications of us workers' diverging location choices by

  skill: 1980-2000. American Economic Review 106 (3), 479­524.


Ehrlich, M. v. and H. G. Overman (2020). Place-based policies and spatial disparities across european cities.

  olume 34, Number 3 , 128.


Epple, D., L. Quintero, and H. Sieg (2020).           A new approach to estimating equilibrium models for

  metropolitan housing markets. Journal of Political Economy 128 (3), 948­983.


Epple, D. and H. Sieg (1999). Estimating equilibrium models of local jurisdictions. Journal of political

  economy 107 (4), 645­681.


Fajgelbaum, P. and C. Gaubert (2020). Optimal spatial policies, geography and sorting. The Quarterly

  Journal of Economics .


Fajgelbaum, P. D., E. Morales, J. C. Su´
                                       arez Serrato, and O. Zidar (2018).           State taxes and spatial

  misallocation. The Review of Economic Studies 86 (1), 333­376.


Fisman, R., K. Gladstone, I. Kuziemko, and S. Naidu (2020). Do americans want to tax wealth? evidence

  from online surveys. Journal of Public Economics 188, 104207.


Flatters, F., V. Henderson, and P. Mieszkowski (1974).          Public goods, efficiency, and regional fiscal

  equalization. Journal of Public Economics 3 (2), 99­112.


Fowlie, M., E. Rubin, and R. Walker (2019). Bringing satellite-based air quality estimates down to earth.

  In AEA Papers and Proceedings, Volume 109, pp. 283­88.


Fu, C. and J. Gregory (2019).       Estimation of an equilibrium model with externalities: Post-disaster

  neighborhood rebuilding. Econometrica 87 (2), 387­421.


Fujiwara, T., E. Morales, and C. Porcher (2020). A revealed-preference approach to measuring information

  frictions in migration decisions. working paper .


Gaubert, C. (2018). Firm sorting and agglomeration. American Economic Review 108 (11), 3117­53.


                                                        44
Glaeser, E. and J. Gottlieb (2008, 11). The economics of place-making policies. Brookings Papers on

  Economic Activity 39.


Glaeser, E. L. (2008). Cities, agglomeration, and spatial equilibrium. Oxford University Press.


Glaeser, E. L. and D. C. Mare (2001). Cities and skills. Journal of labor economics 19 (2), 316­342.


Hendren, N. (2016). The policy elasticity. Tax Policy and the Economy 30 (1), 51­89.


Hornbeck, R. and E. Moretti (2019). Estimating who benefits from productivity growth: Direct and indirect

  effects of city manufacturing tfp growth on wages, rents. Technical report, and Inequality.


Horton, J. J., D. G. Rand, and R. J. Zeckhauser (2011). The online laboratory: Conducting experiments in

  a real labor market. Experimental economics 14 (3), 399­425.


Hurst, E. (2008). The retirement of a consumption puzzle. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic

  Research.


Jackson, K. T. (1987). Crabgrass frontier: The suburbanization of the United States. Oxford University

  Press.


Jargowsky, P. A. (1997).    Poverty and place: Ghettos, barrios, and the American city.           Russell Sage

  Foundation.


Kaplow, L. (2006). On the undesirability of commodity taxation even when income taxation is not optimal.

  Journal of Public Economics 90 (6-7), 1235­1250.


Kaplow, L. (2008). Optimal policy with heterogeneous preferences. The BE Journal of Economic Analysis

  & Policy 8 (1).


Katz, B. (2015). Los angeles 1992 to baltimore 2015: Washington's changed response to urban crisis.


Kennan, J. and J. R. Walker (2010). Wages, welfare benefits and migration. Journal of Econometrics 156 (1),

  229­238.


Kennan, J. and J. R. Walker (2011). The effect of expected income on individual migration decisions.

  Econometrica 79 (1), 211­251.



                                                     45
Kessing, S. G., V. Lipatov, and J. M. Zoubek (2020). Optimal taxation under regional inequality. European

  Economic Review , 103439.


Kleven, H. (2020). Sufficient statistics revisited. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.


Kleven, H. J., C. T. Kreiner, and E. Saez (2009).              The optimal income taxation of couples.

  Econometrica 77 (2), 537­560.


Kline, P. (2010). Place based policies, heterogeneity, and agglomeration. American Economic Review 100 (2),

  383­87.


Kline, P. and E. Moretti (2014a). Local economic development, agglomeration economies, and the big

  push: 100 years of evidence from the tennessee valley authority. Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (1),

  275­331.


Kline, P. and E. Moretti (2014b). People, places, and public policy: Some simple welfare economics of local

  economic development programs.


Kuziemko, I., M. I. Norton, E. Saez, and S. Stantcheva (2015). How elastic are preferences for redistribution?

  evidence from randomized survey experiments. American Economic Review 105 (4), 1478­1508.


Laroque, G. R. (2005). Indirect taxation is superfluous under separability and taste homogeneity: a simple

  proof. Economics Letters 87 (1), 141­144.


Liebschutz, S. F. (1995). Empowerment zones and enterprise communities: Reinventing federalism for

  distressed communities. Publius: The Journal of Federalism 25 (3), 117­132.


Mankiw, N. G. and M. Weinzierl (2010). The optimal taxation of height: A case study of utilitarian income

  redistribution. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2 (1), 155­76.


Mayshar, J. (1990). On measures of excess burden and their application. Journal of Public Economics 43 (3),

  263­289.


McFadden, D. (1978). Modeling the choice of residential location. Transportation Research Record (673).


Mirrlees, J. A. (1971). An exploration in the theory of optimum income taxation. The review of economic

  studies 38 (2), 175­208.


                                                     46
Moretti, E. (2011). Local labor markets. In Handbook of labor economics, Volume 4, pp. 1237­1313. Elsevier.

Moretti, E. (2012). The new geography of jobs. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.

Moretti, E. (2013). Real wage inequality. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5 (1), 65­103.

Moretti, E. and D. J. Wilson (2019). Taxing billionaires: Estate taxes and the geographical location of the

  ultra-wealthy. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Nelson, R. K., L. Winling, R. Marciano, N. Connolly, et al. (2020). Mapping inequality.

Oates, W. E. (1999). An essay on fiscal federalism. Journal of economic literature 37 (3), 1120­1149.

Paolacci, G., J. Chandler, and P. G. Ipeirotis (2010). Running experiments on amazon mechanical turk.

  Judgment and Decision making 5 (5), 411­419.

Piketty, T., E. Saez, and G. Zucman (2018). Distributional national accounts: methods and estimates for

  the united states. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (2), 553­609.

Reardon, S. F. and K. Bischoff (2011). Income inequality and income segregation. American Journal of

  Sociology 116 (4), 1092­1153.

Reardon, S. F., K. Bischoff, A. Owens, and J. B. Townsend (2018). Has income segregation really increased?

  bias and bias correction in sample-based segregation estimates. Demography 55 (6), 2129­2160.

Redding, S. J. and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2017). Quantitative spatial economics. Annual Review of Economics 9,

  21­58.

Ross, S. L. and G. M. Tootell (2004). Redlining, the community reinvestment act, and private mortgage

  insurance. Journal of Urban Economics 55 (2), 278­297.

Rossi-Hansberg, E., P.-D. Sarte, and F. Schwartzman (2019, September). Cognitive hubs and spatial

  redistribution. Working Paper 26267, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Rothschild, C. and F. Scheuer (2013). Redistributive taxation in the roy model. The Quarterly Journal of

  Economics 128 (2), 623­668.

Saez, E. (2002). The desirability of commodity taxation under non-linear income taxation and heterogeneous

  tastes. Journal of Public Economics 83 (2), 217­230.

                                                    47
Saez, E. and S. Stantcheva (2016). Generalized social marginal welfare weights for optimal tax theory.

  American Economic Review 106 (1), 24­45.


Sjaastad, L. A. (1962). The costs and returns of human migration. Journal of political Economy 70 (5, Part

  2), 80­93.


Slattery, C. R. and O. M. Zidar (2020). Evaluating state and local business tax incentives. Technical report,

  National Bureau of Economic Research.


Squires, G. (2011). From redlining to reinvestment: Community responses to urban disinvestment. Temple

  University Press.


Su´
  arez Serrato, J. C. and O. Zidar (2016). Who benefits from state corporate tax cuts? a local labor markets

  approach with heterogeneous firms. American Economic Review 106 (9), 2582­2624.


Vance, J. D. (2016). Hillbilly elegy: A memoir of a family and culture in crisis. New York, NY: Harper.


Weinzierl, M. (2014). The promise of positive optimal taxation: normative diversity and a role for equal

  sacrifice. Journal of Public Economics 118, 128­142.


Wilson, W. (1987). Truly disadvantaged: The inner city, the underclass, and public policy.


Wilson, W. J. (2011). When work disappears: The world of the new urban poor. Vintage.




                                                     48
ONLINE APPENDIX

A       Theory Appendix
A.1     Proofs and derivation
A.1.1    Derivation of equations 8

Taking into account the budget balance constraint, the Lagrangian for the social planner's problem is:


                                L=     () v  () dF () -          T (z  ()) dF ()


The total welfare effect of a PBR scheme expressed in terms of the value of public funds is:

                 1                                                1
W ()-W (0) =                    () [v  (, ) - v  (, 0)] dF ()+                  () [v1 (, ) - v0 (, 0)] dF ()
                     stayers                                          movers


where v (, ) is the indirect utility of household  under PBR scheme . As   0, the first order effect of

the reform on the utility of movers is 0, as movers in response to an infinitesimal PBR are initially indifferent

between the two communities. Second, the number of movers is infinitesimal. Denote with F| (.) the cdf

of  =1 - 0 for households with skill , f| (.) the corresponding pdf, and F () the marginal distribution
                                                  z ( )
of , and write Uj (, ) = U cj () , hj () , aj , wjj () . We have:


                                  dF () =      F| (U1 (, ) - U0 (, )) - F| (U1 (, 0) - U0 (, 0)) dF ()
 v1 (,0)<v0 (,0),v1 (,)>v0 (,)
                                                                               dU1 (, 0) dU0 (, 0)
                                                f| (U1 (, 0) - U0 (, 0))                -             dF ()
                                                                                 d         d
                                         = O ()


    Therefore, the integration of the stayers term can be done on all households, irrespective of whether they

move or not. Taking the appropriate limits, and using the envelope theorem (income is chosen optimally by

households) the first order effect of a PBR simplifies to:

                                     dW   1          U j () - S
                                        =        ()               dF ()
                                     d               c S (1 - S )
                                                  j () - S
                                         =     ()            dF ()
                                                  S (1 - S )
                                         =¯1 - ¯0.


    We now compute the effect of the PBR on the fiscal revenues, as households move hence change their


                                                          49
income as a response to the PBR. Each mover moves necessarily to community 1, which is made relatively

more attractive by the PBR scheme. This entails a revenue change per mover T (z1 ()) - T (z0 ()) =

T (z1 ()) - T (z0 ()) so that the change in fiscal revenues due to movers, starting at no PBR, is:


BT,movers ()-BT,movers (0) =                                            (T (z1 ()) - T (z0 ())) dF () dF| ( )dF ()
                                        v1 (,0)<v0 (,0),v1 (,)>v0 (,)


     which leads to:

             dBT,movers ()                                   1 U1     1 U0
                           = E f| (V1 (·, 0) - V0 (·, 0))         +                  [T (z1 ) - T (z0 )]
                  d                                          S c    1 - S c
                               dS (·, 0)
                           =E            [T (z1 ) - T (z0 )]
                                 d

         dS (,0)
where      d       is the density of movers at skill , starting from 0 PBR.

A.1.2      Derivation of Proposition 1

We compute the first order welfare effect of a PBR reform starting from 0 . Derivations are as above, noting

that social welfare weights are now evaluated at PBR level 0 , that is:

                                              dW  ¯ 1 (0 ) - ¯ 0 (0 ) .
                                                 =
                                              d

                                                                                                          S (0 )-j 
     The behavioral response has an additional term. We start at a budget neutral PBR scheme of        S (0 )(1-S (0 )) 0 .

                                                                                              0          dS
Fiscal revenues from PBR are 0, but the fiscal effect of movers on the PBR budget is - S (0 )(1 -S (0 )) d (0 )

so that overall the welfare effect of the PBR reform is:

dSW F        ¯ 1 (0 )-¯ 0 (0 )+E           dS (·, 0 )                                     1          dS
      (0 ) =                                          [T (z1 ) - T (z0 )] -0 E                          (·, 0 ) .
 d                                            d                                  S (0 ) (1 - S (0 )) d

     At the optimal PBR scheme  , dSW F 
                                   d ( ) = 0. Rearranging terms leads to the formula in Proposition

1.

A.1.3      Derivation of Corollary 1

We now derive a first order approximation of this expression around 0 = 0:

     dSW F
           () = ¯ 1 (0) - ¯ 0 (0) + E dS (·, 0) [T (z  ) - T (z  )]
                                                     1          0
      d                                  d
                                                    2
                      d ¯           d ¯            d S (·, 0)                           1            dS (·, 0)
              +          1 (0) -      0 (0) + E           2
                                                              [T (z1 ) - T (z0 )] -            E
                     d             d                  d                             S (1 - S )         d



                                                         50
                                         2 
                 ()
Let  () =        I       =1
                             ()          v ()
                                         I 2      and ¯ j = E [ (·) |j  = j ], evaluated at  = 0. We have:




            d¯ 1 () d¯ 0 ()                                                       1 (, 0) - ¯ 1 (0) 0 (, 0) - ¯ 0 (0)
                   -        =¯ 1 (0) + ¯ 0 (0) + E dS (., 0)                                       +
              d       d                              d                                  S               1-S

Overall, at the optimal PBR, so long as it small, we have:

                                                      ¯ 1 (0) - ¯ 0 (0) + E       dS (·,0)                  
                                                                                    d        [T (z1 ) - T (z0 )]
  
 =                      ¯ 1 (0)-1 (,0)       ¯ 0 (0)-0 (,0)
                                                                                                                                                           ,
             dS (.,0)                                                d2 S (·,0)         ) - T (z  )] +           1        dS (.,0)     ¯ 0 (0) + ¯ 1 (0)
        E      d                S        +          1-S        +E      d2         [T (z1        0            S (1-S ) E     d        - 

A.1.4       Derivation of equations (11), (12) and (13)

We compute the first order effect of the income tax perturbation on the SWF. In this derivation, we assume

that preferences can give rise to income effects of labor supply. We make the following technical assumption:


Assumption. The income tax schedule T (.) is smooth and T (z ) > 0.


     The first-order effect of the income tax perturbation on utility, expressed in terms of the value of public

funds, is:

                                              dW     1               U °
                                                  =-            ()     T (z ()) dF ()
                                               dq                    c
                                                   =-             ° (z ()) dF ()
                                                               () T

                                                                     S -  (z ())
                                                   =-          ()                             dF ()
                                                                       S (1 - S )

     The behavioral responses to the tax reform are twofold. First, households who do not move get a hit

by a simple income tax reform change and adjust their earnings. The corresponding first order loss in tax

revenue is:
                                                dB               dz  dT (z  )
                                                   = E T (z  )                                    .
                                                dq             dT (z  ) dq

A change in the tax schedule affects earnings z through income and substitution effects. For a given household
                                              
with skill  located in city j , we denote by zj (1 - , I ) the earnings they would supply with a linear budget
                                                                                      ° (z ) dq produces a
constraint with tax rate  and virtual income I . An arbitrary small income tax change T

change in earnings:
                                                                 z          z 
                                                    dz  = -             d +    dI.
                                                                (1 -  )     I



                                                                     51
   The change in marginal tax rate d is equal to:


                                            ° (z  ) dq + T (z  ) dz  ,
                                        d = T


where the first term comes from the direct change in the tax rate and the second one comes from the fact

that z adjusts and that the initial tax schedule has some curvature, leading to a change in marginal rate

when z change. The virtual income shock is :


                                                       ° (z  ) dq.
                                          dI - z  d = -T


Hence:
                                         z          z        ° (z  ) dq -   z  °    
                                   -    (1- )   -   I z      T              I T    zj dq
                           dzj =                                                            ,        (20)
                                                      z          z  
                                           1+        (1- )   -   I z   T (z  )

where the first term in parenthesis is the substitution effect. We now apply this computation to the tax

perturbation that mimics a PBR scheme. To do so, we make the following assumption:


Assumption 1. The function  (z ) is differentiable in z .


   Under this assumption, we get:

                                             z           z                   z 
                       dz        1          (1- )    -   I z       (z  ) -   I    (S -  (z  ))
                           =
                       dq    S (1 - S )             1+      z 
                                                                   -   z  
                                                                              T (z  )
                                                           (1- )       I z


   Denote the substitution effect and income effect as follows:

                                                   z        z  
                                         Zc () =          -   z
                                                  (1 -  )   I
                                                 z 
                                         ZI () =
                                                 I

   Then
                            dz        1      Zc () (z  ) - ZI () (S -  (z  ))
                                =
                            dq    S (1 - S )       1 + Zc ()T (z  )

   The loss in tax revenue from the income tax reform is therefore equal to:

                                 1                Zc  (z  ) - ZI (S -  (z  ))
                                        E T (z  )                                       .
                             S (1 - S )                 1 + Zc T (z  )

   Second, households who do move also adjust their labor supply. The change in fiscal revenues due to

movers in response to the income tax perturbation is:


                                                          52
                                                                 
                                           Uo ()                U1 ()
           E f| (V1 (0) - V0 (0))                        
                                                 (S -  (z0 )) -               
                                                                      (S -  (z1         
                                                                                )) [T (z1         
                                                                                          ) - T (z1 )]
                                            c                    c
                   dS                
           =E         [T (z1 ) - T (z1 )] .
                   dq

in which for some skills the term inside {} can be negative: if the behavioral response induces a move from 1

to 0, it leads to increased tax revenues for the government. We compare the movers term of PBR to the one

of the Income Tax reform that mimics it. We compare the movers term of PBR to the one of the Income

Tax reform that mimics it, for households with skill  :

                                                                       
  dBmovers   dBmovers                            Uo ()                U1 ()
           -          = f| (V1 (0) - V0 (0))  (z0 )              
                                                       + (1 -  (z1 ))                              
                                                                                              [T (z1         
                                                                                                     ) - T (z1 )]
    d          dq                                   c                  c

                                                                                 
   Which is clearly < 0 since the first two terms are positive and T (z1 ) - T (z1 ) < 0. We conclude that
dBmovers       dBmovers
  d        -     dq       <0

   Overall,

dSW F                 (z  ) - S            1                Zc () (z  ) - ZI () (S -  (z  ))       dS
      =E                           +              E T (z  )                                  +E            
                                                                                                      [T (z1         
                                                                                                             ) - T (z1 )] .
  dq                 S (1 - S )        S (1 - S )                 1 + Zc ()T (z  )                 dq

   and without income effects on labor supply:

dSW F                 (z ) - S             1                            Z1-               dS
      =E                           +              E T (z  )  (z  )                   +E           
                                                                                             [T (z1         
                                                                                                    ) - T (z1 )] ,
  dq                 S (1 - S )        S (1 - S )                  1 + Z1- T (z  )        dq

                      z  ()
where Z1- () =         (1- )   > 0 denotes the compensated labor earnings response to a change in the marginal

net of tax rate 1 - T (z  ).

A.1.5      Proof of Example 5

Consider an equilibrium with place-blind tax system T (·) and place based transfers, where j is the lump-

sum tax on j . We aim to show that there is perfect sorting of  into j and z (that is, (z  , j  ) and  are

one-to-one). We first show that each observed pre-tax earnings level z corresponds to only 1 location. The

proof is by contradiction. Assume there exists  =  such that j  () = 0, j  ( ) = 1 but z  () = z  ( ) =

z
~ for some pre-tax earnings z
                            ~. Consider the subutility of consumption function conditional on income,
                                        
v (z, j  ) = maxj aj · (z - j - rj ) . In the interesting non-degenerate case where aj and rj + j are both

higher in community 1 than in 0, the corresponding optimal choice of location j  (z ) is a step function.


                                                           53
WLOG, assume that j  (~
                      z ) = 1, so that v (~
                                          z , 1) > v (~                       z , 1) , z
                                                      z , 0) . In turn, U (v (~        ~) > U (v (~
                                                                                                  z , 0) , z
                                                                                                           ~), so that

both  and  are better off in 1, a contradiction. This implies, in turn, that z and  are one-to-one. Indeed,

if  and  are in the same location, it is clear that  =   z = z . Furthermore, if  =  are in different

locations, they must have different incomes by the point above. Therefore, there is perfect sorting of  into

z and into j .

   Next, we show that in this context, PBR is dominated by using the income tax alone. The proof closely

follows Kaplow (2006) and Laroque (2005). Starting at an equilibrium with taxes and PBR (T (·) , ), remove
                                                                   ¯ (z ) , 0 such that each household at
PBR . For each individual with income z , compute a new tax system T

each level of income z attains the subutility of consumption v (z, j  ) they had under the previous tax scheme

(T (·) , ). Note that the exercise is well defined given that income is one for one with  and j  : an observed

z corresponds to a unique , hence a unique change in utility between the two schemes (with and without
                                                    ¯ (z ) is well defined. Because the level of subutility
PBR), so that the compensating change in income tax T
                                                       ¯ (z ) , 0 compared to before, all households will
of consumption at every z is unchanged with the scheme T

make the same choice of labor supply as under (T (·) , ).
                                           ¯ (z ) , 0 , government revenues are higher: attaining the new
   Finally, we show that in the new scheme T
                                      ¯ (z ). The same utility would be reached when consuming the initial
consumption bundle costs at least z - T
                                                                   ¯ (z ). But, given the budget constraint
choice (c , j  ), which now costs c + rj  . Therefore c + rj   z - T
                                                                                                       ¯ (z )
of the initial equilibrium, we have that c + rj  + j  = z - T (z ). This leads to z - T (z ) - j   z - T
                           ¯ (z ). The government collects more taxes with the income tax alone than with
and therefore T (z ) + j   T

an income tax and PBR, for the same level of utility of households. QED.


A.2     Extensions
A.2.1    Preferences with income effects on labor supply
                                                                                               
                                                                                              zj
We assume here that the utility function displays income effects on labor supply, i.e.,       I    < 0. An additional

behavioral response to both tax reforms (PBR and income tax) emerges, which we discuss here. The other

terms computed in the main text remain unaffected. With income effects on labor supply, the effect of an

infinitesimal lump-sum transfer  on tax revenues is:

                          dBT,stayers             dz                                dz 
                                      = E T (z  )     |stayers       = E T (z  )          ,
                             d                    d                                 d




                                                         54
since the number of movers is infinitesimal.

   Households who do not move in response to the PBR now adjust their earnings in response to the

lump-sum PBR. Applying (20) to the PBR reform, we get:

                                                         dz  S - j
                                                 dz  =                d.
                                                         I S (1 - S )

The additional change in tax revenue from the PBR reform through behavioral effect on z for stayers is

therefore:

                         dBT                   1       ZI () (S - j ) 
                             = -E T (z ) E                            |z = z                 .
                          d                S (1 - S ) 1 + Zc ()T (z )

   Regarding the income tax reform, the computation were made above. The additional term only present

with income effects on labor supply is:

                         dBT             S -  (z )         ZI ()
                             = -E T (z )            E                 |z  = z                .
                          dq             S (1 - S )   1 + Zc ()T (z )

Comparing the two income effects The difference between these two terms is:

                 dBT   dBT                   ZI ()                    j - E [j |z  = z ]
                     -     = E T (z ) E                                                    |z  = z
                  d     dq              1 + Zc ()T (z )                  S (1 - S )

   Consider the following assumption (Saez (2002)):

                                                                                      ZI (, j )
Assumption 2. Conditional on each income level, behavioral response                1+Zc (, j )T (z )   is independent of

where the household lives.


   Under Assumption 2, location choice j can be pulled out of the conditional expectation and averaged out
                                dBT       dBT
conditional on z , leading to    d    -    dq   = 0. The behavioral responses to PBR and the equivalent income

tax reform coming through the income effect are exactly equal.

A.2.2    Endogenous rents

We release the assumption made throughout the main text that house prices are fixed and exogenous. Assume

that housing in community j is provided by landowners according to a housing supply function:


                                                      Hj = H0j rj




                                                            55
   There is no a priori ordering of 1 vs 0 . On the one hand, one could think that housing tends to be

supplied less elastically in high wage/high skilled city, so that: 0 < 1 . On the other hand, one could think

that distressed areas are on the vertical part of their housing supply function, since they are under populated

compared to their historical stock of housing (Glaeser and Gyourko 2005). In this case, one could think that

0 > 1 . This is ultimately an empirical question. The price of housing can be written as a function of city

population Lj = jS () + (1 - j ) (1 - S ()):

                                                                    1
                                                             Lj     j
                                             rj (Lj ) =
                                                             H0j

For a PBR scheme , population is Lj = jS () + (1 - j ) (1 - S ()). We assume that landlords are valued

in the social welfare function at some weight  land :


                                    SW F  E  h G v h           + E  land r ,


where possibly  land = 0 (absentee landlords assumption). Let Ll
                                                               j denote the number of landowners in j ,

¯ l their average welfare weight. We define        Ll
                                                    j ¯l
                                            ¯j =
  j                                                Lj j .

   A PBR reform generates a net transfer of utility from inhabitants of community 0 to those of community

1, measured by:


                         dW       ¯1 - ¯ 0 + dS         r0 ¯   ¯ 0 - r1 ¯1 - ¯1
                            |=0 =                          0 -                                ,
                         d                   d          0            1

where ¯j - ¯ j measures the social value of transferring a dollar from landlords to households in community

j . Under the assumption of absentee landlords, the formula becomes:

                                 dW       ¯1 - ¯ 0 + dS            r0 ¯  r1 ¯
                                    |=0 =                             0 -     1 .                                 (21)
                                 d                   d             0     1

   We see that taking into account endogenous rents leads to an additional effect of the PBR, as movers

change the price of housing for all infra-marginal households. The sign of this additional term is a priori

ambiguous, as r1 < r0 but 1 > 0 . It is interesting to note the role played by the difference in housing

supply elasticity j between locations on the welfare effect of PBR. To highlight it, we assume for simplicity
                                                                               1        1
that rj j  constant, so that the sign of the extra term is the sign of         0    -   1 .   If high-income areas also

happen to be housing-supply inelastic, while low income area have more elastic housing supply (0 < 1 ),then



                                                        56
the rent effect is favorable to PBR. Movers relocate out of congested places, prices react downwards strongly

to these moves, while they react mildly upwards in the destination area. Taxing highly inelastic areas like

Manhattan, and redistributing to more elastic areas like its suburbs leads to this additional positive effect

of PBR. On the other hand, it can be that distressed areas are on the vertical part of their housing supply

curve (1 low ), when they are areas like Detroit or the Appalachian with a large stock of unused housing

(Glaeser and Gyourko (2005)). In this case, the rent effect can turn to negative - increase in housing costs

in the Distressed area, because of movers, outweighs the decrease in housing cost in Elsewhere, acting as an

additional efficiency cost to account for when evaluating the effect of a PBR scheme. Beyond this additional

welfare term, there is no other efficiency cost to account for when recognizing that prices are endogenous

(we do not take into account property taxes in this derivation). We can then derive the overall effect of a

PBR scheme when rents are endogenous:


Lemma. The first order effect on welfare of a small PBR reform starting from a place-blind system is:

     dSW F       ¯1 - ¯ 0 + S       r0 ¯   ¯ 0 - r1 ¯1 - ¯1                   dS  (0)           
           (0) =                       0 -                             + E            T z1 - T z0           (22)
      d                             0            1                              d

   where ¯ j = 0 with absentee landlords.


A.2.3    Alternative specification of locational preferences

In this section, rather than assuming that idiosyncratic choices of locations are driven by additive preference

shocks as in the main text, we consider a more general formulation where households have idiosyncratic

productivity in both locations, as well as idiosyncratic preferences for location. They are therefore characterized

by a quadruple  = {w0 , w1 , 1 , 2 } distributed according to the CDF F (.). Furthermore, we do not restrict

the preference shocks to enter additively in the utility function. That is, we assume that:

                                                                   z
                                         uj () = U    c, h, aj ,      , j .
                                                                   wj

   We first discuss how our main results carry through to these more general cases. We then discuss the

pitfalls of non-additive idiosyncratic preferences in the context of normative questions.




                                                       57
Main results The logic of the derivations in the main text is unchanged, but notations need to be adjusted.

In particular, we define the share of households who live in Distressed when the transfer is of size  as:


                                      S () =           j  (, ) dF () .
                                                  R4


   We have

                              dS                  j  (, ) - j  (, 0)
                                 = lim                               dF ()
                              d 0            R4          

   The fiscal cost of movers still corresponds to the earnings losses of movers, which now writes more

generally:

              dB                  [j  (, ) - j  (, 0)] [T (z1
                                                            
                                                              (, )) - T (z0 
                                                                             (, 0))]
                 = lim                                                                dF ()
              d 0          R4                             
                                  j  (, ) - j  (, 0)                      
                  = lim                              [T (z1  (, 0)) - T (z0 (, 0))] dF ()
                     0     R4            

                                                      
where the last line follows because T (z1 (, )) = T (z1 (, 0)): absent an income effect on labor supply,

stayers do not adjust their earnings following a lump-sum tax/subsidy. We write this expression with a more

convenient notational shortcut:




     dB                                                                       
        = E[T (z1 (, 0)) - T (z0 (, 0)) |move]P (move) + E[T (z1 (, 0)) - T (z0 (, 0)) |stay ]P (stay )
     d
                                               dS
        = E[T (z1 (, 0)) - T (z0 (, 0)) |move]
                                               d

   The main results of the paper are amended as follows (nothing is changed in the equity computations,

only in the efficiency cost computations):


   · The first order effect on welfare of a small PBR reform starting from a place-blind system is:

                          dSW F  ¯1 - ¯ 0 + dS E {[T (z  (., 0)) - T (z  (., 0))] |move}
                                =                      1               0                                  (23)
                           d                d


   · The difference between the efficiency cost of a PBR and the one of a corresponding income tax reform

     is:




                                                       58
             dB   dB                 j  (, ) - j  (, 0)                         
                -    = lim                                 ([T (z1 (, 0)) - T (z0 (, 0))]) dF ()                      (24)
             d    dq   0      R4               
                                    j  (, q ) - j  (, 0)                      
                        - lim                            ([T (z1 (, 0)) - T (z0 (, 0))]) dF ()
                          q 0 R4              q
                                       (z  )        Z1-
                        - E T (z  )
                                    S (1 - S ) 1 + Z1- T (z  )

   Technical results are therefore similar to what is in the main text with an additive formulation of

idiosyncratic preferences, except that they call for a more cumbersome notation. We now discuss the

advantage of choosing additively separable idiosyncratic preferences for location when it comes to normative

questions.

A.2.4    Pitfalls of non-additive idiosyncratic shocks

With additively separable idiosyncratic preferences for location, the social welfare weights j
                                                                                             z are not direct

functions of j - they are only indirectly impacted by idiosyncratic preferences through their effect on choice

of city j . So welfare weights are functions of j (as well as z , wj ()), but not of j . The reason why this is an

advantage is that welfare weights ­ hence welfare implications of policies ­ do not depend on the specification

and values of the unobserved shocks j , they only depend on their indirect impact on the observed location

choice j . In contrast, when the 's directly depend on the value of j , the definition of j obviously matters

for welfare. Unfortunately, as we show in the example below, one can easily build examples where two

alternative models of j lead to observationally equivalent equilibria, hence they cannot be disentangled

using data, but have opposite welfare implications. It makes it undesirable to rest a normative argument

on such a model.24 Finally, it is easy to see that a similar argument applies to the case where idiosyncratic

preferences for location are additively separable but the planner has concave preferences over levels of indirect

utility, i.e. SW F =     G U h dh, as examined for instance in Kessing et al. (2020).


Example Consider a simple utility function:


                                                    U c h1- + j
  24 Davis and Gregory (2020) discuss a related point: multiplicative preference shocks commonly used in Economic Geography

model are typically not identified but influence marginal utility of consumption, hence social preferences. They propose to
adjust the planner's problem to neutralize the influence of these shocks on marginal utility of consumption. Our setup with
additive shocks avoids this pitfall.




                                                            59
with U (.) concave. Households supply labor inelastically. Type  gets income zj () in city j . Households

choose city j = 1 iff
                                                  z1 ()                  z0 ()
                                             U          + 1      >U            + 0 ,
                                                   P1                     P0

i.e., iff
                                                                z0 () z1 ()
                                                    1 - 0 >          -      .                                                 (25)
                                                                 P0    P1

    Note that the values of 1 and 0 separately play no role in any of the observable choices of households, so

that 1 and 0 are not separately identified. We then consider two alternative models: in model (a), 0 = 0

while 1 is an iid shock with some positive variance. In model (b), 1 = 0 while 0 is an iid shock with

some positive variance. Both models can rationalize the exact same same sorting equilibrium, as they can

rationalize the same distribution of 1 - 0 , which drives sorting. The two models are therefore observationally

equivalent. Interestingly though, they have opposite welfare (PBR-related) implications. To make the point

very stark, we assume that P1 = P0 and normalize it to 1, and we also assume that z0 () = z1 () ( z ())

in what follows. We compute j the social welfare weight of type  in city j :




                                                                              1
                                                      j = U (z ( ) + j )
                                                                              

    We now compare z    z
                   0 to 1 to determine the direction of desirability of redistribution within earnings
                                                                                                      25


implied by the two models. In model (a), households are in 1 iff

                                                                z0 () z1 ()
                                                    1 - 0 >          -      ,
                                                                 P0    P1

i.e., given our simplifying assumptions, iff 1 > 0. Therefore, given that U is concave

                                                                  1         1
                                              z
                                              1 = U (z + 1 )        < U (z ) = z
                                                                               0
                                                                            

and redistribution within-earnings from 1 to 0 is desirable.

    In model (b), households are in 1 iff

                                                                z0 () z1 ()
                                                    1 - 0 >          -      ,
                                                                 P0    P1
  25 If   we had productivity differences, we would be comparing here within-skill redistribution, but the point would still hold.




                                                                 60
i.e., given our simplifying assumptions, iff 0 < 0. Therefore households who live in 0 are such that 0 > 0,

                                                     1             1
                                        z
                                        1 = U (z )     > U (z + 0 ) = z
                                                                      0,
                                                                   

and redistribution within-earnings from 0 to 1 is desirable.

    This example illustrate the pitfalls of allowing welfare weights to directly depend on j , rather than

indirectly based on city choice only.


B     Survey Appendix

Section 5.4 presented results from our online survey of Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) U.S. online

laborers. We now present further details on the survey and its results.

    We conducted the survey in two batches. We launched one request for 550 responses at 10am Pacific

Time on Thursday July 9, 2020, and a second request for 550 responses at 10am Pacific Time on Friday, July

10, 2020. We surveyed 1,100 users in order to ensure at least 1,000 valid responses. We chose 10am Pacific

Time so that the survey would be launched during business hours throughout the continental United States.

We used unique MTurk identification numbers to prevent MTurk users who took the survey on July 9 from

taking it again on July 10, or from retaking either day's survey again on the same day. Thirty respondents

had invalid MTurk IDs or failed an attentiveness question (identifying a hand-drawn picture of a flower as

a flower), leaving us with 1,070 valid responses.

    The survey asked questions in the following order: the neighborhood and regional questions displayed

in Figure 3a (in random order), a single follow-up question eliciting explanations from the respondent for

their neighborhood and regional answers, a General Social Survey question on redistribution attitudes,

demographic questions, and the attentiveness question.

    MTurk survey respondents need not conform to nationally representative respondents. Indeed, MTurk

respondents tend to be younger and more highly educated than the average American, despite the low wages

offered on MTurk. In order to gauge how representative MTurk attitudes for redistribution may be, we

followed Fisman et al. (2020) in asking respondents a standard question from the General Social Survey

(GSS) on redistributive attitudes:




                                                        61
Some people think that the government in Washington ought to reduce the income differences between the rich
and the poor, perhaps by raising the taxes of wealthy families or by giving income assistance to the poor. Others
think that the government should not concern itself with reducing this income difference between the rich and the
poor. Here is a card with a scale from 1 to 7. Think of a score of 1 as meaning that the government ought to
reduce the income differences between rich and poor, and a score of 7 meaning that the government should not
concern itself with reducing income differences. What score between 1 and 7 comes closest to the way you feel?


    In the 2018 GSS, 50% of respondents reported that the government ought to reduce income differences

between rich and poor (i.e., gave a score between 1 and 3), 33% reported that the government should not

concern itself with reducing income differences (i.e., gave a score between 5 and 7), and 17% reported the

middle score of 4.26 As in Fisman et al., we find a similar distribution of scores in our MTurk survey: 44%

reported that the government ought to reduce income differences between rich and poor, 32% reported that

the government should not concern itself with reducing income differences, and 24% reported the middle

score.

    Figure 3a presented our main survey results with 95% confidence intervals: the share of respondents

selecting each option for distributing tax credits to poor families across space. Online Appendix Table 1a

lists the precise numbers in table form, with standard errors in parentheses. Online Appendix Table 1b lists

the full joint distribution of answers to the urban and regional questions. Approximately half of respondents

(51% in the urban question and 48% in the regional question) chose to target the hypothetical tax credit to

poor families in the distressed areas. One-third (32%) chose to target the tax credit to both distressed urban

areas and distressed rural areas while two-thirds (66%) chose to target the tax credit to either distressed
                                                       27
urban areas or distressed rural areas or both.

    Figure 3b presented survey responses to the follow-up question asked of the subset of respondents who

chose to distribute the tax credit to poor families in distressed areas. Online Appendix Table 2b lists the

precise numbers in table form, with standard errors in parentheses. The remaining panels of the table list

the analogous responses to the follow-up question asked of the other four subsets of respondents, as listed in

the panel headings. Each panel lists responses in descending order of response frequency; respondents were

asked to select all that apply.

    As noted in the main text and shown in Online Appendix Table 2ba, a large majority ­ 78% ­ of those
  26 These answers can be accessed in NORC's GSS Data Explorer: https://gssdataexplorer.norc.org/variables/243/vshow.
  27 We do not find that question order significantly predicts answers. If one restricts attention to respondents who provided
the same answer to the urban question as they did to the regional question ­ i.e., when restricting to the 583 respondents lying
along the diagonal of Online Appendix Table 2b who are especially unlikely to have provided random answers ­ one finds that
60% prefer distribution to poor families in distressed areas.



                                                              62
choosing to target the tax credit to poor residents of distressed areas explain their choice with the reasoning:

"Poor families in distressed areas are worse off, since they deal with high poverty, high crime, high pollution,

struggling schools, and a history of job losses." That response suggests an emphasis on utility levels rather

than marginal utility. Interestingly, Online Appendix Table 2a shows that a substantial majority ­ 67% ­ of

those choosing to spread the tax credit evenly to poor residents everywhere explain their choice with marginal

utility reasoning: "Extra money given to poor families is equally valuable to poor families no matter where

they live." Hence, standard notions of earnings being a sufficient statistic for marginal social welfare weights

due to diminishing marginal utility of income do find support in the data, albeit among only a subset of

respondents.


C     Calibration Appendix

Section 6.3 described the calibration of our quantification exercise. We provide further details here.


C.1     Community Productivity

As described in Section 6.2, we use the Hornbeck and Moretti (2019) Metropolitan Statistical Area productivity-

rent gradient in order to assign a productivity level to each community based on its adjusted median rent.

Specifically, in the year-2000 Hornbeck-Moretti data (the most recent year available), we regress Hornbeck-

Moretti's estimated log MSA total factor productivity on log MSA mean rent (see their Table 2). We

find a coefficient of 0.254 (robust standard error 0.052). Hence, we set community productivity equal to

community rent raised to 0.254. Because the community with the minimum normalized rent (which happens

to be the Distressed community) equals 0.38, the minimum community productivity equals 0.78. Because

the community with the maximum normalized rent (which happens to be the lowest-poverty community)

mechanically equals 1, the maximum community productivity equals 1.


C.2     Community Earnings Distribution

As described in Section 6.3, we use community earnings distributions from the 2013-2017 ACS in order to

calibrate the skill distribution parameters {µ ,  } and the amenity valuation parameters {aj ()}. Specifically,

the tract-level ACS aggregates contain each tract's annual household income distribution along ten income

bins defined by nine annual household income thresholds: $10,000, $15,000, $25,000, $35,000, $50,000,




                                                      63
$75,000, $100,000, $150,000, and $200,000. We aggregate these household income distributions across tracts

within our hundred communities in order to obtain a household income distribution for each community.

   The ACS household income measure includes labor earnings, capital income, and some government

transfers. In contrast, our quantitative model does not include capital income and does not distinguish

among different types of government transfers. We therefore calibrate the model to match each community's

labor earnings distribution, after translating each household income threshold into an analogous household

earnings threshold. Specifically, in the 2013-2017 individual-level ACS, we compute mean household labor

earnings (wages, salary, commissions, bonuses, and tips from all jobs) within symmetric two-thousand-

dollar ranges around each of the nine household income thresholds in the 2013-2017 tract-level ACS. For

example, we find that mean household labor earnings among households with household income in the range

[$9,000,$11,000] is $4,300.

   In this way, we arrive at nine annual household labor earnings thresholds, each rounded to the nearest one

hundred dollars: $4,300, $9,600, $19,500, $28,500, $42,000, $64,700, $88,000, $132,400, and $180,200. For

each community, we assign each the mass in each household income bin to the analogous household earnings

bin. Finally, we combine the bottom two bins into one, which we found aided simulation fit in certain

permutations. Hence, our final nine earnings bins are defined by the eight thresholds: $9,600, $19,500,

$28,500, $42,000, $64,700, $88,000, $132,400, and $180,200.


C.3     Current Tax-and-Transfer System

Our calibration requires an approximation of the current all-in tax-and-transfer system that applies to

the average U.S. household, including redistribution at all levels of government. Specifically, we require

an approximation of taxes-paid-minus-transfers received ("net taxes") as a function of pre-tax-and-transfer-

income ("pre-tax income"). We obtain that approximation using the distributional national accounts (DINA)

of Piketty, Saez, and Zucman (2018), which distributes across U.S. individuals all U.S. national income and

all taxes paid to all levels of U.S. governments.

   We adopt the following sample restrictions in the public-use DINA files. We compile all individuals in the

2013-2017 DINA files, analogous to our use of the 2013-2017 ACS. We aggregate DINA's annual records of

individuals to the annual tax unit level, in order to reflect the tax code. Because our quantification exercise

includes labor income but not capital income, we restrict attention to annual household records in which



                                                      64
the wages, salaries, and tips reported on tax returns comprise between 99% and 100% of their total income

reported on tax returns.28 Because our model abstracts from savings and because the elderly consume out

of savings and pay concomitant consumption taxes, we restrict attention to annual household records in

which the taxpaying adults (either the lone taxpayer or both taxpayers of a married couple) are aged 30-55.

We restrict to households with pre-tax income (defined below) under $500,000, which exceeds the maximum

pre-tax income we find in our baseline quantitative exercises.

    We define pre-tax income and net taxes as follows. Because our quantification exercise includes labor

income but not capital income, we define pre-tax income as pre-tax-and-transfer labor income. Hence, our

income concept does not include actual or imputed capital income, such as imputed rental income from

owner occupied housing. Similarly, we define net taxes as taxes paid on labor income and consumption

minus government transfers. Hence, our net taxes concept does not include taxes directly attributable to

wealth or capital income, such as property taxes or corporate income taxes (whose incidence DINA assumes

falls entirely on capital). We handle contributory social insurance taxes ­ i.e., taxes like Social Security taxes,

unemployment insurance taxes, and workers compensation taxes that fund future transfers to contributing

individuals ­ in the same way that Piketty, Saez, and Zucman do in their main pre-tax income concept:

we exclude those taxes and the accompanying transfers from our net taxes concept. That is: contributory

social insurance taxes are excluded from both pre-tax income and post-tax income, while contributory social

insurance payments are included in both pre-tax income and post-tax income.29

    We implement our pre-tax income and net taxes definitions in the DINA files as follows. We set pre-

tax income equal to DINA personal factor labor income. Personal factor labor income equals employee

compensation (equal to employee wages and benefits) plus the labor component of mixed income (i.e., self-

employment income assumed attributable to labor rather than capital) plus assumed sales and excise taxes

falling on labor.30 We set net taxes equal to the sum of DINA federal and state personal income taxes, sales
  28 For households that do not file taxes, the DINA files include synthetic records with values imputed based on the Current

Population Survey and other data sources.
  29 See PSZ's discussion between pre-tax factor income and pre-tax national income. Alternative approaches from the one

we adopt are difficult to implement in annual cross-sectional data. For example, counting Social Security taxes as a pure tax
on working-age households ignores the large transfers that those benefits will trigger later in life. Panel data would permit a
researcher to compute lifetime Social Security taxes paid minus lifetime Social Security benefits received, but the DINA files
are annual cross sections.
  30 In terms of DINA variables, pre-tax-and-transfer income equals flinc ("personal factor labor income", equal to employee

wages and benefits plus the labor component of mixed income plus the labor component of sales and excise taxes). Employee
wages and benefits includes employer payroll taxes and unemployment insurance contributions. Sales and excise taxes are part
of national income and are part of the taxes that households pay when consuming after-tax-and-transfer income, so those taxes
must be counted as pre-tax-and-transfer income as well. DINA allocates those taxes to individuals according to their labor
and capital income; personal factor labor income includes only the portion of sales and excise taxes attributable to their labor
income.



                                                              65
and excise taxes, and non-contributory social insurance taxes (essentially Medicare taxes), minus the sum

of DINA cash and cash-like transfers (e.g., refundable tax credits, food stamps, and Supplemental Security

Income) and in-kind transfers (e.g., Medicaid, Medicare, and Pell grants).31 Taxes paid tend to be negative

for low-pre-tax-income households, which indicates that they receive net transfers from the tax-and-transfer

system, while taxes paid tend to be positive for high-pre-tax-income households.32

    Our quantitative exercise uses a three-bracket income tax-and-transfer system, with bracket kink points at

$20,000 and $80,000 and with a universal lump-sum transfer. We therefore estimate the best-fit three-bracket

income tax-and-transfer system on the DINA data, using OLS regression of net taxes on a three-segment

linear spline in pre-tax income. The resulting coefficients equal our approximation of net taxes T (z ) as a

function of pre-tax income z :


                        T (z )   = -11300

                                 + .438 × min {z, 20000}

                                 +    1 {z > 20000} × .161 × min {z - 20000, 80000 - 20000}

                                 +    1 {z > 80000} × .271 × (z - 80000)


where 1 {z > 20000} and 1 {z > 80000} are indicators for pre-tax income lying above $20,000 and $80,000,

respectively. In the DINA data, the lump-sum transfer of $11,300 reflects a combination of cash and cash-

like transfers like Supplemental Security Income and food stamps and in-kind transfers like Medicaid. The

high effective marginal tax rate of 43.8% in the $0-$20,000 income tax bracket largely reflects the phase-out

ranges of transfers to low earners. The low effective marginal tax rate of 16.1% in the $20,000-$80,000 income

tax bracket reflects relatively low statutory income tax rates after deductions and exemptions. The higher

effective marginal tax rate of 27.1% in the $80,000+ income tax bracket reflects higher statutory income

tax rates at higher earnings.33 Notably, standard optimal income tax systems similarly exhibit a U-shaped
  31 Medicare taxes are non-contributory taxes: Medicare is an "entitlement" that is not limited to those who have paid in

to the system. Medicare is available to working-age households with specific conditions, such as end stage renal disease or a
disability that qualifies them for Social Security Disability Insurance. In terms of DINA variables, taxes paid the sum of ditaf
("Federal personal income tax gross of refundable tax credits"), ditas ("State personal income tax"), salestax ("Sales and excise
taxes"), and othercontrib ("Contributions for government social insurance other than pension, UI, DI"), minus the sum of dicab
("Social assistance benefits in cash") and inkindinc ("Social transfers in kind").
  32 The average value of taxes paid is positive, primarily because we exclude public goods consumption ­ including defense

procurement, most government salaries, and other government expenditures that are not individualized transfers ­ from net
taxes.
  33 The 2015 federal marginal tax rate for a married couple earning $80,000 was 15% and for a single filer was 25%. Our

best-fit approximation somewhat overestimates actual taxes paid among middle earners and underestimates actual taxes paid
among the highest earners in the DINA data.




                                                               66
pattern of marginal tax rates with a five-digit lump-sum transfer (e.g., Saez 2001).34


C.4      Calibration Procedure

We jointly choose the discretized lognormal skill distribution parameters {µ ,  } and the amenity parameters
         100,50
{aj ()}j =1,=1 via a minimum distance algorithm that seeks to equate certain model-predicted moments

to the equivalent moments in the ACS data. The amenity parameters are chosen to exactly match each

community's share of each of nine nationwide household earnings bins based on the ACS tract-level aggregates

described in Appendix C.2. The nine household earnings bins are the same as those computed from the ACS

in Appendix C.2 and are defined by the following eight earnings thresholds: $9,600, $19,500, $28,500, $42,000,

$64,700, $88,000, $132,400, and $180,200. The skill-distribution parameters are chosen to minimize the sum

of square deviations from the share of the nationwide population with earnings in the bottom two ACS-based

bins (i.e., below $19,500) and the share with earnings in the top three ACS-based bins (i.e., above $88,000).

    The calibration algorithm consists of two optimization steps: an outer loop and an inner loop. Let d (z )

denote the ACS earnings bin into which earnings level z falls. We allow each of the one hundred communities

to have nine amenity levels, one for each earnings bin d  {1, ..., 9}, so that aj () = ajd(z ()) . In the outer
                                                                                                          j

                                                                     100,9
loop, we take these earnings-indexed amenity levels            {ajd }j =1,d=1       as given and find the skill distribution

parameters {µ ,  } that minimize the sum of squared residuals between the model-predicted and actual

shares of households with earnings less than $19,500 and greater than $88,000.

    In the inner loop, we find amenity levels needed to exactly match each community j 's share of each of

the nine nationwide household earnings bins d using a fixed point algorithm analogous to that of Berry et al.

(1995). Specifically, we update the amenity parameters as follows until convergence:

                            (t+1)          (t)truth         (t)
                           ajd      = ajd + lnjd    - lnjd          for j = 1, .., 100, d = 1, ..., 9,

                                     (t)
where t is the iteration step, jd is the model-predicted share of households with pre-tax earnings in bin d
                                                                         100,9
                                                                   (t)                                truth
that locate in community j given the current guess                ajd               of amenities, and jd    is the empirical
                                                                         j =1,d=1

share of households with earning in bin d that locate in community j according to the ACS data.

    After the inner loop has converged, for each skill type   {1, ..., 50}, we recenter the amenity parameters

aj () to equal zero in the community with the median poverty rate (i.e., the 50th poorest community).
  34 Note that Piketty, Saez, and Zucman (2018) and Saez and Zucman (2019) report relatively flat average tax rates across the

income distribution using the DINA data. Their calculations include contributory social insurance taxes and do not include
transfers.


                                                             67
Specifically, for final iteration T , we set

                        (T )         (T )       (T )
                       aj      () = ajd z () - a50d z () ,   for j = 1, ..., 100,  = 1, ..., 50,
                                       (j )        ( 50 )

which yields 5,000 amenity levels, one for each community and skill type combination. Because skill type

location decisions only depend on differences in amenity levels across communities, this final recentering step

has no effect on behavior.

   While the inner loop adjusts the nine hundred amenity parameters to exactly match the share of each

earnings bin that resides in each community in the ACS, the outer loop's two lognormal parameters do

not yield an exact match to the nationwide earnings distribution in the ACS. As a result, each community's

population deviates from 1%. However, the deviations are relatively small in practice: community populations

range from 0.94% to 1.07%, with the highest-poverty and lowest-poverty communities having lower population

than middle-poverty communities, because the lowest earners and highest earners are slightly underrepresented

nationally.




                                                        68
                                                           ONLINE APPENDIX TABLE 1
                                                   Survey Results on Distributional Preferences

A. Marginal Distributions
                                              A $100 tax credit for                                   A $100 tax credit for
                                              poor families in the       A $1 tax credit for poor     poor families in the
                                                distressed area            familes everywhere             thriving area
                                                       (1)                          (2)                         (3)
  Regional question                                    48%                         24%                        28%
                                                     (1.53pp)                    (1.31pp)                   (1.38pp)
  City/Town question                                   51%                         25%                        25%
                                                     (1.53pp)                    (1.32pp)                   (1.32pp)

B. Joint Distribution
                                                                                   Answer to City/Town question
                                              A $100 tax credit for                                 A $100 tax credit for
                                              poor families in the       A $1 tax credit for poor   poor families in the
                                                distressed area            familes everywhere           thriving area                 All responses
                                                        (4)                         (5)                        (6)                          (7)
  Answer to Regional question
    A $100 tax credit for poor families in
    the distressed area                                32%                          7%                         8%                         48%
                                                     (1.43pp)                    (0.78pp)                   (0.84pp)                    (1.53pp)
    A $1 tax credit for poor familes
    everywhere                                          7%                         11%                         6%                         24%
                                                     (0.78pp)                    (0.97pp)                   (0.71pp)                    (1.31pp)
    A $100 tax credit for poor families in
    the thriving area                                  11%                          6%                        11%                         28%
                                                     (0.97pp)                    (0.74pp)                   (0.95pp)                    (1.38pp)
    All responses                                      51%                         25%                        25%                         100%
                                                     (1.53pp)                    (1.32pp)                   (1.32pp)

Notes - Panel A repeats in the table format the survey results plotted in Figure 3a. See the notes to that table for details. Panel B lists the full
cross-tabulation of responses that underlie Panel A. Standard errors are listed in parentheses.
                                                                                 ONLINE APPENDIX TABLE 2
                                                                  Survey Results on Rationales for Distributional Preferences

A. Subset of respondents who answered to both questions: A $1 tax credit for poor familes everywhere.
  Extra money given to poor families is equally valuable no matter where they live.                                                                                                        67%
                                                                                                                                                                                         (4.29pp)
  Poor families are no worse off in one place or another.                                                                                                                                  36%
                                                                                                                                                                                         (4.39pp)
  I might want to help poor families in one place over another place, but it is wrong for the government to treat people with the same earnings differently.                               45%
                                                                                                                                                                                         (4.55pp)
  An explanation not listed above (please specify).                                                                                                                                         1%
                                                                                                                                                                                         (0.83pp)

B. Subset of respondents who answered to both questions: A $100 tax credit for poor families in the distressed area.
  An extra dollar goes further in distressed areas, since housing costs and other services are cheaper.                                                                                    34%
                                                                                                                                                                                         (2.54pp)
  An extra dollar goes further in distressed areas, since poor families there have greater spending needs like supplementing school instruction, replacing stolen goods, or
  treating asthma from high pollution.                                                                                                                                                     39%
                                                                                                                                                                                         (2.62pp)
  Poor families in distressed areas are worse off, since they deal with high poverty, high crime, high pollution, struggling schools, and a history of job losses.                         78%
                                                                                                                                                                                         (2.22pp)
  Poor families in distressed areas are more deserving, since they are more likely to be poor due to circumstances beyond their control.                                                   44%
                                                                                                                                                                                         (2.67pp)
  An explanation not listed above (please specify).                                                                                                                                         3%
                                                                                                                                                                                         (0.85pp)

C. Subset of respondents who answered to both questions: A $100 tax credit for poor families in the thriving area.
  An extra dollar goes further in thriving areas, since poor families there have less money left over after paying high housing costs.                                                     63%
                                                                                                                                                                                         (4.51pp)
  Poor families in thriving areas are worse off, since housing costs more there.                                                                                                           52%
                                                                                                                                                                                         (4.68pp)
  Poor families in thriving areas feel poorer because they interact with more rich neighbors.                                                                                              49%
                                                                                                                                                                                         (4.68pp)
  Poor families in thriving areas are more deserving, since they are more likely to be poor due to circumstances beyond their control.                                                     46%
                                                                                                                                                                                         (4.67pp)
  An explanation not listed above (please specify).                                                                                                                                         2%
                                                                                                                                                                                         (1.22pp)

D. Subset of respondents who gave more money to poor families in distressed urban areas than to poor families in distressed regions.
  The poor in distressed urban areas are worse off than the poor in distressed rural areas.                                                                                                55%
                                                                                                                                                                                         (3.08pp)
  A dollar goes further in distressed urban areas than in distressed rural areas.                                                                                                          48%
                                                                                                                                                                                         (3.09pp)
  Distressed urban areas have suffered greater racial injustices than distressed rural areas.                                                                                              40%
                                                                                                                                                                                         (3.03pp)
  Poor families in distressed urban areas are more deserving, since they are more likely to be poor due to circumstances beyond their control.                                             51%
                                                                                                                                                                                         (3.09pp)
  An explanation not listed above (please specify).                                                                                                                                         2%
                                                                                                                                                                                         (0.93pp)

E. Subset of respondents who gave more money to poor families in distressed regions than to poor families in distressed urban areas.
  The poor in distressed rural areas are worse off than the poor in distressed urban areas.                                                                                                50%
                                                                                                                                                                                         (3.34pp)
  A dollar goes further in distressed rural areas than in distressed urban areas.                                                                                                          43%
                                                                                                                                                                                         (3.31pp)
  Distressed rural areas have suffered greater racial injustices than distressed urban areas.                                                                                              41%
                                                                                                                                                                                         (3.28pp)
  Poor families in distressed rural areas are more deserving, since they are more likely to be poor due to circumstances beyond their control.                                             57%
                                                                                                                                                                                         (3.30pp)
  An explanation not listed above (please specify).                                                                                                                                         0%
                                                                                                                                                                                         (0.00pp)

Notes - Panel B repeats in table format the results presented in Figure 3b. As explained in the notes to that figure, the respondents who chose to distribute the tax credit only to poor families in
distressed areas were given five potential explanations and asked to select all that apply. All potential explanations other than "An explanation not listed above (please specify)." were presented
in random order. Panels A, C, D, and E present analogous results to the follow-up question asked of the other four subset of respondents, as specified in the panel heading. As an example of
interpretation, Panel B shows that -- among those who chose to distribute the tax credit only to poor families in distressed areas -- 78% selected as at least of one explanation for their choices:
"Poor families in distressed areas are worse off, since they deal with high poverty, high crime, high pollution, struggling schools, and a history of job losses.".
                                                                                  ONLINE APPENDIX TABLE 3
                                                     Exploration of Mechanisms for Large Optimal Place-Based Transfers ­ Additional Results

                                                                    Under Optimal Income Tax and No PBR                          Under Optimal Income Tax and Optimal PBR
                                                                   Value of                                          Value of
                                                                 redistributon Marginal value     MVPF of          redistributon                                                      Place-blind
                                                                     from      of public funds   analogous             from                      Increase in   Place-blind            marginal tax
                                                 Optimal level   Elsewhere to     (MVPF) of     income tax         Elsewhere to Redistribution population of   lump-sum               rate above
                                                   of PBR         Distressed         PBR           reform           Distressed value narrowed Distressed         transfer                $80K
                                                          (1)         (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)              (8)             (9)
A. Calibration
  Baseline                                           $5,500          1.29            0.98             0.72              1.09            71%               9%            $22,357          46.5%
  Income effects                                     $3,700          1.26            0.98             0.60              1.11            59%               7%            $22,721          46.9%
  Comparative advantage                              $4,200          1.29            0.91             0.61              1.12            57%               7%            $21,983          45.7%
  Income effects + Comp. adv.                        $3,100          1.26            0.89             0.61              1.13            50%               6%            $22,497          46.3%

B. Eliminate skill-taste correlation after calibration
  Baseline                                               $400        1.04            0.97             0.82              1.02            34%               1%            $21,902          46.0%
  Income effects                                         -$400       1.01            0.96             0.78              1.02           -116%             -1%            $22,254          46.4%
  Comparative advantage                              $1,600          1.18            0.87             0.70              1.12            32%               2%            $21,759          45.8%
  Income effects + Comp. adv.                            $700        1.16            0.85             0.67              1.13            17%               1%            $22,688          46.6%

Notes - This table expands on the results presented in Table 3. For details on the specifications underlying each row of this table, see the notes to Table 3. For details on the content of each
column, see the notes to Table 2. As explained in Section 6.5, the optimal level of PBR in the second row of Panel B is negative because the planner favors redistribution towards Elsewhere
conditional on earnings . The column 2 value exceeds one in that specification because low earners sort to Distressed in order to enjoy low rent.
                                                                                              ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE 1

                                                          Community Poverty Rates and Calibration Parameters

                                                                                                       A. Poverty Rate by Community




                                                                                         60
                                                                                         40
                                                                          Poverty Rate
                                                                                         20
                                                                                         0




                                                                                              0       20             40            60              80                                          100
                                                                                                  Community (ranked from highest poverty to lowest poverty)




                                                B. Rent by Community                                                                                                                     C. Productivity by Community
                      1




                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                      scaled by highest community productivity
scaled by highest community rent




                                                                                                                                                                      .95
                                                                                                                                              Community productivity,
                      .8
        Community rent,




                                                                                                                                                           .9
        .6




                                                                                                                                               .85                .8
                      .4




                                   0       20             40            60             80                    100                                                                 0       20             40            60             80          100
                                       Community (ranked from highest poverty to lowest poverty)                                                                                     Community (ranked from highest poverty to lowest poverty)




Notes : Our quantitative exercise is based on an amalgamation of U.S. Census tracts into one hundred equal-
sized communities based on tract poverty rate in the 2013-2017 ACS. Panel A plots community poverty rates,
which is not a direct input to the quantitative exercise. Panels B-C plot direct inputs to the quantitative
exercise under baseline preferences. Community rent equals the population-weighted mean of median tract
rent, normalized to one in the highest rent tract. Community productivity equals community rent raised to
0.254, based on Hornbeck-Moretti's productivity-rent elasticity.




                                                                                                                         72
                                                    ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE 2

                                          Skill-Taste Correlation across Preference Specifications
                        3
     Above-median-skill taste minus

                              1.5
        below-median-skill taste
        -1.5      0     -3




                                      0          20             40            60              80           100
                                             Community (ranked from highest poverty to lowest poverty)
                                              Baseline                            Income effects
                                              Comparative advantage               Income effects w/ comp. adv.



Notes : This figure plots calibrated skill-taste correlation ­ i.e., the degree to which the high skilled and low
skilled disagree on community valuations ­ across four preference specifications. For each specification and
each community j , the figure plots the unweighted mean valuation aj () of those with above-median skill
(i.e., the twenty-five highest skill types ) minus the unweighted mean valuation of those with below-median
skill (i.e., the twenty-five lowest skill types ). Each of the fifty skill types constitutes two percent of the
simulated economy's population. The four preference specifications are the same as those underlying Table
3, as described in Section 6.5.




                                                                     73
