                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     PRICE INDICES AND THE VALUE OF INNOVATION WITH HETEROGENOUS
                               PATIENTS

                                      Claudio Lucarelli
                                       Sean Nicholson
                                      Nicholas Tilipman

                                     Working Paper 28333
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28333


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2021




We thank Mark Duggan, David Molitor, Kate Bundorf, Adam Ullman, Ron Katznelson, and
seminar participants at Hoover IP2 and Stanford University. Artem Gulish and Brigid Farrell
provided excellent research assistance. This research was supported by unrestricted grants from
the Pharmaceutical Economics and Policy Council and the Merck Company Foundation. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Claudio Lucarelli, Sean Nicholson, and Nicholas Tilipman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Price Indices and the Value of Innovation with Heterogenous Patients
Claudio Lucarelli, Sean Nicholson, and Nicholas Tilipman
NBER Working Paper No. 28333
January 2021
JEL No. I11,I31,L00

                                          ABSTRACT

Many countries use uniform cost-effectiveness criteria to determine whether to adopt a new
medical technology for the entire population. This approach assumes homogeneous preferences
for expected health benefits and side effects. We examine whether new prescription drugs
generate welfare gains when accounting for heterogeneous preferences by constructing quality-
adjusted price indices for colorectal cancer drug treatments. We find that while the efficacy gains
from newer drugs do not justify high prices for the population as a whole, innovation improves
the welfare of sicker, late-stage cancer patients. A uniform evaluation criterion would not permit
these innovations despite welfare gains to a subpopulation.


Claudio Lucarelli                                Nicholas Tilipman
The Wharton School                               1603 West Taylor Street
University of Pennsylvania                       School of Public Health
3641 Locust Walk                                 Room 783 (MC 923)
Philadelphia, PA 19104                           Chicago, IL 60612
clucarel@wharton.upenn.edu                       tilipman@uic.edu

Sean Nicholson
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
Cornell University
102 Martha Van Rensselaer Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
sn243@cornell.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28333
1     Introduction
    Persistent health care spending growth in the United States has been a policy concern for the
last eight decades and the subject of substantial research and policy activity (Newhouse, 1992).
Innovation of medical technology has been identified as the consensus catalyst for this growth, de-
spite several policy eorts (Smith et al., 2009). Most policies and market evolutions have involved
changes to health insurance, such as increased patient cost-sharing, managed care, prospective pay-
ment mechanisms, and, more recently, narrow provider networks and high-deductible health plans.
None of these eorts have had a direct impact on innovation or the adoption of new technology,
and therefore their eect has occasionally decreased the level of spending but not its growth rate
(Chernew and Newhouse, 2011; Cutler et al., 2000; McWilliams et al., 2016; Manning et al., 1987).
    Given the limited success of these interventions, the question of whether society obtains enough
value for the price of medical care continues to be an important question, and controversial in
situations where the stakes are high for patients, payers, providers, and manufacturers (Lakdawalla
et al., 2012). Some countries in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
(OECD) have introduced centralized health technology assessment agencies to evaluate the value of
new technology. The most prominent such institution is the United Kingdom's National Institute
for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE), which employs cost-eectiveness analysis (CEA) to
assess a technology's cost per incremental unit of benefit.1 Although the United States has no such
system in place, periodically there are proposals to transition to a system of centralized medical
technology value assessment that would allow public insurers such as Medicare to negotiate prices
based on CEA evidence. (Frank and Nichols, 2019).
    The relative simplicity of CEA as a tool for allocating scarce medical resources and its eec-
tiveness at reducing spending explains its widespread use in European countries and why it is
frequently considered for the U.S. However, using a single threshold to decide whether a particular
technology is cost-eective is at odds with conventional economic models of demand, whose ap-
peal is precisely to be able to capture the heterogeneity of dierent consumers' values for a good.
In fact, the heterogeneity of willingness to pay that is central to a demand function highlights
that a homogeneous valuation does not exist, unless preferences and outcomes are homogeneous
in the population, which is very unlikely. The homogeneous cost eectiveness (CE) thresholds
used to determine coverage or market entry, and the homogeneity of preferences assumed in CEA,
are problematic for the e cient allocation of health care resources. Indeed, Garber and Phelps
(1997) studied the economic foundations of CEA and concluded that it can identify egalitarian
allocations, but applying a homogeneous rule to a heterogeneous population is not likely to yield a
Pareto optimal allocation.2
   In this paper we examine whether pharmaceutical innovation has delivered enough value to
dierent groups of patients in the U.S. to justify high prices. We focus on the market for colorectal
   1
     A widely used metric to measure the benefits of medical technology and interventions is a Quality Adjusted Life
Year (QALY). This measure incorporates both the expected length and quality of life
   2
     Through its recent action, the U.K. has also recognized that using a homogeneous CE threshold may produce
suboptimal allocations. Specifically, the Cancer Drug Fund was established in the U.K. in 2010 to pay for oncology
treatments that NICE did not recommend for coverage. Between 2010 and 2016, Lakdawalla et al. (2014) documents
that one billion pounds were invested in the Fund to assuage public concerns regarding NICE's recommendations
that blocked or delayed access to new therapies.



                                                         2
cancer treatments, a setting that has seen both substantial innovation as well as considerable price
increases over the past several decades. We first rely on the discrete choice literature to estimate
a model of oncologists' demand for colorectal cancer treatments (McFadden, 1974; Berry, 1994;
Berry et al., 1995; Nevo, 2000; Berry and Pakes, 2007). We next compute the consumer surplus
for dierent patient subpopulations resulting from new regimens entering the market. Finally, we
construct a series of quality-adjusted price indices for each group by computing the change in drug
prices consistent with the calculated welfare eect. This allows us to assess whether, for these
patient subpopulations, quality-adjusted prices rose or fell once new goods entered the market.
       The market for colorectal cancer treatments provides an ideal setting for estimating quality-
adjusted price indices. From a policy perspective, the innovation-driven changes in drug attributes
and prices of cancer treatments has led to considerably dierent approaches across countries re-
garding whether and how to regulate access to medical care. As an example, comparing the market
shares of colorectal cancer regimens between the U.S. and Europe in 2005, it is clear that regimens
with higher expected survival rates (measured in months within each segment, with more eective
regimens appearing at the top of the figure) had a larger market share in the U.S. versus Europe, as
shown in Figure 1. These dierences may lead to significant dierences in health outcomes. Indeed,
Stevens et al. (2015) show that cancer mortality reductions have been larger in the countries that
spend more on treatment. Considering its high prevalence in every country, cancer is therefore an
area where the lack of a consensus between governments and their citizens regarding the value of
new technology and how to measure that value could have a substantial impact on welfare.
       In addition, the colorectal cancer market is attractive for purposes of estimation. It is a setting
where physicians are sensitive to price. Because colorectal cancer treatments are usually adminis-
tered in a physician's o ce, physicians take ownership of the drugs they infuse to their patients, are
aware of prices, incur substantial carrying costs, and are subject to oversight from health insurers.
As a result, physicians consider both clinical and financial considerations when choosing drug treat-
ments for their patients, which leads to fewer instances of supplier-induced demand. This contrasts
with most health care markets where physicians are aware of attributes but insulated from price,
or where patients face only part of the price.
       A key contribution of our paper is to account for physician and patient heterogeneity when
estimating demand for drugs. Our model posits that physicians act as agents for their patients,
but permits them to have idiosyncratic preferences for drug attributes. We specify a model where,
in choosing a therapy for a patient, physicians take into account a patient's value for each e cacy
measure (e.g., median life expectancy when the drug was tested in a randomized controlled trial),
their tolerance for side eects, and the extent to which patients are willing to accept greater toxicity
to achieve greater e cacy.3 We also allow physicians' utility to depend on the regimen price. As
mentioned above, physicians in this setting incur substantial carrying costs and, therefore, should
have aligned incentives with their patients. However, one possible concern is that physicians could
potentially profit from more expensive drugs after being reimbursed by the patient's insurer.4 To
   3
     These attributes, and the heterogeneity in preferences patients exhibit for them, have been recognized in the
medical literature. Kravitz et al. (2004) state that the ability to predict how a patient will respond to therapy will
depend on what they call response to treatment, vulnerability to side eects, and how those are traded with each
other in terms of utility.
   4
     Exploiting changes in reimbursement policy by Medicare, Jacobson et al. (2016) report that physicians' changes



                                                          3
address this concern, in our preferred approach we specify a highly flexible model that allows
physician preferences for price and non-price attributes to vary with their patients' characteristics.
In addition, our model allows for unobserved heterogeneity in preferences for price across physicians
through the inclusion of random coe cients. We identify the parameters of our model by using
detailed and novel microdata, where we observe oncologists' prescription choices for individual
patients over time, as the choice set of drug regimens and patient characteristics change. In eect,
this allows us to separate the extent to which physician prescribing behavior is driven by changes
in patient characteristics as opposed to the physicians' idiosyncratic preferences for specific drug
regimens, such as price.
    Our approach allows us to address two important challenges that are relevant in markets with
substantial innovation. The first challenge relates to correctly measuring the cost of living, which
has been a concern since the introduction of the Consumer Price Index (CPI) more than 100 years
ago. The CPI Commission (Boskin et al., 1998), appointed in 1995, concluded that most of cost
of living mismeasurement comes from the introduction of new goods and changes in the quality of
goods. Our model explicitly incorporates such changes in quality through our measure of consumer
surplus.5 The second challenge is to account for the heterogeneity of patients' willingness to pay due
to dierent price sensitivity and clinical outcomes from treatment. Our approach derives values
directly from the demand function, and therefore the heterogeneity in willingness to pay is built
naturally into the price index.
    We generate several indices for purposes of comparison for the period between 1993 and 2005.
During this period, all new products remained on patent, which provides the most conservative
scenario for a price index because we do not include decreases in prices due to eventual generic
or biosimilar competition.6 First, we construct a "na¨
                                                     ive" price index that simply reports the
mean price of cancer regimens in each quarter, relative to our initial period (1993), without any
adjustments for changes in regimen attributes but allowing the market shares (or bundle weights)
to change. The naive index is based on the prices physicians pay to acquire each regimen and the
market share of each regimen. This index shows a large increase in prices of about 29,000% (see
Figure 5), which emphasizes the importance of quality-adjusting in a market with innovation and
quality improvement.
    We next construct several price indices from the discrete choice demand estimation methods
described above. These methods vary in how much preference heterogeneity is allowed, starting
from a simple case in which all heterogeneity is accounted for by the idiosyncratic logit error term
(McFadden, 1974), and extending to a random coe cients model whose distribution depends on
in treatments administered are small compared to the survival benefits for lung cancer patients, indicating that
physicians behave altruistically. These results are also consistent with Kolstad (2013), who reports that physicians'
intrinsic motivation is about four times larger than the extrinsic motivation induced by profit incentives. Cockburn
and Anis (2001) and Dunn (2012) make similar assumptions that physicians act in the best interest of patients when
they construct medical price indices for rheumatoid arthritis and cholesterol drugs, respectively.
    5
      Since (Hicks, 1940) it has been widely accepted that a promising approach for constructing cost of living price
indices is to measure the change in consumer surplus and welfare implications from the introduction of new goods
using estimated demand systems (Trajtenberg, 1989; Pakes et al., 1993; Petrin, 2002; Nevo, 2003; Hausman, 1996).
Related to this literature, but taking a more general view on innovation, Murphy and Topel (2006) also use consumer
surplus to measure the value of improvements in health and longevity in the U.S., which they later relate to the value
of investing in basic research to decrease cancer mortality.
    6
      By July 2019, four of the five patent-protected drugs in our sample were competing with lower-priced generic or
biosimilar versions of their molecules.


                                                          4
observed patient and unobserved physician characteristics (Berry et al., 1995, 2004). In models with
idiosyncratic tastes for products, the addition of new products mechanically increases consumer
surplus as the error term generates positive demand, and therefore every new product increases
consumer surplus. For this reason, we also estimate a pure characteristics model of demand in
order to test whether the price index changes when removing the idiosyncratic error term that is
present in the logit and random-coe cients models (Berry and Pakes, 2007). The latter model
includes only idiosyncratic tastes for characteristics and, to the best of our knowledge, has only
been applied empirically in a few studies of computer markets (Song, 2007, 2008; Nosko, 2014).
Following Nevo (2003)'s insight, we are explicit regarding our assumptions about the evolution of
the outside option and the unobserved components of utility, and we report price indices for each
case.
   Our results show that accounting for patient heterogeneity matters, with the price index diering
for distinct patient types. Our principal finding is that innovation in colorectal cancer treatments
appear to have largely benefited patients with late-stage cancers undergoing multiple rounds of
treatment, as compared to patients with early-stage cancers. Indeed, we find that patients with ad-
vanced cancers undergoing multiple treatment rounds experience a quality-adjusted price decrease
of 44 percent, whereas patients with early-stage cancer receiving their first drug treatment expe-
rience an increase of 128 percent. In the first case, the value that patients obtain from the more
expensive treatment greatly osets its price, whereas the situation is reversed for patients with
less advanced cancer. If one disregards heterogeneity and only uses an average value, such as with
CEA, the price index increases by between five and 15 percent, and one would conclude that the
innovation we observed in this period was not worth it. If a uniform rule prevented patients with
advanced cancer from receiving their preferred treatment, these patients would have experienced
large welfare losses. Our results are consistent with the conclusions reached by Lakdawalla et al.
(2012), who found that patients at the end of life place large value on hope, and are willing to
pay more for therapies that oer the possibility of a longer survival period. Our results are also
consistent with survey data suggesting that people substantially value health investments for sick
patients (Nord et al., 1995). Similarly, Bauer et al. (2018) develop a theoretical framework for
valuing health improvements and find that the willingness to pay for medical treatment by a sick
individual is several times greater than what a healthy person would be willing to pay for preven-
tive care that improves longevity by the same amount. Ignoring heterogeneity in value assessment
will lead to one-size-fits-all decision by payers that are disconnected from the preferences of the
physician-patient dyads.
   The heterogeneity in values we find, and the implied divergent evolution of the price index
for dierent types of patients, is also informative for the e cient design of health insurance. A
homogeneous rule based on thresholds determined by CEA would provide coverage for treatments
below the CE threshold, and no coverage for treatments above it. Optimal health insurance should
allow for the dierences in value to express themselves in the market, by either oering a variety of
plans that accommodate this heterogeneity in preferences with varying premia (Pauly, 2017), or by
allowing patients to internalize treatment costs at the margin through the use of "top-up" insurance,
where patients pay the incremental cost relative to a fully covered baseline treatment (Einav et al.,
2016). Based on our results, a one-size-fits-all decision rule based on CEA or homogeneous criteria


                                                 5
will not lead to optimal decisions for the adoption of technology to treat colorectal cancer.
    In the next section we provide the institutional background that underlies our modeling as-
sumptions; section section 3 describes our model for estimating the demand system under various
assumptions and the computation of the price indices; in section section 4 we describe our data;
section section 5 presents our results on demand estimation and the evolution of the price indices;
and in section section 6 we conclude.


2     Background
2.1   Medical Price Indices
    There are several important empirical challenges when measuring a medical price index (Berndt
et al., 2000). One challenge is that quantities of the components in an index change as new goods
displace old goods in the market. Therefore, a price index must allow the bundle of goods to change
over time as well as the weight on each component in the bundle. Another challenge is that often
transaction prices are not observed in health care. Most publicly available data sets contain "list
prices," i.e. prices that pharmaceutical firms, medical device firms, physicians, or hospitals charge
for a product or service rather than what they actually receive. Health insurers usually receive
substantial discounts o of list prices, but net prices are often unobserved.
    In addition, due to health insurance, most consumers do not face the full price of medical
care and may consume beyond the point where the marginal value of care equals the full price.
Patients also rely on physicians to provide information regarding the value of medical goods and
services. The implication is that consumer purchases in the medical market will not necessarily
reveal their marginal valuation of a good or service. Finally, and most relevant for our paper, price
increases are often accompanied by quality improvements. In our setting, we look at the decisions of
informed physicians, who are aware of prices, and where rebates are unusual. Therefore, perhaps the
greatest empirical challenge for constructing meaningful medical price indices is how to account for
the changing quality of medical products and services. For example, life expectancy and mortality
rates are often used as proxies for quality, but in some medical settings improvements in the quality
of life are more important than the length of life. Information on such measures is often di cult
to obtain.
    There have been relatively few studies of whether medical prices are rising or falling once one
takes into consideration the attributes of the new products and consumers' valuations of those
attributes. Existing studies can be placed into three groups based on the method used. One
method to account for changing quality is to measure actual changes or expected changes in health
outcomes (e.g., life expectancy for a heart attack patient or remission of a depressive episode) due
to the adoption of new medical technologies, monetizing these improvements based on separate
estimates from the literature (e.g., $100,000 per year of life), and subtracting the value of the
health gains from the rising costs. Cutler et al. (1998) show that the life expectancy of heart attack
patients increased by eight months between 1984 and 1991. The value of per-patient expected
longevity ($11,100) increased three times more than average treatment costs ($3,600) during this
time period in real terms, which implies that the quality-adjusted price index fell by about one



                                                  6
percent annually. Berndt et al. (2002) conclude that the real cost of treating major depression
decreased by about two percent per year between 1991 and 1996 once one takes into account the
probability that a patient's depression will go into remission. Eggleston et al. (2011) conclude that
the cost of treating diabetes declined between 1999 and 2009 once one accounts for the value of
reduced coronary heart disease mortality. Lakdawalla et al. (2015) find that the estimated value of
health benefits produced by new colorectal cancer drugs were about equal to their higher prices,
whereas prices fell for drug treatment of multiple myeloma patients once accounting for expected
health outcomes.
       A second method is to estimate hedonic price indices by regressing prices on objective measures
of product attributes and time indicator variables. Cockburn and Anis (2001) find that rheumatoid
arthritis prices rose over time, even after accounting for each drug's expected e cacy and toxicity.
Dunn (2012) reports that the prices of cholesterol drugs fell by 30 percent between 1996 and 2007
once one accounts for each drug's expected change in a patient's bad and good cholesterol levels.
       The two studies closest to our approach, in the third group, also construct price indices, or the
components of an index, based on discrete choice demand models. Estimating a nested multinomial
logit model, Trajtenberg (1989) shows that the social returns to CT scanner innovation exceeded
the R&D costs, especially when the first products were introduced (1972-1978). Dunn (2012) uses a
logit model to estimate patients' demand for cholesterol drugs and concludes that quality-adjusted
prices fell by about 25 percent between 1996 and 2007, similar to the results from the hedonic
model.

2.2      Medical Treatment of Colorectal Cancer
       Colorectal cancer is an appropriate case study for examining the welfare eects of medical
innovation because it is a common health condition, the majority of patients today are treated
with drugs that did not exist 25 years ago, and treatment costs are rising rapidly. According to
the National Cancer Institute (NCI), approximately 140,000 patients are diagnosed with colorectal
cancer in the United States each year, resulting in about 50,000 deaths annually. This places
colorectal cancer as the fourth most common cancer based on number of new patients, after breast,
prostate, and lung. It is estimated that people born today will have a 4.5 percent chance of being
diagnosed with colorectal cancer over their lifetime. According to the NCI, between 2005 and 2011
colorectal cancer patients had a 65 percent chance of surviving for five years. The probability a
patient will survive for five years ranges from 90 percent for those diagnosed with Stage I cancer
to 13 percent for those diagnosed with Stage IV (or metastatic) cancer.7
       Colorectal cancer is treated dierently depending on the stage of the disease at diagnosis. Most
patients with a Stage I, II, or III disease at diagnosis will have the tumor removed surgically,
or resected, in a hospital. The National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) recommends
that patients with Stage III disease receive six months of drug treatment following the resection;
they do not recommend drug treatment for Stage I patients; and they recommend that Stage II
patients consider drug treatment after discussing the potential benefits and side eects with their
physician. Most Stage IV patients are treated with drugs, either to shrink the tumor so that it
   7
   Cancers are classified into four stages, with higher numbers indicating that the cancer has spread to the lymph
nodes (Stage III) or beyond its initial location (Stage IV).


                                                        7
can be resected, following a resection, or when the tumor is unresectable in order to lengthen and
improve the quality of life. If a patient's cancer progresses after the initial drug treatment, patients
often receive a second regimen (i.e., a second line of therapy) that might have been tested on
similar patients and approved as a second-line therapy, or might be a regimen formally approved
as a first-line treatment. The latter case would be an example of a physician prescribing a drug
o label. In this paper we do not model the process by which a physician and her patient decide
whether or not to receive drug treatment; we examine prescription drug choices conditional on the
decision to receive drug treatment.
   Treating colorectal cancer in the US is expensive. Paramore et al. (2006) report that between
1998 and 2004, which is part of the time period we study in this paper, newly-diagnosed metastatic
colorectal cancer patients in the United States received $97,000 of additional medical treatment in
the 13 months following their diagnosis relative to a similar (based on age, gender, and geography)
group of people (Paramore et al., 2006). Most of the spending occurred for hospital care ($37,400,
on average), including the surgical resection, and physician visits ($34,600), including drugs and
their administration.
   In this paper we report a price index for drug treatment only, not for the total cost of treating
colorectal cancer. We focus on drug costs because this is where the treatment innovation has
occurred since 1996, and drug innovation has been the main driver of the subsequent increase in
treatment costs and improvements in health. In our data set, the average cost of providing six-
months of drug treatment to a colorectal cancer patient increased from about $127 in 1993 to over
$36,000 in 2005 (see Figure 5). Hospital costs, on the other hand, did not increase substantially
during this time period for colorectal cancer patients nor were there any surgical innovations that
would have lengthened life or improved the quality of life substantially.
   About 95 percent of colorectal cancer patients who were treated with drugs between 1993
and 1996 received a chemotherapy regimen called 5-FU/leucovorin. This regimen was inexpensive
because the patents on the two component drugs (fluorouracil and leucovorin) had expired, so
there were many companies oering low-cost generic versions. Between 1996 and 2004, five new
drugs were approved to treat colorectal cancer. By 2005, these drugs collectively captured about
82 percent of the market. Most of the new drugs are biologics that target the inner workings
of cancer cells, whereas 5-FU/leucovorin is a standard chemotherapy treatment that targets all
fast-growing cells. Although the new drugs extended life in randomized clinical trials relative to
chemotherapy and sometimes have less severe side eects due to their targeted nature, they are also
priced much higher than standard chemotherapy drugs. Most colorectal cancer patients who are
treated with pharmaceuticals receive multiple drugs in the form of a regimen rather than a single
drug, similar to anti-retroviral "cocktail" treatments for AIDS patients. For example, the regimen
with the greatest market share in 2005 contained four separate drugs: bevacizumab, oxaliplatin,
fluorouracil, and leucovorin. Most of our analysis in this paper, therefore, is conducted at the level
of a regimen rather than a drug. We describe the characteristics of the various drug regimens in
greater detail in the section 4.




                                                   8
2.3      Medical Technology Adoption and Use: United States Versus Europe
       In 2018, prescription drug spending per capita in the Unites States was $1,024 versus an average
of $495 for the five most populous European countries.8 Danzon and Furukawa (2008) show that
US spending is higher due to greater use of newer (and more expensive) drugs and higher prices
for the same drug, especially drugs still under patent protection.
       Cost eectiveness analysis is a major reason European countries spend less on pharmaceutical
drugs than the US. In the United Kingdom, for example, The National Institute for Care and Health
Excellence (NICE) generally recommends rejecting new medical technologies with an incremental
cost eectiveness ratio (relative to the standard of care) above $50,000 per quality-adjusted life year
(QALY) for the population as a whole (Claxton et al., 2015). In 2007, just after our sample period,
NICE recommended not covering bevacizumab and cetuximab, the two most expensive colorectal
cancer drugs that were launched in the US in 2004.9 As a result, most patients in the UK who want
these drugs have to pay the full price themselves. The benefit of NICE, and similar organizations
in other European countries, is that they often put pressure on pharmaceutical firms to cut their
prices in order to get covered by European public payers. Cost eectiveness also restricts the use of
therapies deemed to be priced above the average patient's valuation. The drawback of applying a
uniform decision rule for the entire population is that some patients are likely to value the rejected
therapies above the incremental price. Einav et al. (2016) propose a "top-up" health insurance
policy where patients pay the incremental cost of the more expensive treatment to e ciently sort
patients across treatment options.
       To depict these tradeos in our context, in Figure 1 we compare the colorectal cancer drug
regimens received by patients in the US versus the five largest European countries for the 12-month
period between April 2005 and March 2006, which is at the end of our sample period.10 To highlight
the important role that preferences play, we focus on patients who are likely to value the health
benefits of prescription drugs highly: patients diagnosed with Stage IV colorectal cancer who are
receiving their second line (or higher) of drug treatment because the cancer progressed during or
after their initial treatment. As we show in section 5, these patients experienced a reduction in
quality-adjusted prices in the US, whereas patients with less advanced cancer experience a price
increase. The height of each bar in Figure 1 indicates a regimen's market share, and the regimens
are ordered from the lowest median length of survival at the bottom to the highest at the top, with
the median survival months depicted inside each bar. The survival data are based on randomized
controlled trials, which avoids concerns about patient selection. Regimens that have not been
formally approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) (i.e., o-label uses) do not have
reported survival data, thus the "N/A."
       Beginning at the bottom of Figure 1, about 20 percent of second-line metastatic patients in
the US receive a second-line regimen, with either irinotecan or cetuximab as a component in
the regimen. The use of these regimens is about five percentage points higher in Europe. The
   8
     Hartman et al. (2020) and OECD Health Statistics (2019): https://www.oecd.org/health/health-data.htm. Ad-
justed for exchange rates and purchasing power parity. Earlier years were used for some European countries when
necessary.
   9
     https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ta118/chapter/4-Evidence-and-interpretation.
  10
     US data are from IntrinsiQ and European data are from Synovate. France, Germany, Italy, Spain, and the United
Kingdom are included in the European average.


                                                        9
 Figure 1: Market Shares of Colorectal Cancer Regimens in the United States and Europe

100%         NA
                                      NA                 Other
                                      NA                                                        off-label
                             23.2
             NA                       20.3                                                      regimens
                                                         Involving bevacizumab and/or
80%                                                      cetuximab
                                      19.7
                                                         Bevacizumab+oxaliplatin+5-
             23.2                                        FU/capecitabine

                                                         Bevacizumab+irinotecan+5-FU
60%

            20.3
                                      15.6               Oxaliplatin+5-FU/capecitabine
                                                                                                FDA-approved
                                                                                                first-line
40%          19.7                                        Irinotecan+5-FU                        regimens
            15.6                      13.1

            13.1                      12.5               Capecitabine

20%         12.5
                                                         5-FU
                                      6.9 ­
             6.9 ­
                                       9.6
              9.6                                                                           FDA-approved
                                                         Cetuximab; Cetuximab+irinotecan;   second-line
 0%                                                      or irinotecan                      regimens
         United States               Europe

          Notes: Market share of drug regimens received by patients diagnosed with Stage IV
          colorectal cancer who are receiving their second line (or higher) of drug treatment
          for April 2005 through March 2006. European shares are averages for France,
          Germany, Italy, Spain, and the United Kingdom. US data are from IntrinsiQ and
          European data are from Synovate. The height of each bar indicates a regimen's
          market share and the median survival months from the regimen's randomized
          controlled trial is depicted inside each bar. The regimens are ordered from the
          lowest median length of survival at the bottom to the highest at the top. Regimens
          that have not been formally approved by the FDA (i.e., o-label uses) do not have
          reported survival data, thus have "N/A" for survival months.




                                                  10
median survival is low for the second-line therapies (6.9 to 9.6 months) in large part because the
patients enrolled in the trials had already been treated for colorectal cancer. The next 61 and 66
percent of patients in the US and Europe, respectively, were treated with an approved first-line
therapy. However, many more US patients received a first-line therapy that included the expensive
drug bevacizumab (the green and dark blue bars), which both have median survival in excess of
20 months (when tested on metastatic patients receiving their initial drug treatment). Finally,
US patients were much more likely to receive an o-label regimen involving either cetuximab or
bevacizumab (e.g., either of these drugs combined with a drug approved for a type of cancer other
than colorectal) relative to European patients. Cetuximab is another expensive drug. In summary,
physicians in the US were much less constrained in how they treated patients, which contributed to
much higher spending but also presumably better expected outcomes. However, there would have
been little data at the time documenting the extent to which eective first-line therapies translated
into eective second-line therapies.

2.4      Physician Behavior and Modeling Approach
       In most markets one can use prices to infer consumers' willingness to pay for products and ser-
vices because consumers are well informed and face the full price. Several features of the health care
market create challenges for estimating and interpreting a quality-adjusted price index. Physicians
(or sometimes hospitals on behalf of their physicians) purchase oncology drugs from wholesalers
(who previously purchased them from drug manufacturers), administer them to patients in their
o ces, and then bill the patient's insurance company for the drugs.11 Health insurers reimburse
physicians for cancer drugs and the time required to administer the drugs to patients, and control
moral hazard by requiring patients to pay a portion of the treatment cost and by restricting (ex-
pensive) treatments to patients who are not likely to benefit from them (e.g., requiring a physician
to receive authorization from the insurer before treating a patient).12 Finally, patients rely on
physicians to recommend a treatment. Thus, colorectal cancer patients do not face the full price
of drugs and rely on physicians to articulate both the choice set and the attributes of the drugs in
the choice set. Thus, physicians have an opportunity to exploit their informational advantage and
recommend particular drugs if the health insurer's reimbursement amount deviates substantially
from physicians' drug acquisition costs.
       We model the choice of a colorectal cancer drug regimen from a physician's perspective by
positing that physicians choose treatments to maximize their own utility. We focus on physicians
because they are well informed about attributes and prices, they care about their patients' health,
and they are subject to oversight by profit-maximizing private health insurers. Physicians observe
the full price of oncology drugs when they purchase them from wholesalers and store them in their
o ces. Physicians should be aware of the e cacy and safety of oncology drugs based on how the
drugs performed in randomized controlled trials during the approval process (and recorded on the
FDA-approved drug label), as well as by observing how their own patients respond to the drugs.
  11
     Based on data from IMS Health, 59 percent of colorectal cancer drugs in the third quarter of 2005 were purchased
by physician o ces/clinics and 28 percent by hospitals. The remainder was purchased by retail and mail order
pharmacies, health maintenance organizations, and long-term care facilities.
  12
     Medicare patients, for example, pay 20 percent of the price of drugs administered by physicians if they have Part
B coverage and no Medigap supplemental insurance.


                                                         11
       One criticism of our assumption is that physicians may, in fact, be insulated from the price
of oncology drugs because health insurers ultimately reimburse them for drug acquisition costs.
Although physicians are eventually reimbursed, they do take temporary ownership of oncology
drugs. As such, physicians face the possible risk of not being reimbursed by health insurers and
may incur substantial carrying costs. For example, a physician who pays $50,000 for the drugs in
one patient's regimen and experiences a three-month delay between when she acquires the drugs
and when her practice is reimbursed by a health insurer would incur an inventory carrying cost
of $625 at an interest rate of five percent. Furthermore, if physicians care about patients' out-of-
pocket costs they will internalize part of the price. Both carrying costs and patients' out-of-pocket
costs, which are often a percentage of the price the insurer pays, increase with a drug's price.
       Another criticism of our assumption is that if physicians earn profits on oncology drugs and
profits influence prescribing decisions, this might bias the price and attribute estimates in our
model. In the early 2000s the federal government concluded that oncologists were earning profits
on most oncology drugs by acquiring them for less than the Medicare reimbursement amount (Gov-
ernment Accountability O ce, 2001). At the time Medicare reimbursed oncologists 95 percent of
a drug's listed average wholesale price (AWP), whereas physicians could acquire many drugs from
wholesalers for substantially less than AWP. Most private health insurance companies reimbursed
physicians using a similar formula, so these profits occurred for all patient types 13 Most of these
profits were eliminated in 2005 when Medicare began reimbursing oncologists based on a drug's ac-
tual average selling price (ASP) rather than its list price (Medicare Payment Advisory Commission,
2006).
       There is evidence that the profits oncologists earned on drugs did aect treatment decisions,
especially prior to 2004. Several papers identify eects by examining variations in profits across
oncology drug treatments due to geographic reimbursement rules (Jacobson and Newhouse, 2006)
or variation within treatments over time following the 2005 Medicare policy change (Jacobson et al.,
2010, 2016), or the entry of generic drugs (Conti et al., 2012). Our interpretation of these studies
is that the magnitudes of the eects are small. In Jacobson and Newhouse (2006), for example, a
one-standard deviation increase in reimbursement generosity is associated with an increase of about
five percent in the cost of the drug treatments prescribed to colorectal cancer patients.
       One factor supporting our assumption is that health insurers have the incentive to encourage
physicians to tradeo the full price of drugs against patients' health benefits, and the tools to
do so. When physicians use expensive drugs it forces a health insurer to charge its customers
higher premiums, but when patients receive treatments that improve their health, the insurance
plan becomes more attractive to prospective enrollees. Therefore, insurers should set a patient's
drug co-insurance rate, physicians' drug profits, and its oversight policies (e.g., the criteria for pre-
authorizing a proposed oncology treatment) to encourage optimal drug treatment decisions. Dunn
(2012) and Cockburn and Anis (2001) make similar assumptions that physicians and insurers act
in the best interest of patients when interpreting their medical price indices.
       The heterogeneity in physicians' preferences we assume in the model below is driven primarily
from physicians treating patients who have dierent survival goals and tolerance to side eects.
  13
   In the IntrinsiQ data set we use, Medicare patients account for about one-half of all colorectal cancer patients
who receive drug treatment.



                                                        12
Other sources of heterogeneity among physicians are documented by Chan et al. (2020) in relation
to physicians' skill levels. Although important in specialties like radiology, where they report
that variation in skill can explain a sizable part of the variation in diagnostic decisions, we do
not have reason to believe that higher quality oncologists would have more homogeneous practice
styles, or that improving skills of lower-skilled physicians would lead to more standardization. On
the contrary, a recent panel of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network Policy Summit                         14

defines higher quality oncologists as those able to correctly interpret patient priorities. Another
source of heterogeneity is knowledge, as reported in Agha and Molitor (2018), who find that the
diusion of oncology drugs is related to the geographic location of the physicians running clinical
trials. However, the magnitude of these eects are not large enough to explain the treatment
heterogeneity we observe, and the reported eects are also short-lived. In addition, among all the
drugs these authors studied, colorectal cancer drugs were the ones with the largest number of trial
sites, which suggests that for colon cancer this other source of heterogeneity is less of a concern.


3         Model
3.1        Physician Choice of Drug Regimen
         We model a physician's utility when choosing a regimen to treat a patient as a random utility
model, in which physicians act as partial agents, as discussed in section 2. In making these decisions,
physicians take into account the e cacy and side eects that a regimen oers to their patients.
They also take into account the regimen price they face. Our model allows for heterogeneity
in physician's preferences, which vary both in terms of unobserved physician heterogeneity and
patient observables. Our exposition is centered on the most general version we can estimate that
exploits both observed and unobserved patient and physician characteristics in a random coe cients
framework with micro data (Berry et al., 2004). However, we also estimate and present results of
alternate model specifications for comparison. These include a logit model with no individual
heterogeneity (Berry, 1994), a random coe cients model with aggregate data (hereafter referred
to as "BLP") (Berry et al., 1995), and a pure characteristics model that omits the well-known
idiosyncratic error term present in most discrete choice models (Berry and Pakes, 2007). Our intent
with these special cases is to demonstrate how our estimated price indices and welfare calculations
change with varying model assumptions.
         Equation 1 shows attending physician's a utility when treating patient i with regimen j at time
t. The price paid by the physician is denoted by pjt , and we do not allow for the possibility of price
discrimination or rebates from pharmaceutical companies.15 The characteristics of a regimen in
terms of both e cacy and side eects are denoted by xjt . We allow for a static unobserved quality
component j , and time-variant deviations from its mean                  jt . The model allows for random
coe cients on price and other characteristics, and their distributions depend on both observed and
unobserved characteristics of patients and physicians. We also include a taste shock at the product
level, "aijt , which we assume is distributed Type I Extreme Value.
    14
    https://www.nccn.org/about/news/newsinfo.aspx?NewsID=1686
    15
    We discuss in section 4 that these rebates were either small or nonexistent in this market. We therefore do not
subscript the price variable by a.


                                                        13
                                uaijt =              ai pjt +       ai xjt   + j +   jt + "aijt                 (1)

   where:

                                                                     d
                                                      ai =  + 1  a + 1 di                                       (2)

   and

                                                                            d
                                                         ai   =    + 2  a + 2 di                                (3)

   Equation 2 explicitly shows how preferences for a regimen might depend on characteristics of
the physician that are unobserved to the econometrician a , and characteristics that are observed
in our patient-level data di . Here, a are a series of unobserved physician preference shocks drawn
from a normal distribution, and di are a series of observed characteristics of patients of type i.
 and  d represent parameters to be estimated on unobserved (physician) and observed (patient)
1    1
                                    and  d are parameters for unobserved and observed regimen
price heterogeneity, respectively. 2    2
characteristic heterogeneity. This flexible model allows for the possibility of imperfect agency
by physicians, who might prefer higher priced regimens that are more profitable. Observing the
choices of physicians for several patients over time, and controlling for observable dierences across
patients, we are able to identify the random coe cient on price and characterize the distribution
of physicians' preferences over price.
   Our outside option (j = 0) includes o-label colorectal cancer drug treatments, regimens with
very small market shares, and regimens with missing e cacy or side eects attributes. For estima-
tion purposes, we assume normalize the outside option to 0, i.e.


                                                                  uai0t = 0

   Following Berry (1994); Berry et al. (1995) and the substantial subsequent literature, we can
group in the mean utility       jt   all the terms that do not depend on individual heterogeneity and
rewrite equation Equation 1 as:

                                                         d                   d
                          uaijt =    jt         ( 1  a + 1 di )pjt + (2  a + 2 di )xjt + "aijt                  (4)

   where


                                                jt   =    pjt + xjt + j +             jt                        (5)

   Integrating over the distribution of the observed patient characteristics di , physician unobserv-
ables a and the taste shock "aijt , we obtain the market shares:

                    X                  X            exp jt               v v +  d d )p + ( v v +  d d )x
                                                                       ( 1  a     1 i jt    2 a     2 i jt
         sjt () =         saijt () =                P                         v v +  d d )p + ( v v +  d d )x
                                                                                                                (6)
                    a,i                   a,i
                                                 1 + exp              kt   (  1 a    1 i kt     2 a    2 i kt
                                                         k




                                                                     14
3.2      Estimation and Identification
       We estimate the model by "concentrating out" the objective function; searching over the pa-
rameters that account for heterogeneity for a given mean utility                 jt ,   and then finding the means for
the attributes with a linear projection, similar to Berry et al. (1995) and Nevo (2000). We construct
two sets of micro-moments following Berry et al. (2004). The first set of moments is constructed
by matching the observed and predicted covariances between regimen characteristics and physi-
cian/patient attributes. Specifically, for characteristic xk interacted with patient characteristic dr ,
the moment is:

                                            1 X k r
                             G1
                              k,r ( ) =        xjt dait ( {yait = j }            saijt ())                         (7)
                                            N
                                              a,i,j,t

       where N is the total number of physician-patient combinations in the data and {yait = j } is
an indicator for whether individual i seeing physician a at time t choose regimen j .
       The second set of moments matches observed and predicted covariances of the regimen char-
acteristics, xk
              j chosen for patient i by attending physician a, and the regimen characteristics of all
other regimens chosen by attending physician a for patients other than i throughout the sample.
Specifically, the moment is:

                                1 X k      1  X
                     G2
                      k ( ) =      xaijt        xk
                                                 a,                i,t (   {yait = j }      saijt ())              (8)
                                N        AI 1
                                  a,i,j,t                  i,t

       where xk                                                                                k
              aijt represents characteristic k chosen by physician a for patient i in time t, xa,                i,t   is
the characteristic k of regimen j chosen by physician a at time t for any patient other than i, and
AI is the total number of patients treated by physician a throughout the sample. In other words,
this moment takes as given the observed average characteristic of regimens chosen by physician a
for patients other than i and matches the observed and predicted covariance between this statistic
and the characteristic chosen by physician a for patient i at time t.
       We stack these moments together and search for the values of  that minimizes the sum of
square moments.16
       Equation 7 helps to identify all of the observed heterogeneity parameters (2 ), while Equation 8
pins down the unobserved heterogeneity parameters (1 ). In practice, we estimate two unobserved
heterogeneity parameters: price and second-line regimens.


                                                        G()0 G()                                                   (9)

       To identify the random coe cients in Equation 2 and Equation 3, we take advantage of the fact
that we observe many physicians making treatment decisions for many patients as the choice set
changes. Suppose, for example, that within a particular physician's patient panel, controlling for
patient characteristics and choice set availability, he tends to prescribe low-priced regimens only.
Another physician, on the other hand, tends to prescribe high-priced regimens only, controlling
for patient characteristics. This variation identifies the unobserved price taste parameter for each
  16
    Because this system is exactly identified (one moment inequality for each parameter to be estimated), it is
invariant to the choice of weighting matrix. We therefore choose the identity matrix.



                                                           15
physician. If a new regimen enters the market that is similar to an existing regimen, and we observe
a physician substitute from the old to the new regimen, the covariance between the regimens'
attributes helps to further pin down the random coe cient.
   To estimate the parameters of attributes in the mean utility function in Equation 5, in theory
we could also have constructed an additional series of moments to match the predicted aggregate
market shares from Equation 6 to the actual shares in the individual data. This would produce an
additional JxT moment equations, with only J + K + 1 parameters to estimate (the j for each
regimen j , , and the   parameters for each characteristic k ). However, as with Berry et al. (2004),
this would have required a simultaneous search over not only the  "heterogeneous" parameters,
but also the J + K + 1 "mean" parameters as well. To expedite the search process, we instead
implement a two-step procedure. First, we employ the contraction mapping from Berry et al. (1995)
to recover   jt :


                        h+1               h                                    h
                        jt (,   , 1 ) =   jt (,   , ) + (ln(sjt )   ln(Sjt (   jt ,  )))           (10)

   Second, following Berry (1994), we estimate Equation 5 using two-stage least squares to recover
the mean regimen parameters. Because the unobserved drug regimen characteristics are likely to
be correlated with price, estimating Equation 5 requires instrumental variables. We obtain our
instruments by using the supply-side market equilibrium conditions. As price is a function of
marginal costs and markups, any exogenous variable that shifts marginal costs or markups should
be a valid instrument. Bresnahan et al. (1997) use as instruments the plausibly exogenous number
of products in the market in period t and the sum of the observed characteristics of the competitors,
which measure how crowded and competitive the product space is. These sets of instruments should
aect markups via changes in the competitive environment, and therefore should be correlated with
price but uncorrelated with a regimen's unobserved characteristics.
   However, product attributes do not vary much over time in our sample due to infrequent
product entry and exit. Therefore, our first-stage regressions using these "BLP-style" instruments
are generally weak, and the estimation results do not dier measurably from standard OLS models.
Therefore, we follow Nevo (2000) and use "Hausman-style" instruments. Specifically, we construct
two instruments with the lagged prices of other regimens. For the price of regimen j in period t,
one instrument is the average price in period t          1 of all other regimens other than j . A second
instrument is the average price in period t       1 of regimens produced by firms whose drugs are not
used in regimen j . The intuition is that these prices capture a common shock to marginal costs,
such as the cost of the active ingredients in the regimens or drug distributions costs. The key
identifying assumption is that these instruments are uncorrelated with the current-period demand
shock but are correlated with price of regimen j . For this to hold, we require that the demand
shock for regimen j in period t is uncorrelated with the demand shock for regimen k in period t       1,
a condition likely to hold true unless there exists a time-persistent market-level demand shock.

3.3   Constructing the Price Indices
   We build a series of price indices for dierent demand specifications. Following our model
description, we focus the exposition in this section on the most general model that has observed and


                                                    16
unobserved heterogeneity, and summarize the other models as special cases. The price index is built
based on changes in the compensating variation derived from the above model. The compensating
variation provides a measure of how much income could be taken away from (or given to) a physician
to leave him indierent between facing the old choice set and the new improved (inferior) choice
set. Given the Type I Extreme value assumption on the taste shock, and the presence of observed
and unobserved heterogeneity, the compensating variation is calculated as:

                                                        uait         uait   1
                                              CVait =
                                                                 ai
      where uait is the unconditional indirect utility uait = maxj uaijt and ai is the marginal utility
of income of physician a when treating patient i. Small and Rosen (1981) show that uait can be
computed as:

                                  X
                                                            d                   d
                        ut = ln       exp(   jt    ( 1  a + 1 di )pjt + (2  a + 2 di )xjt )
                                  j

      Trajtenberg (1990) shows that if the price change takes the form of a shift by a factor of (1   µt )
in the distribution of prices but the variance remains the same, then the price index can be obtained
as:


                                              P It = (1        µt ) P I t   1

      where:

                                                          ¯t
                                                         CV
                                                   µt = ¯
                                                       CVt + p
                                                             ¯t
      Here p
           ¯t is the average price in period t and:

                                                          X    ns
                                                   ¯t= 1
                                                  CV        CVait
                                                       ns
                                                               a,i

      and p
          ¯t is the average price in period t. Similar logic can be used to construct price indices for
distinct groups of physician and patient populations, by constructing the compensating variation
                             ¯ait ).
just for those groups (e.g. CV
      We construct price indices for several special cases of this model. If all heterogeneity is cap-
tured by the regimen-level taste shock, this results in a logit model with no random coe cients.
Introducing random coe cients with aggregate data permits only the unobserved heterogeneity
and presumes patient observables do not vary across physician. For each of these we construct
price indices, keeping the objects that enter the the compensating variation consistent with the
underlying demand specification.

3.3.1     Assumptions on the Unobserved Components of Demand

      As noted by (Nevo, 2003), the welfare implications of new product introductions are sensitive
to how one interprets the estimated coe cients of the time variables and unobserved product
characteristics. Therefore, we plot a separate index associated with four dierent scenarios. In the


                                                          17
first scenario, we assume that the period-specific unobserved quality of the inside goods (i.e., t )
are fixed, but that the value of the outside option (i.e. u0t ) changes over time. We refer to this
scenario as "u0t changes." In the second scenario, we assume that the value of the outside option
does not change over time and that, therefore, the average period-specific unobserved value of the
inside goods does change over time ("u0t fixed"). Under this scenario, the estimated coe cients on
the time indicators measure changes in the mean quality of the inside goods over time, whereas in
the former scenario they measure changes in the value of the outside option.
    The interpretation of these time dummies significantly aects the indices. Suppose, for instance,
that the market share of the outside option increases substantially between period t 1 and period t.
It is impossible to identify whether, net of observable dierences in observed product characteristics
between period t       1 and period t, this decrease in demand reflects decreases in unobserved quality
of the inside goods in period t, or whether it reflects an increase in the unobserved quality of the
outside option in period t. If it is the former, this represents a welfare loss for consumers. If it is
the latter, this represents a welfare gain.
    We believe the data in our application are most consistent with the first scenario described
above (see Appendix A for more details), so we feature price indices where the period-specific mean
utility of the inside goods are assumed to be fixed, while the value of the outside option is assumed
to change over time. Nevertheless, we still present price indices that assume the opposite situation
for two reasons. First, the actual situation is likely to be some combination of the two scenarios
above, even though we believe it is much closer to the first versus the second scenario, as we describe
below. Second, in other applications the data might be more consistent with the second scenario.
Therefore, our approach allows us to depict how dierent the colorectal cancer quality-adjusted
price indices are when one adopts polar-opposite assumptions about changes in unobserved quality.
   We also plot indices for the above two scenarios under two dierent assumptions about the
unobserved time-and-product-specific deviation in quality from the mean (i.e. jt ). In estimating
the demand models,         jt are the equivalent of residuals that can be backed out given the estimated
parameters. There is, therefore, one residual for every product-time combination throughout the
sample period. Practically, these residuals capture two things: a change in unobserved quality of
products between periods, or a change in consumer tastes for products between periods. However,
whether we view changes in          jt as changes in quality or tastes aects the implied price indices.
    Suppose, for instance, that we observe that                jt <    jt   1,   i.e., the unobserved deviation of
product j from the time-specific mean went down between periods t 1 and t. One interpretation is
that this reflects a decrease in quality of product j . Another interpretation is that, for unobserved
reasons, consumers' tastes changed such that they needed fewer purchases of product j to achieve
the same utility. In the former case, this reflects a loss in welfare and a rise in the price index
for the product; the product became less eective at the same price, and therefore the consumer
purchases less of it. In such a case, we would want              jt to vary over time to reflect this changing
quality. In the latter case, the price index need not increase, and we would therefore want to fix
  jt . We therefore report both sets of indices­one where we assume " jt changes" and one where
we fix it to product j 's initial value (" jt fixed").17
  17
     See (Nevo, 2003) for a much more detailed explanation on this distinction, as well as for an additional motivation
for treating jt as changing over time.



                                                          18
   One final concern with the model outlined above is that welfare gains generated from product
introductions may be upward biased due to the presence of the idiosyncratic error term (Berry
and Pakes, 2007). As a result, price indices may be artificially low following a product entering
the market, particularly if that product has close substitutes with existing regimens. This is a
particularly salient issue in our context as we are explicitly concern with the value of permitting
such new products. To address these concerns, we present a special case of our demand model:
a pure characteristics model, which assumes all the heterogeneity derives from dierent values for
characteristics, but that no welfare is generated from a purely "product-level" shock. In this case
the estimation and computation is substantially dierent from the other cases that we describe
above. We outline the estimation of the pure characteristics model below.

3.4   Pure Characteristics Model
   While the random-coe cients model mitigates some of the substitution problems inherent in a
logit model, it still relies on the assumption of the Type I Extreme Value idiosyncratic error term,
"ijt . The presence of this term allows the model to be solved and the mean utility levels,      jt ,   to
be derived as a function of observed market shares. However, the error term is problematic when
calculating welfare because it guarantees that regardless of product characteristics, there are certain
consumers who would purchase any product (i.e., market shares cannot be zero for any product
regardless of its price and attributes). This implies that product entry necessarily increases the
utility of some consumer, and therefore consumer utility increases as more products are added to
the product space.
   Berry and Pakes (2007) show how this shortcoming can lead to biased welfare estimates. They
propose eliminating the idiosyncratic error term from the model altogether, which alters the model
so that it becomes purely a model of "tastes for characteristics." The randomness of choices comes
from dierent consumer sensitivity to price and heterogeneous product attribute preferences, as
opposed to heterogeneity in the "tastes for products" models described above. The benefit of
estimating this model is that it generates more plausible substitution patterns by eliminating the
Type I error assumption.
   We define physician utility in the pure characteristics model to be


                                      uijt =   jt   i pjt +   i xjt                                   (11)

   where    jt   is defined as in Equation 5; the combination of all the attributes for which the
parameters are non-random (i.e., physicians agree on the value of these attributes). Note that all
the heterogeneity now comes from the i term, the price sensitivity of physician i, and           i,   the
physician taste for attributes. For tractability, we allow physicians to dier in their sensitivity to
price and to have heterogeneous preferences for just one non-price attribute: whether a regimen
has been formally approved by the FDA as a second-line treatment.
   Following Berry and Pakes (2007) and Song (2008), we derive the market share equation first
by ordering the products such that product 1 has the lowest price and product J has the highest
price. That is:



                                                    19
                                                    p1 < p2 < ... < pJ

   Given this price ordering, consumer i will buy product j if and only if:



                                                         uijt > uikt
                                              ijt    i pjt >                ikt       i pkt

   where   ijt   = ¯
                   jt +    i xjt   + j +      j . Thus we have the cuto points:

                                                     ijt        ikt
                                           i <                          if pjt > pkt
                                                    pjt        pkt
                                                     ikt        ij
                                            i >                         if pkt > pjt
                                                    pkt        pjt
   Therefore consumer i will buy good j if:

                                                               ijt          ikt
                                              i < min                             = ¯ ijt
                                                         k<j   pjt       pkt
and
                                                                ikt         ijt
                                             i > max                              =     ijt
                                                         k>j   pkt       pjt
   and so the share for good j becomes:
                                   Z
                           sj =        F ( ¯ ijt | i )     F(        ijt | i )1[
                                                                                   ¯ ijt >        ijt ]dG( i )

   where F (.| i ) is the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of i conditional on                                   i,   and dG( i )
is the CDF of      i.   For our model, we assume a lognormal distribution for i , so that log (i ) 
N (0, 1 ) and a normal distribution for             i,   so that        i    N(        2 , 2 ).
   The parameters of the model to be estimated are  = ( ,                                2 , 1 , 2 ).    Note that if there were only
one random coe cient, for instance on price, then this model would collapse to a vertical model
(see Bresnahan et al. (1997) and Lucarelli and Nicholson (2009)). In a vertical model, the                                       jt   can
be derived analytically, and thus estimating the model is relatively straightforward. However, with
the presence of two random coe cients, one can no longer back out the mean utilities.
   In addition, this model imposes a computational burden; dropping the idiosyncratic error term
implies that a contraction mapping that can be used to estimate the full random-coe cients model
may not exist, as demonstrated by Berry et al. (1995). We therefore follow Berry and Pakes (2007)
and Song (2008) and use a three-step procedure to estimate the model. We first re-estimate the full
random-coe cients model and rescale the logit error term by a factor that drives it toward zero.
This brings the mean utility closer to its true value in the absence of an error term. We then use
a combination of a fixed-point homotopy method and a Newton-Raphson search. We elaborate on
details of the search procedure in Appendix B.
   Constructing the price indices is similar to the methods described above. The only dierence
is that without the idiosyncratic logit error, uit is no longer expressed as the traditional "log-sum"


                                                                 20
formula, but instead: uit = max uijt
                                   j


4         Data
4.1        Prices and Market Shares
         We use a number of dierent data sources to collect four types of information: drug prices,
regimen market shares, the recommended quantity/dose of each drug used in each regimen, and
regimen attributes from randomized controlled clinical trials. Wholesalers purchase drugs from
manufacturers and then sell them to physician practices, hospitals, retail pharmacies, and other
customers. IMS Health records transactions between wholesalers and its customers.18 Specifically,
IMS Health collects information on the sales in dollars and the quantity of drugs purchased by 10
dierent types of customers (e.g., hospitals, physician o ces, retail pharmacies) from wholesalers
in each quarter from 1993 through the third quarter of 2005. Prices and quantities are reported
separately by National Drug Classification (NDC) code, which are unique for each firm-product-
strength/dosage-package size. We calculate the average price paid per milligram of active ingredient
of a drug by averaging across the dierent NDC codes for that particular drug. IMS Health reports
the invoice price a customer actually pays to a wholesaler, not the average wholesale price (AWP),
which often diers substantially from the true transaction price. We use nominal rather than real
prices because any deflator would itself be a price index, and we do not want to build one index on
top of another.
         The price we calculate includes on-invoice discounts (e.g., for paying the wholesaler promptly)
but does not include any discounts or rebates a customer may receive from a manufacturer after
purchasing the product from the wholesaler. Based on interviews with oncologists and an analysis
reported in Lucarelli et al. (2010), we do not believe that manufacturers oered substantial rebates
during this period for the drugs in our sample.19 A recent paper Howard et al. (2015) agrees that
"we do not believe that rebates ­ refunds from manufacturers to hospitals, physicians, pharmacies
and third party insurers ­ are large in the market for new anticancer drugs. . . ". Although we
have information on 10 dierent types of customers, we focus on the prices paid by the two largest
customers - hospitals and physician o ces ­ because most oncology drugs are infused in a physician's
o ce or hospital clinic.
         Most colon cancer patients who receive drug treatment are treated with a regimen that contains
two or more component drugs. The IMS Health data contain information on market share by drug,
but not market share for the combinations of drugs (regimens) actually used by patients. We rely,
therefore, on two dierent sources for regimen-specific market shares. IntrinsiQ is a company that
provides information systems to oncologists to help them determine the proper drug dosing for
their cancer patients. As a result, IntrinsiQ collects monthly data from its oncology clients on the
    18
    IMS Health is now part of a company called IQVIA
    19
    For the five patent-protected colorectal cancer drugs in our study, these authors compared prices that include
discounts and rebates to the IMS prices that we use in this paper. They found that prices from the two data sources
were within two to four percent of one another, which is consistent with no or small rebates/discounts. Although
pharmacy benefit managers, or PBMs, are able to negotiate price discounts for health insurers for many patient-
administered oral drugs, PBMs are less eective at negotiating discounts on the physician-administered drugs that
we examine in this paper. And discounts tend to be smaller for drugs treating life-threatening conditions such as
cancer.


                                                        21
types of drugs used for patients. IntrinsiQ provided data on the proportion of US colorectal cancer
patients (of all ages) treated with drugs who are treated with each regimen for each month between
January 2002 and September 2005.20
    We derive market shares for the 1993 to 2001 period from the Surveillance Epidemiology and
End Results (SEER) data set, which tracks the health and treatment of cancer patients over the
age of 64 in states and cities covering 26 percent of the United States population.21 We calculate
the proportion of colorectal cancer patients who are treated with each drug regimen in each quarter
based on Medicare claims data available in SEER. In October 2003, approximately 48 percent of all
colorectal cancer patients treated with cancer therapy drugs were 65 years or older.22 In the 1993
to 2001 period, when there were relatively few treatment options for colorectal cancer, we include
all regimens that contain drugs that were explicitly approved by the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) for colorectal cancer and had a market share greater than two percent. Market shares of all
other drugs are combined into an outside option, which in this early period will consist primarily
of o-label drugs - drugs approved for conditions other than colorectal cancer that are used on
colorectal cancer patients.23 In the 2002 to 2005 period, the outside option includes o-label drugs,
regimens with less than one percent market share in the third quarter of 2005 (the end of the
sample period), and regimens with missing attribute data.
    Market shares for the 12 regimens in our sample and the outside option are plotted in Figure 2.
The regimens are also described more fully in Table 1 and Table 2. Between 1993 and 1996,
about 95 percent of colorectal cancer patients were treated with 5-FU/leucovorin, which at that
time was generic.24 Irinotecan (brand name Camptosar) was approved by the FDA for treating
colorectal cancer in 1996, and over the next several years the market share of irinotecan (approved
as a second-line treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer patients who had already been treated
with a dierent drug regimen) and irinotecan combined with 5-FU/LV (approved as a first-line
treatment) grew at the expense of 5-FU/LV.25 Capecitabine (Xeloda), a tablet that produces the
same chemical response as 5-FU/LV, was approved for treatment of colorectal cancer in April of
2001 and was administered as a standalone therapy or combined with irinotecan. All other drugs
for treating colorectal cancer in our sample other than capecitabine are delivered intravenously
under the supervision of a physician or nurse.
    Oxaliplatin (Eloxatin) was introduced in August of 2002, followed by cetuximab (Erbitux) and
bevacizumab (Avastin) in February of 2004. By the third quarter of 2005, two of the regimens
created by these three new drugs (oxaliplatin + 5-FU/LV; and bevacizumab + oxaliplatin + 5-
  20
     Because we observe the market shares of regimens among patients with colorectal cancer, we do not need to
worry about o-label use. O-label use occurs when a physician treats a colorectal cancer patient with a drug that
has not been approved by the FDA to treat colorectal cancer, or when a physician uses a drug approved for colorectal
cancer on a patient with a dierent type of cancer. In October 2005, seventy-six percent of patients being treated
with the four drugs approved solely for the treatment of colorectal cancer (irinotecan, oxaliplatin, cetuximab, and
bevacizumab) actually had colorectal cancer. That is, o-label use accounted for approximately 24 percent of the
quantities of these drugs.
  21
     SEER contains data on the incidence rate of cancer among the non-elderly, but only has medical claims available
for Medicare patients.
  22
     Based on data from IntrinsiQ.
  23
     O-label use is more likely to occur if a patient's initial treatment has been unsuccessful.
  24
     5-FU contains the drug fluorororacil.
  25
     Because it takes Medicare a while to code new drugs into their proper NDC code, for several quarters a new drug
will appear in the outside option.



                                                        22
                                      Figure 2: Regimen Market Shares




                  Notes: Market shares of colorectal cancer regimens between 1993 and 2005. Market
                  share is measured as the percentage of colon cancer patients who are treated with
                  drugs that are treated with a specific regimen. Data from IntrinsiQ and SEER.



FU/LV) surpassed the market share of 5-FU/LV, whose share had fallen to about 14 percent. The
market shares of several regimens change sharply in the first quarter of 2002 when we use market
share data from IntrinsiQ rather than SEER. One explanation for these changes is that Medicare
patients may be treated with dierent regimens than non-Medicare patients. Another possible
explanation is that the samples used by IntrinsiQ and/or SEER may not be consistent.26 In order
to smooth market shares between the pre- and post-2002 periods, we apply a regimen-specific factor
to adjust the pre-2002 market shares based on the ratio of total (from IntrinsiQ) to Medicare-only
(from SEER) market shares for the four quarters of 2002, when the two data sets overlap.
      In order to calculate the price per regimen, we require information on the quantity of each drug
in a regimen. The National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) reports the typical amount of
active ingredient used by physicians for the major regimens. We supplement this where necessary
with dosage information from drug package inserts, conference abstracts, and journal articles.
Dosage information is reported in Appendix C. For example, the standard dosage schedule for the
regimen with the second largest market share in 2005 is 85 milligrams (mg) of oxaliplatin per meter
squared of a patient's body surface area infused by IV on the first day of treatment, followed by
a 1,000 mg infusion of 5-FU per meter squared of surface area on the first and second treatment
days, and a 200 mg infusion of leucovorin per meter squared on the first and second treatment days.
This process is repeated every two weeks. We price the regimens for a representative patient who
has 1.7 meters squared of surface area (Jacobson and Newhouse, 2006) weighs 80 kilograms, and is
treated for 24 weeks. Regimen prices are derived by multiplying the average price a customer paid
 26
      The SEER sample is drawn from locations representing 26 percent of the U.S. population.


                                                         23
per milligram of active ingredient in a quarter by the recommended dosage amounts for each drug
in the regimen over a 24-week period.27

4.2      Regimen Attributes
       We obtain most of the attribute information for each regimen from the FDA- approved package
inserts that accompany each drug. These inserts describe the phase 3 randomized controlled clinical
trials that were conducted, including the number and types of patients enrolled in the trials, the
treatments administered to the treatment and control groups, the health outcomes for patients in
both groups, and the side eects experienced by those patients. The benefit of data from clinical
trials is that the regimen attributes are not aected by patient selection. Often there are multiple
observations for a regimen, either because a manufacturer conducted separate trials of the same
regimen, or because a regimen may have been the treatment group in one clinical trial and the
control group in a subsequent trial run by a dierent firm. In these cases we calculate the mean
attributes across the separate observations. Where necessary, we supplement the package insert
information with abstracts presented at oncology conferences and in journal articles.
       The attribute information is summarized in Table 1 and Table 2, organized according to the
year when each regimen was introduced. Table 1 shows three measures of a regimen's e cacy:
the median number of months patients survive after initiating therapy; the percentage of patients
who experience a complete or partial reduction in the size of their tumor (i.e., the response rate);
and the mean number of months (across patients in the trial) before their cancer advanced to a
more serious state.28 For all three of these measures, higher values are associated with superior
health outcomes. We also record whether a regimen contains the capecitabine tablet, which should
make the administration of the regimen more convenient for a patient, and whether the regimen is
approved (and was tested) as a second-line treatment. E cacy measures for second-line regimens
will generally be worse than those for first-line regimens because the patients' cancer is likely to
be more advanced at the beginning of the clinical trial and the first treatment was not completely
successful.
       We also collected data on the percentage of patients in phase 3 trials who experienced either
a grade 3 or a grade 4 side eect for five separate conditions: abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea,
vomiting, and neutropenia. These are displayed in Table 2. Although many more side eects are
recorded for most regimens, these five were consistently recorded across the 12 regimens in the
sample. Side eects are classified on a standard one to four scale, with four being the most severe.
Higher values for the side eect attributes are associated with worse health outcomes.
       New colorectal cancer regimens tend to be more e cacious than the existing regimens, with side
eect profiles that are sometimes more and sometimes less severe than earlier regimens. Consider
the new entrant in 1996, irinotecan + 5-FU/LV (third row of Table 1). Relative to patients who
received 5-FU/LV in a clinical trial (first row of Table 1), patients in clinical trials who received
irinotecan + 5-FU/LV lived 3.1 months longer, on average, had a 14.6 percentage point higher
probability of experiencing a reduction in the size of their tumor, and experienced a two month
  27
     The regimens are priced using data for the contemporaneous quarter only.
  28
     Cancers are classified into four stages, with higher numbers indicating that the cancer has metastasized beyond
its initial location.



                                                        24
                                                      Table 1: Drug Regimens and E cacy Measures

                                                                                                                   E cacy Measures
     Regimen                                              Launch Year       Price (2005)     Survival Months       Response Rate Time to Progression

     5-FU + Leucovorin                                        1991               75                 12.5                  20.8                    4.7
     Irinotecan (Second Line)                                 1996             23,478                9.6                  14.3                    4.2
     Irinotecan + 5-FU/LV                                     1996             20,124               15.6                  35.4                    6.7
     Capecitabine                                             2001              9,223               13.1                  21.0                    4.4
     Ironetecan + capecitabine                                2001             21,385               15.6                  35.4                    6.7




25
     Oxaliplatin + 5-FU/LV                                    2002             25,426               19.7                  46.8                    9.1
     Oxaliplatin + capecitabine                               2002             31,936               19.7                  36.5                    8.1
     Cetuximab (Second Line)                                  2004             53,859                6.9                  10.8                    1.5
     Cetuximab + irinotecan (Second Line)                     2004             73,519                8.6                  22.9                    4.1
     Bevacizumab + oxaliplatin + 5-FU/LV                      2004             76,636               23.2                  41.0                     9.9
     Bevacizumab + oxaliplatin + capecitabine                 2004             57,541               23.2                  41.0                     9.9
     Bevacizumab + irinotecan + 5-FU/LV                       2004             46,991               20.3                  45.0                    10.6
       Notes: All attribute information is based on results of patients in Phase 3 randomized controlled clinical trials. Median survival is given in months. Time
       to progression is measured as the mean number of months for a tumor to advance to a more severe stage.
                                                       Table 2: Drug Regimens and Side Eects Measures

                                                                                                                  Side Eects Measures
     Regimen                                            Launch Year       Price (2005)     Abdominal Pain       Diarrhea Nausea Vomiting              Neutropenia

     5-FU + Leucovorin                                       1991               75                5.5              10.4        4.8         4.4             33.7
     Irinotecan (Second Line)                                1996            23,478               16.0             31.0        17.0        12.0            26.0
     Irinotecan + 5-FU/LV                                    1996            20,124               5.3              24.0        11.9        8.0             39.5
     Capecitabine                                            2001             9,223                9.5             15.0         4.0         4.5             3.0
     Ironetecan + capecitabine                               2001            21,385                5.3             24.0        11.9         8.0            39.5




26
     Oxaliplatin + 5-FU/LV                                   2002            25,426                6.0             15.4         4.4         5.5            38.8
     Oxaliplatin + capecitabine                              2002            31,936                6.0             21.9        15.6        11.3             3.7
     Cetuximab (Second Line)                                 2004            53,859                9.0              2.0         2.0         3.0             5.0
     Cetuximab + irinotecan (Second Line)                    2004            73,519                8.0             22.0         6.0         7.0             5.0
     Bevacizumab + oxaliplatin + 5-FU/LV                     2004            76,636                8.0             23.1         7.9         8.6            12.2
     Bevacizumab + oxaliplatin + capecitabine                2004            57,541                8.0             23.1         7.9        19.0            12.0
     Bevacizumab + irinotecan + 5-FU/LV                      2004            46,991                8.0             34.0         1.0         1.0            21.0
       Notes: All attribute information is based on results of patients in Phase 3 randomized controlled clinical trials. Side Eects are measured as the percentage of
       patients who experienced a serious (i.e. grade 3 or 4) side eect of the given type in the randomized control trial"
delay in the time it took for the cancer to advance to a more severe state. However, patients taking
the new regimen were more likely to experience four of the five side eects listed in Table 2.
      Oxaliplatin + 5-FU/LV, which was launched in 2002 (sixth row of Table 1 and Table 2), is more
e cacious and has fewer severe side eects than irinotecan + 5-FU/LV. Patients in clinical trials
of the former regimen lived an average of 3.8 months longer, had a 10.7 percentage point higher
probability of experiencing a reduction in the size of their tumor, and experienced a 2.4 month
delay in the time it took for the cancer to advance to a more severe stage relative to the latter
regimen. Oxaliplatin + 5-FU/LV patients are also less likely to experience a grade 3 or 4 side eect
for four of the five measures relative to irinotecan + 5-FU/LV. Finally, the arrival of bevacizumab
+ oxaliplatin + 5-FU in 2004 increased the median survival time by about four months relative
to oxaliplatin + 5-FU/LV, with substantial improvements with one side eect measure and worse
performance on the other four measures.
      Two new second-line regimens entered the market in 2004 to compete against the first second-
line regimen (irinotecan) that was launched in 1996.29 cetuximab + irinotecan has a substantially
better response rate than irinotecan administered by itself, although median survival is shorter.
The new regimen also is superior to irinotecan on all five of the side eect measures.

4.3      Individual Choice Data
      To estimate micro-moments with observed physician and patient heterogeneity, we rely on
a disaggregated sample of the IntrinsiQ data from January 2003 through September 2005. As
mentioned above, the data contain monthly reports from a sample of oncologists on the types of
drugs used for patients. Our data contain identifiers for the provider, including site of service (i.e.,
physician practice), location (geographic region), and attending physician. In addition, it contains
patient information including a patient identifier, age, cancer stage, weight, and the number of the
course of treatment (e.g., first-round, second-round, etc.). We also observe which drug regimen any
particular physician at any particular site prescribed to a particular patient for a particular round
of treatment.
      We aggregate the data to a panel of physician-patient-round treatment choices. We drop Stage
I cancer patients as well as patients undergoing either third- or fourth-round treatments due to
the small number of observations for which these occur. Summary statistics for the individual
choice sample are reported in Table 3. Older patients appear to be disproportionately prescribed
lower-priced regimens, whereas younger patients appear to be prescribed higher-priced regimens.
For instance, the average age for 5-FU + LV, the lowest-priced regimen on the market ($75) is 69
years old whereas the average age of patients being prescribed capecitabine ($9,223) is 74 years old.
Conversely, the average age for bevacizumab + oxaliplatin + 5-FU LV ($76,636) is only 63 years
old versus the average age for cetuximab ($53,859) of 66.
      In addition, patients with more advanced cancer tend to be prescribed either second-line treat-
ments (e.g. 73 percent of patients on irinotecan are Stage IV patients, compared with only six
percent of Stage II patients) or treatments that are otherwise higher-priced (e.g. 71 percent of
patients on bevacizumab + oxaliplatin + capecitabine are Stage IV patients compared with only
 29
      Regimens that include the tablet, capecitabine, are chemically equivalent to regimens that include 5- FU/LV.



                                                         27
                                 Table 3: Summary Statistics of Patient Characteristics by Drug Regimen

                                                                                                     Individual Attribute
     Regimen                                            Price (2005)       Age      Female     Second-Round Stage 2 Stage 3              Stage 4

     5-FU + Leucovorin                                        75          68.99      0.48           0.97            0.34       0.52        0.14
                                                                         (12.47)    (0.50)         (0.18)          (0.47)     (0.50)      (0.35)
     Irinotecan (Second Line)                              23,478         69.24      0.49           0.40            0.06       0.21        0.73
                                                                         (12.49)    (0.50)         (0.49)          (0.25)     (0.41)      (0.45)
     Irinotecan + 5-FU/LV                                  20,124         65.63      0.47           0.81            0.04       0.21        0.76
                                                                         (11.60)    (0.50)         (0.40)          (0.18)     (0.41)      (0.43)
     Capecitabine                                           9,223         73.68      0.51           0.80            0.24       0.39        0.37
                                                                         (13.07)    (0.51)         (0.40)          (0.43)     (0.49)       0.49)
     Ironetecan + capecitabine                             21,385         62.09      0.52           0.70            0.03       0.36        0.61
                                                                         (14.07)    (0.51)         (0.47)          (0.17)     (0.49)      (0.50)
     Oxaliplatin + 5-FU/LV                                 25,426         63.66      0.46           0.83            0.12       0.46        0.41




28
                                                                         (12.12)    (0.50)         (0.38)          (0.33)     (0.50)      (0.49)
     Capecitabine + Oxaliplatin                            31,936         66.33      0.41           0.67            0.17       0.30        0.52
                                                                         (11.46)    (0.49)         (0.47)          (0.38)     (0.46)      (0.50)
     Cetuximab (Second Line)                               53,859         65.92      0.46           0.54            0.08       0.15        0.77
                                                                          (7.12)    (0.52)         (0.52)          (0.28)     (0.38)      (0.44)
     Cetuximab + irinotecan (Second Line)                  73,519         66.38      0.44           0.13            0.05       0.18        0.77
                                                                         (10.99)    (0.50)         (0.34)          (0.22)     (0.39)      (0.42)
     Bevacizumab + oxaliplatin + 5-FU/LV                   76,636         63.05      0.45           0.73            0.07       0.22        0.71
                                                                         (12.33)    (0.50)         (0.44)          (0.25)     (0.41)      (0.45)
     Bevacizumab + oxaliplatin + capecitabine              57,541         67.50      0.36           0.71            0.07       0.14        0.79
                                                                         (15.68)    (0.50)         (0.47)          (0.27)     (0.36)      (0.43)
     Bevacizumab + irinotecan + 5-FU/LV                    46,991         62.92      0.49           0.50            0.04       0.17        0.79
                                                                         (12.33)    (0.50)         (0.50)          (0.19)     (0.37)      (0.41)
     Obs: 4,155
       Notes: Standard Deviations in parentheses. Summary statistics by regimen using individual choice data from IntrinsiQ. All data are summaries
       from 2003-2005.
seven percent being Stage II patients). Patients whose cancer is early-stage tend to be prescribed
lower-priced products (e.g., 34 percent of patients on 5-FU LV are Stage II cancer patients, and
only 14 percent are Stage IV patients).
   Apart from patient characteristics, attending physicians also appear to have preferences for
specific regimen characteristics. To see this, we plot the distribution of physician fixed eects from
a regression of regimen price on age, gender, round of treatment, cancer stage, quarter, region, and
physician fixed eects. The results, depicted in Figure 3, show that there is considerable variation
across physicians in the average price per chosen regimen even when netting out market, time, and
patient characteristics. This variation motivates our inclusion of unobserved random coe cients on
regimen price and second-line regimens in some of the demand models that follow. Intuitively, these
unobserved coe cients will be identified by correlation in drug regimen characteristics prescribed
by individual physicians across patients over time.

   Figure 3: Residual Average Regimen Price Across Physicians Net of Patient Characteristics




               Notes: This figure plots the distribution of physician fixed eects from a regression
               of regimen price on patient characteristics as well as quarter, region, and physician
               dummies. Dependent variable is the price level.



   Since we only observe individual choices between 2003 and 2005, we estimate our heterogeneous
demand parameters from Equation 2 and Equation 3 using the "micro-BLP" procedure outlined
in section 3 for only these years. We next assume that the distribution of patient characteristics
remains fixed for the preceding years, and use our aggregate market shares from 1993-2003, as well
as our estimated heterogeneous parameters, to iterate for            jt   as described in Equation 10.




                                                        29
5         Results
5.1        Parameter Estimates
         We first report the parameter estimates from each of the models using aggregate data only.
In the first column of Table 4 we report estimated coe cients from the OLS logit model without
instrumenting for price; in the second column we report results of the IV logit that addresses the
endogeneity of prices; and in the third column we report coe cients from the random coe cients
model (BLP) that both instruments for price and incorporates physician heterogeneity in drug
preferences. The final column reports the parameter results from the pure characteristics model
that incorporates physician heterogeneity for price as well as second-line regimens, while omitting
from the model the idiosyncratic error term, ". Because many of the attributes are highly correlated,
we include in all models a reduced set of attributes that proxy for relevant quality indicators of
the regimen. To proxy for e cacy, we include the median survival months from the randomized
clinical trial and to proxy for potential side eects, we include the share of trial patients experiencing
vomiting symptoms. We also include an indicator for whether the regimen was a tablet--a measure
of convenience--an indicator for whether the regimen was approved by the FDA as a second-line
regimen, and an indicator for whether any drug in the regimen was produced by the company
Pfizer. The latter is meant to capture brand preferences for one of the major innovators of such
second-line therapies. In all of the models, we rescale prices to log points rather than levels.30
    The logit and BLP results align closely with Song et al. (2017). Comparing the (log) price
coe cients between column 1 and columns 2 and 3 confirms that there is a positive correlation
between a drug's price and demand shocks, and that the instrumental variables mitigate the problem
of price endogeneity. The price coe cient is -0.278 in the OLS logit, versus -1.280 and -1.372 in the
in the IV logit and BLP models, respectively. The price coe cient is significantly dierent from
zero at the one-percent level in all three models.
         The sign on the median months that patients survived in the treatment's randomized controlled
trial is positive across all the models with exception of the OLS model. For the IV logit model,
our estimates imply that physicians, on average, are willing to pay an additional 44 percent for
an additional month of patient survival (where the mean survival months among these regimens
is 13.2). Evaluated at the mean regimen price in our sample ($21,113), this implies physicians are
willing to pay $9,400 per additional month. The estimates therefore indicate that physicians value
survival quite highly, and the annualized amount is close to the common estimate in the economics
literature that a year of life in perfect health is worth $100,000 (Cutler, 2004). Meanwhile, the
coe cient on the percentage of patients in the randomized controlled trial who experienced a severe
vomiting reaction to the treatment is negative across all four models, suggesting that physicians
value drug regimen e cacy and dislike side eects. Specifically, the IV logit estimates suggest that
physicians are willing to pay an additional 19 percent to reduce the expected share of patients
experiencing vomiting by one percentage point (or an additional $4,000 evaluated at the mean
price).
    30
    Average regimen prices rise very substantially from about $127 in 1993 to $36,000 in 2005. As such, estimating
the models with log price rather than the price level increases the amount of price variation early in the sample period
for purposes of identifying the coe cient on price, and prevents the index from swinging wildly. For this reason, we
also plot all of the indices below in logs.


                                                          30
Table 4: Parameter Estimates from Quality-Adjusted Models with Aggregate Data

                                  (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)
                                 OLS        IV Logit       BLP        Pure Char.
        (Log) Price            -0.278       -1.280       -1.372
                               (0.0559)      (0.304)      (0.341)

        Survival Months         0.0127       0.570        0.599          0.506
                               (0.0405)      (0.175)      (0.179)        (0.262)

        Vomiting               -0.0614      -0.243       -0.261         -0.185
                                (0.0249)    (0.0683)     (0.0861)       (0.0512)

        Tablet                 -1.209         0.798        0.946        1.919
                                (0.196)      (0.672)      (0.719)       (0.477)

        Second Line              -0.630      5.324         3.648          4.283
                                (0.442)      (1.877)      (3.551)        (3.651)

        Pfizer                  -0.288       1.600        1.699         1.498
                                (0.166)      (0.616)      (0.621)       (0.556)

        Constant               2.165         1.824         2.792          2.956
                               (0.449)       (0.799)      (2.485)        (4.654)

        1                                                  -0.180        0.348
                                                          (0.233)        (0.172)

        2                                                  2.458          1.008
                                                          (3.399)        (1.008)

        Observations              208          208          208            208
            Notes:  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001. Parameter estimates from
            various demand models. Column 1 reports results from an OLS demand
            model. Column 2 reports results from the logit model with Hausman in-
            strumental variables. Column 3 reports results from the full (BLP) model.
            Column 4 reports results from the pure characteristics model. 1 refers
            to the random coe cient on price, 2 refers to the random coe cient on
            second-line regimens.. In the BLP model, i = N (, 1 ). In the pure
            characteristics model, log (i ) = N (0, 1 ).




                                             31
   The coe cient on the second-line indicator is positive and significant in the IV logit model.
This positive coe cient captures the fact that second-line regimens have low e cacy measures
(e.g., survival months) because they are tested on the sickest patients and are often quite expensive.
Nevertheless, second-line regimens are often prescribed to patients who failed on a first-line regimen
(i.e., the cancer progressed) and are seeking a viable clinical alternative or complement. Our
estimates suggest physicians are, on average, willing to pay about 400 percent more for second-line
regimens. As such, this coe cient plays a large role in the implied welfare gains from the launch
of second-line treatments, as discussed in subsection 5.2. The coe cient on the Pfizer regimen
indicator is positive in the final three models.
   Turning to the random coe cients, the BLP and pure-characteristics models incorporate ran-
dom coe cients on a regimen's price and whether it is FDA approved as a second-line regimen. Nei-
ther of the estimated standard deviations are significantly dierent from zero in the BLP model. The
coe cient on the standard deviation of price is positive and significant in the pure-characteristics
model. This indicates that colorectal cancer treatments that are similarly priced are perceived by
physicians to be closer substitutes than treatments that are dierently priced.
    The distributions of the estimated  and coe cients for the demand models are displayed
in Figure 4. Panel (a) depicts i for the BLP and pure characteristics models. Although the esti-
mated mean price sensitivity is lower in the pure characteristics model (approximately 1.0 versus
the estimated 1.5 in the BLP model), it is clear from the figure that consumers have more hetero-
geneous price preferences in the pure characteristics model, as the distribution of i is considerably
more disperse about the mean. The implication is that some of the heterogeneity that the logit
and BLP models previously placed on the idiosyncratic error term is now being loaded onto i .
Looking at one standard deviation below and above the estimated mean price sensitivity coe -
cient, our pure characteristics model implies that physicians are willing to pay between 37 percent
less ($8,000) and 77 percent more ($16,385) than the mean for an additional month of survival,
suggesting considerable heterogeneity. Conversely, moving to Panel (b), the       i   coe cient (valua-
tion of second-line treatments) exhibits more variation among physicians in the BLP relative to the
pure characteristics model. Nevertheless, although the coe cient is estimated imprecisely, our pure
characteristics model implies physicians are willing to pay between an additional 240 percent and
800 percent for second-line regimens when evaluated at plus or minus one standard deviation of the
mean. Overall, these distributions indicate that allowing for unobserved random preferences is an
important driver of demand: in particular, models with more flexibility (i.e., pure characteristics)
characterize physicians as having wider variation in price sensitivity, but tighter deviations in their
predisposition towards recommending second-line treatments.
   We now turn to parameter estimates of the demand model with both observed and unobserved
heterogeneity across physicians and patients from the individual choice data. The results are
displayed in Table 5. The coe cient estimates for mean regimen attributes are largely consistent
with those from the estimation of the macro moments from Table 4. Physicians dislike higher-priced
regimens and those with side eects, but value regimens with higher e cacy. The coe cient on
the second-line indicator is positive suggesting that, controlling for other regimen characteristics,
physicians prefer second-line treatments. Recall that second-line regimens have relatively short
survival months because they are tested on patients with more advanced cancer.


                                                   32
 Table 5: Parameter Estimates Allowing for Patient Heterogeneity

                                                    (1)
                        Log Price               -2.000
                                                 (0.497)

                        Survival Months         0.979
                                                 (0.286)

                        Vomiting                -0.634
                                                 (0.112)

                        Tablet                  2.481
                                                (1.100)

                        Second-Line Indicator   8.657
                                                 (3.070)

                        Pfizer                  2.946
                                                 (1.007)

                        Constant                6.238
                                                 (1.307)

                        AgexPrice               -0.757
                                                 (0.045)

                        AgexVomiting            0.538
                                                 (0.026)

                        AgexSecondLine          0.0642
                                                (0.484)

                        Round2xPrice            0.145
                                                 (0.004)

                        Round2xVomiting         -0.122
                                                 (0.001)

                        Round2xSecondLine       2.731
                                                 (0.246)

                        StageIIIxPrice          0.301
                                                 (0.030)

                        StageIIIxVomiting       -0.100
                                                 (0.008)

                        StageIVxPrice           0.591
                                                 (0.062)

                        StageIVxVomiting        -0.133
                                                 (0.017)
                        v
                        1                       -0.502
                                                 (0.039)
                        v
                        2                        0.014
                                                (3.313)
                        Observations              208
Notes:  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001. Parameter estimates from micro-
                                                                      v
BLP demand models with observed and unobserved heterogeneity. 1         refers to
                                              v
the random unobserved coe cient on price. 2 refers to the random coe cient
on second-line treatments. "Round2" refers to whether a patient is undergoing
their second-or-higher round of treatment. "Vomiting" refers to share of patients
experiencing vomiting symptoms after taking the regimen.




                                         33
          Figure 4: Estimated Price Sensitivity and Second-Line Valuation Coe cients
                    (a) Estimated i                                         (b) Estimated   i




              Notes: This figure plots estimated distributions of price sensitivity (i , Panel (a))
              and valuation for regimens approved by the FDA as second-line treatments ( i ,
              Panel(b)) across sampled individuals for the BLP and pure characteristics models.


   The estimated coe cients on the interactions between drug regimen characteristics and observed
patient attributes, however, highlight the importance of allowing for heterogeneity when analyzing
the welfare impact of innovation. Specifically, we allow for interactions between regimen price and
side eects with a patient's age (divided by 100), whether the patient is being treated for Stage III
cancer, and whether the patient is being treated for highly advanced (Stage IV) cancer. In addition,
we allow for interactions between patients undergoing their second-or-higher round of therapy with
an indicator for whether the regimen was approved by the FDA as a second-line treatment. The
cancer patients with the shortest expected life expectancy will be those whose tumor is already
advanced when diagnosed (i.e., Stage III or Stage IV), and patients where the disease continues
to progress and advance even after receiving an initial drug treatment (i.e., second line). These
patients might be more willing to pay more for expensive therapies that are eective, have limited
side eects, and are specifically designed for their clinical situation (i.e., treatments approved by
the FDA as second-line therapies for patients who have already received an initial drug treatment).
   Indeed, based on the results from Table 5, physicians treating patients who are undergoing
a second-round of treatment as well as those with advanced cancer (i.e., Stage III or Stage IV,
where Stage II is omitted from the regression and Stage I patients were omitted from the sample
altogether), place greater value on regimens with minimal side eects and are less price sensitive
relative to physicians treating patients with better treatment prospects and longer expected sur-
vival. Our model implies that physicians treating patients for Stage IV cancer are willing to pay
about 70 percent more for an additional month of survival. Evaluated at the mean regimen price,
this implies that Stage IV patients are willing to pay about $177,000 for an additional year of
survival, about an extra $51,000 relative to Stage II cancer patients. Stage IV cancer patients
are willing to pay about 54 percent more for a one percentage point lower likelihood of vomiting,
amounting to an additional $11,000. For Stage II cancer patients, this amounts to about $7,000.
Moreover, physicians treating patients with a second-round of treatment place significantly extra



                                                       34
value on second-line regimens. These results provide the intuition for why the price index that
allows for heterogeneity falls over time for patients with a Stage IV cancer receiving a second round
of treatment when expensive second-line regiments arrive in the market, as we discuss below.
   The coe cients on the age interactions in Table 5 indicate that physicians treating older patients
have relatively strong preferences for lower-priced regimens and are somewhat less sensitive to side
eects relative to physicians treating younger patients. The former results would be consistent with
Medicare enrollees being required to pay a greater percentage of the drug price relative to younger
                                                                                          v , is
patients covered by private health insurance. Finally, the unobserved coe cient on price, 1
negative and insignificant unlike the results from the pure-characteristics model, but similar to the
results of the macro-BLP model.

5.2   What are the Gains from New Drug Regimens?
   We now use the estimated models to produce quality-adjusted price indices for colorectal cancer
regimens between 1993 and 2005. The naive price index (in log points) is plotted in Figure 5. Note
that prices are relatively stable in the pre-1998 period where 5-FU/LV dominated the market and
all other products were included in the outside option. The share-weighted prices began to rise
in 1998 after irinotecan was introduced, and then continued to increase until the 2005 period.
This is further documented in Table 1, where it can be seen that the 2005 price of irinotecan was
considerably higher than that of 5-FU/LV, and that this continued to be the case in 2001 when
capacitabine was introduced, in 2002 when oxaliplatin was launched, and in 2004 when bevacizumab
entered the market.
                                      Figure 5: Naive Price Index




               Notes: This figure plots the price of regimens weighted by market share between
               1993 and 2005. Prices are for a 24-week treatment cycle. Dashed red lines re-
               flect the arrival of four new regimens to the market: irinotecan, capecitabine,
               oxaliplatin, and bevacizumab, in chronological order.



   We plot the log price indices for the models using aggregate data (logit, BLP, and pure charac-

                                                     35
teristics) in Figure 6. The figure presents our preferred index where the quality of the inside goods
is assumed to be fixed at zero (i.e., the coe cients on the time indicators capture changes in the
mean quality of the outside goods), and         jt is assumed to reflect changes in unobserved product
quality over time. In Appendix A, we present indices separately for each of the four assumption
combinations regarding the outside option, u0t , and unobserved product quality,                jt , as described
in detail in subsubsection 3.3.1. We also present evidence justifying our preferred interpretation of
the outside option in the appendix.

                       Figure 6: Price Indices with No Patient Heterogeneity




               Notes: This figure plots the aggregate price indices from the estimated logit, BLP,
               and pure characteristics models. All indices are on a log scale (i.e., the depen-
               dent variable is the "log" price). This graph plots the index from our preferred
               specification, which assumes that the outside option (µ0t ) changes in quality each
               period and that the period-specific deviations from the mean in estimated regimen
               quality ( jt ) change each period. Dashed red lines reflect the arrival of four new
               regimens to the market: irinotecan, capecitabine, oxaliplatin, and bevacizumab,
               in chronological order.



   The first notable result from these indices is that, regardless of modeling assumptions used,
adjusting for quality through our discrete choice framework significantly reduced the extent to
which the indices rose relative to the na¨
                                         ive index. Whereas the na¨
                                                                  ive index rose by about 94 log
points between 1993 and 2005, the quality-adjusted indices each rose by six log points. This implies
the survival and side eects gains brought on by these entrants were highly valued by physicians.
This can further be seen through the notable drop in the index surrounding the introduction of
each new regimen (depicted by the vertical red lines).
   During the initial period before irinotecan was introduced, all three quality-adjusted price in-
dices estimated from demand models in Panel (a) are relatively flat and similar to the naive index,
as would be expected. They each fall slightly throughout this period, reflecting the fact that only
one product was available before 1996 (5-FU + LV), and its product characteristics did not change
other than experiencing minor price decreases (producing a small decrease in the index). When


                                                       36
irinotecan was introduced in 1996 there was a noticeable reduction in all of the price indices. This
reflects the fact that physicians valued the substantial improvement in expected longevity by more
than the price increase. Although the price of irinotecan ($20,000 in 2005 dollars) was well above
5-FU + LV ($75), irinotecan improved survival from 12.5 months to 15.6 months. Beyond this,
irinotecan was the first second-line regimen approved by the FDA (irinotecan with 5-FU + LV is a
first-line regimen, whereas irinotecan by itself is a second-line regimen). The substantial valuation
on second-line treatments in our demand models served to reinforce a declining index during this
period.
       All of the price indices rise substantially after the introduction of irinotecan until 2001 when
the only products on the market continued to be 5-FU + LV and irinotecan. While their quality
attributes were consistent, their prices rose substantially over this time period. Between 1996 and
2001, both irinotecan regimens experienced price increases of about 25 percent, translating into an
increase of more than $3,600. As a result, the logit and BLP indices spiked by about 25 log points
during this time period. The pure-characteristics index rose only about 15 log points, driven by
the fact that the average mean price sensitivity in the pure characteristics model is estimated to
be lower than that of the BLP and logit models (and, as a result, physicians are estimated to lose
less utility from irinotecan price increases).
       The index then falls sharply when capecitabine and oxaliplatin were introduced in 2001 and
2002, respectively. Oxaliplatin further increased the median survival to 19.4 months, but with a
higher price ($25,000 for a six-month treatment). Capecitabine is an oral tablet that provides time
savings by allowing patients to avoid time consuming infusions, but it is much more expensive
than 5-FU-LV, which it is chemically equivalent to. In spite of these price increases, however, the
value of the survival gains and tablet convenience led to a decrease in the logit and BLP indices
by a little over five log points following the introduction of capecitabine and a little under 10 log
points following the introduction of oxaliplatin. The pure characteristics index, however, remained
relatively flat during this time period. This suggests that most of the welfare gains associated with
the introduction of these new regimens were driven by the idiosyncratic error term. When the term
is removed by the pure characteristics model, the welfare gains associated with higher survival are
muted.
       After this point, the indices stabilize or fall for the rest of the sample period when bevacizumab
and cetuximab launch in 2004. Part of the observable drop visible in 2004 for the logit and BLP
indices are attributed to the survival gains exhibited by bevacizumab. However, recall that between
2000 and 2005 the market share of the outside option increased substantially, so the stability or
drop in the indices is due in large part to our interpretation that the quality of the outside option
was increasing over time (a point we return to below).
       Overall, towards the end of the sample period all three indices are 21 percent to 35 percent
higher than they were in 1993, implying a slight reduction in welfare, despite a substantial increase
in price.31 As a point of comparison, the CPI rose 35 percent during this time period. Although
  31
    Using the pure characteristics price index as an example, the index is 6.18 log points higher in the third quarter
of 2005 relative to the first quarter of 1993 (i.e., log(pt)/log(p0) = 1.0618). Because prices in the first quarter of 1993
were $127, this implies that in levels prices rose to $171 (1271.0618 ), or 35 percent. The log transformation method
is more accurate for small versus large price changes. For example, prices increased by 29,000 percent between 1993
and 2005, whereas the log-price method depicted in Figure 5 implies an increase of only 12,000 percent. The log-price



                                                            37
pharmaceutical firms oered superior products over time, they set prices that extracted most of
the welfare gains, which should provide strong incentives to invest substantially in R&D.
    The ordering of the three demand-based indices seem intuitive. The BLP and pure characteris-
tics indices drop about five log points more than the logit index in 1997 when irinotecan is launched.
The larger drop for the former two indices is driven by the fact that these models allow consumers to
have heterogenous preferences for a treatment's price and whether it is formally approved as second-
line treatment, whereas the logit model assumes homogenous preferences. Irinotecan was included
in both first- and second-line regimens in 1997. Physicians who placed a high value on second-
line regimens would therefore benefit from irinotecan's launch, but that would not be captured in
the logit model. This is particularly true since prior to irinotecan, there were no FDA-approved
second-line regimens. As a result, irinotecan had no close substitutes in the product space and, as
such, produced substantial welfare gains. After 1998, the BLP and logit indices closely track one
another.
    The pure characteristics index does not rise as substantially as the other two indices after the
introduction of irinotecan. As mentioned previously, this reflects the fact that between 1996 and
2001, no new products were introduced into the product space. In addition, among the existing
products, the only changing attribute was a substantial increase in the price of irinotecan. Given
that the pure characteristics model estimated a lower mean price elasticity among physicians, the
price index did not rise during this time period as much as the other indices.
    Conversely, the pure characteristics index also did not fall by as much as the logit and BLP
indices upon introduction of new regimens. For instance, when bevacizumab was launched in 2004,
both the BLP and logit indices fell by about 10 log points with the introduction of this flagship
product. The pure characteristics index, however, remained stable. As mentioned, a key weakness
of the logit and BLP models is that because of the idiosyncratic error term, ", each new product
introduction, irrespective of where it is in the quality space, yields welfare gains for consumers.
This pushes the implied quality-adjusted price index downward. The pure characteristics model
corrects this flaw by removing the error term, thereby allowing consumers to value newly introduced
products exclusively by their characteristics.
    The implication is that if products are introduced that do not oer substantial improvements
in e cacy, side eects, or substantial decreases in price, the pure characteristics index will rise
relative to the logit index (or not fall as much). This is indeed what we see towards the end of the
sample period. Consider, for instance, cetuximab, a second-line treatment introduced in 2004. This
treatment is quite expensive and oers substantially fewer survival months relative to the existing
second-line treatment (irinotecan). The logit model, however, predicts that despite the fact that
cetuximab appears to be dominated by irinotecan, consumers still benefit from its introduction.
The pure characteristics model, on the other hand, is flat when cetuximab is launched.
    The three price indices depicted Figure 6 rely on physicians' valuation of how drug attributes
will aect their patients' health, and the value of health gains. If, however, health insurers fail to
create the optimal incentives for patients and physicians, or if physicians exploit their information
advantage to capture profits on drug treatments at the expense of patients' health outcomes, these
method therefore understates increases and decreases in quality-adjusted prices in our application, but captures the
directional and qualitative eects.



                                                        38
indices may not accurately measure changes in social welfare.
   In a separate paper, Lakdawalla et al. (2015) use the same data to present a price index for
colorectal cancer drug treatment that does not rely on physicians' valuations of drug attributes, and
they arrive at a similar conclusion regarding flat quality-adjusted prices. Specifically, they use the
performance of the drugs in randomized clinical trials, reported here in Table 1 and Table 2, and
the observed market shares to estimate a patient's expected quality adjusted life years (QALYs)
between 1998 and 2005. Applying a value of $100,000 per QALY from the economics literature,
they then subtract the change in monetized expected health gains from the change in the drug
treatment costs, which is similar to the method used by Cutler et al. (1998) for heart attack
treatment and Eggleston et al. (2011) for diabetes treatment. Lakdawalla et al. (2015) find that
this quality-adjusted price index, which imposes a value per QALY and forecasts QALY changes
based on changes in market share and the survival and side eects of each regimen, increased by
$1,400 over this time period, versus the unadjusted increase of $36,000 in the per-patient average
drug treatment cost. That is, a price index that does not rely on physicians' subjective valuations
is essentially flat, similar to the three indices depicted Figure 6.
   Although the aggregate indices shed light on the overall welfare eects of new colorectal cancer
regimens, as well as how those eects vary by modeling assumptions, the indices above do not
capture the considerable heterogeneity that may exist among patients and physicians who may place
dierent value on dierent attributes of particular treatments. In Figure 7 we depict the indices
constructed from the Micro-BLP model, our preferred specification, for two subgroups. Alternate
indices are presented in Appendix A separately for the four scenarios regarding whether the quality
of the outside option changes over time and how to interpret the period-specific unobserved value
of the inside products. The subgroups we highlight are relatively healthy patients diagnosed with
Stage II cancer who are receiving their first-round of drug treatment, versus relatively sick patients
diagnosed with Stage IV cancer who are receiving their second-round of drug treatment.
   Figure 7 plots the price indices for the two subgroups under our preferred assumptions where
the outside option quality changes over time and jt changes, reflecting changes in unobserved
product quality over time. The index plotted for the entire population looks fairly similar to the
BLP index plotted in Figure 6. In particular, the index begins fairly flat then falls with each new
product entrant, and rises in between. The one notable exception is the extent to which quality-
adjusted prices rise over time and the extent to which the introduction of new regimens increase
welfare. In general, price increases are more muted when patient heterogeneity is introduced to the
model. By the end of the sample period, the index ends up rising just five percent, implying a slight
reduction in welfare (in nominal prices). Moreover, the introduction of new regimens also caused
lower fluctuations in the index. For instance, in Figure 6, the introduction of bevacizumab in 2004
led to a decline of about 10 log points for the BLP index. However, once patient heterogeneity
is incorporated, the introduction of this flagship product decreases the index by about half that
amount. This, in eect, mimics the behavior of the pure characteristics model: the introduction of
heterogeneity in patient preferences "soak" up eects that would have otherwise been attributed
to idiosyncratic preferences for new products.
   While the index implies that the gains from new products were not quite worth the price
increases, the behavior of the index for the two subgroups highlights the stark contrast in patient


                                                   39
Figure 7: Estimated Price Indices with Physician and Patient Heterogeneity




   Notes: This figure plots the price indices from the estimated micro-BLP models,
   incorporating both observed and unobserved heterogeneity. These are indices for
   the entire population, as well as for the population of patients with Stage II cancer
   diagnoses undergoing their first-round of treatment and patients with Stage IV
   diagnoses undergoing their second-or-higher round of treatment. All indices are
   on a log scale (i.e. the dependent variable is the "log" price). All indices assume our
   preferred specification: assuming that the outside option (µ0t ) changes in quality
   each period and that the period-specific deviations from the mean in estimated
   regimen quality ( jt ) change each period. Dashed red lines reflect the arrival
   of four new regimens to the market: irinotecan, capecitabine, oxaliplatin, and
   bevacizumab, in chronological order.




                                             40
valuations of these cancer therapies. In particular, the quality-adjusted price indices for the two
subgroups diverge substantially with the introduction of capecitabine (in 2001) and oxaliplatin (in
2002). By the end of the sample period the quality-adjusted price index for the healthy patients
is 128 percent higher than it was in 1993, whereas it is 44 percent lower for the sicker patients.
Notably, even after the introduction of bevacizumab and cetuximab in 2004, the price index for
relatively healthier patients continued to increase through the end of the sample period, suggesting
that the survival gains from this regimen did not bring enough value to early-stage cancer patients.
However, the price index for sicker patients continue to mildly decrease, even post-launch.
    Overall, the results indicate that the gains from expensive colorectal cancer regimens accrued
mostly to relatively sick patients with repeated interactions with oncologists. These populations
experienced a substantial improvement in welfare due predominantly to the development of both (a)
regimens that promised significantly higher survival and low side-eects and (b) valuable second-
line therapies. Conversely, the high prices brought by these regimens caused welfare to fall for
the relatively healthy patients being treated for the first (and probably last) time. Given that the
latter group represents a larger share of the population, the overall index for the entire popula-
tion exhibited a slight increase, suggesting overall welfare declines from product introductions in
aggregate.


6    Conclusion
    In this paper, we use price and market share data from 1993 to 2005, clinical trial data, and
patient and physician characteristics to estimate a series of quality-adjusted price indices for col-
orectal cancer treatments. In particular, we compute a naive price index that does not adjust for
improving attributes, and compare it with indices based on logit, full random-coe cients BLP, and
pure characteristics demand models.
    We find that accounting for patient heterogeneity is important. Newer, more eective colorec-
tal cancer treatments benefited patients with late-stage cancers whose initial treatment was not
successful relative to patients with early stage cancers. The former group of patients experienced a
quality-adjusted price decrease of 44 percent, whereas the latter group of patients experienced an
increase of 128 percent. When we ignore heterogeneity and only use an average value, such as is
commonly done in European countries, the quality-adjusted price index increases by between five
and 15 percent, implying that the innovation was not worth it. A uniform rule preventing patients
with advanced cancer from receiving newer treatments would reduce welfare for these patients.
During our sample period, five of the six drugs were patent-protected and able to mark-up prices
well above production costs. By July 2019, however, generic or biosimilar versions of all but one
of the drugs had entered the market and driven down prices due to greater competition.
    Our results show that adjusting for quality and accounting for patient heterogeneity matter.
The naive price index greatly overestimates the price increase. We find that the pure characteristics
quality-adjusted (log) price index rises by five to 15 percent for the entire patient population over
a 13-year period compared with a 29,000% percent increase exhibited in a model without quality
adjustments. Moreover, allowing for flexible substitution patterns matters for generating accurate
welfare estimates. By shedding the idiosyncratic logit error term that is a workhorse of traditional


                                                 41
demand models, the pure characteristics model produces more realistic substitution patterns as new
colorectal cancer treatments enter the market and replace existing regimens. Quality adjustment
methods that rely on traditional logit models overestimate welfare gains of product introductions
by up to 10 log points.
   Our calculations regarding the value of new technology do not include the insurance value
of innovation (Lakdawalla et al., 2017): how healthy individuals value reducing the variance of
outcomes by converting previously uninsurable physical risk because of the lack of treatment into
insurable financial risk. The value measured in our setting is for patients that are already sick,
for whom treatment innovation improves utility in the bad state of the world, making illness less
unpleasant through either increased e cacy or lower side eects.




                                               42
References
Agha, L. and Molitor, D. (2018). The local influence of pioneer investigators on technology adoption:
  Evidence from new cancer drugs. Review of Economics and Statistics, 100(1).

Bauer, D., Lakdawalla, D., and Reif, J. (2018). Mortality risk, insurance, and the value of life.
  NBER Working Paper.

Berndt, E. R., Bir, A., Busch, S. H., and Frank, R. G. (2002). The medical treatment of depression,
  1991-1996: Productive ine ciency, expected outcome variations, and price indices. Journal of
  Health Economics, 3(21):373­396.

Berndt, E. R., Cutler, D., Frank, R. G., Griliches, Z., Newhouse, J., and Triplett, J. E. (2000).
  Handbook of Health Economics. Elsevier Science.

Berry, S., Levinsohn, J., and Pakes, A. (2004). Dierentiated product demand systems from a
  combination of micro and macro data: The new car market. Journal of Political Economy.

Berry, S. T. (1994). Estimating discrete choice models of product dierentiation. Rand Journal of
  Economics, 25(2):242­262.

Berry, S. T., Levinsohn, J., and Pakes, A. (1995). Automobile prices in market equilibrium.
  Econometrica, 63(4):841­890.

Berry, S. T. and Pakes, A. (2007). The pure characteristics demand model. International Economic
  Review, 48(4):1993­1225.

Boskin, M. J., Dulberger, E. R., Gordon, R. J., and an Dale Jorgenson, Z. G. (1998). Consumer
  prices, the consumer price index, and the cost of living. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12(1).

Bresnahan, T. F., Stern, S., and Trajtenberg, M. (1997). Market segmentation and the sources
  of rents from innovation: Personal computers in the late 1980s. RAND Journal of Economics,
  28(0):S17­S44.

Chan, D. C., Gentzkow, M., and Yu, C. (2020). Selection with variation in diagnostic skill:evidence
  from radiologists. Working Paper.

Chernew, M. E. and Newhouse, J. (2011). Health care spending growth. In Pauly, M. V., Mcguire,
  T. G., and Barros, P., editors, Handbook of Health Economics, Volume 2, pages 1­43. Elsevier.

Claxton, K., Sculpher, M., Palmer, S., and Culyer, A. J. (2015). Causes for concern: Is nice failing
  to uphold its responsibilities to all nhs patients? Health Economics, 24.

Cockburn, I. M. and Anis, A. H. (2001). Hedonic analysis of arthritis drugs. In Cutler, D. M.
  and Berndt, E. R., editors, Medical Care Output and Productivity, pages 439­462. University of
  Chicago Press, Chicago.

Conti, R. M., Rosenthal, M. B., Polite, B. N., Bach, P. B., and Shih, Y.-C. T. (2012). Infused
  chemotherapy use in the elderly after patent expiration. American Journal of Managed Care,
  18(5).

                                                 43
Cutler, D. (2004). Your Money Or Your Life: Strong Medicine for Americans Health Care System.
  Oxford University Press.

Cutler, D., McLellan, M., Newouse, J., and Remler, D. (1998). Are medical prices declining?
  evidence from heart attack treatments. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 63(4):991­1024.

Cutler, D. M., Mclellan, M., and Newhouse, J. P. (2000). How does managed care do it? RAND
  Journal of Economics, 31(3).

Danzon, P. M. and Furukawa, M. F. (2008). International prices and availability of pharmaceuticals
  in 2005. Health Aairs, 27(1).

Dunn, A. (2012). Drug innovations and welfare measures computed from market demand: The
  case for anti-cholesterol drugs. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(3):167­189.

Eggleston, K. N., Shah, N. D., Smith, S. A., and Berndt, E. R. (2011). Quality adjustment for
  health care spending on chronic disease: Evidence from diabetes treatment, 1999-2009. American
  Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 101(3).

Einav, L., Finkelstein, A., and Williams, H. (2016). Paying on the margin for medical care: Evidence
  from breast cancer treatments. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 8(1).

Frank, R. G. and Nichols, L. M. (2019). Medicare drug-price negotiation--why now...and how.
  New England Journal of Medicine, 381.

Garber, A. M. and Phelps, C. E. (1997). Economic foundations of cost-eectiveness analysis.
  Journal of Health Economics, 16.

Government Accountability O ce (2001). Medicare: Payments for covered outpatient drugs exceed
  providers' cost. Technical report, Government Accountability O ce.

Hartman, M., Martin, A. B., Benson, J., and Catlin, A. (2020). National health care spending
  in 2018: Growth driven by accelerations in medicare and private insurance spending. Health
  Aairs, 39(1).

Hausman, J. A. (1996). Valuation of new goods under perfect and imperfect competition. In
  Bresnahan, T. F. and Gordon, R. J., editors, The Economics of New Goods, pages 207­248.
  University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Hicks, J. R. (1940). The valuation of the social income. Economica, 7(26).

Howard, D. H., Bach, P. B., Berndt, E. R., and Conti, R. M. (2015). Pricing in the market for
  anticancer drugs. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(1):139­162.

Jacobson, M., Chang, T. Y., Newhouse, J. P., and Earle, C. C. (2016). Physician agency and
  competition: Evidence from a major change to medicare chemotherapy reimbursement policy.
  Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 134.

Jacobson, M., Earle, C. C., Price, M., and Newhouse, J. P. (2010). How medicare's payment cuts
  for cancer chemotherapy drugs changed patterns of treatment. Health Aairs, 29(7).

                                                44
Jacobson, M. and Newhouse, J. P. (2006). Does reimbursement influence chemotherapy treatment
  for cancer patients? Health Aairs, 25.

Kolstad, J. T. (2013). Information and quality when motivation is intrinsic: Evidence from surgeon
  report cards. American Economic Review, 103(7).

Kravitz, R. L., Duan, N., and Braslow, J. (2004). Evidence-based medicine, heterogeneity of
  treatment eects, and the trouble with averages. Milbank Quarterly, 82(4).

Lakdawalla, D., Shafrin, J., Lucarelli, C., Nicholson, S., Khan, Z. M., and Philipson, T. J. (2015).
  Quality-adjusted cost of care: A meaningful way to measure growth in innovation versus the
  value of health gains. Health Aairs, 34(4):555­561.

Lakdawalla, D. N., Jena, A. B., and Doctor, J. N. (2014). Careful use of science to advance the
  debate on united kingdom's cancer drugs fund. Journal of the American Medical Association,
  311(1).

Lakdawalla, D. N., Malani, A., and Reif, J. (2017). The insurance value of medical innovation.
  Journal of Public Economics, 145.

Lakdawalla, D. N., Romley, J. A., Sanchez, Y., Maclean, J. R., Penrod, J. R., and Philipson, T.
  (2012). How cancer patients value hope and the implications for cost-eectiveness assessments
  of high-cost cancer therapies. Health Aairs, 31(4).

Lucarelli, C. and Nicholson, S. (2009). A quality-adjusted price index for colorectal cancer drugs.
  NBER Working Paper.

Lucarelli, C., Nicholson, S., and Town, R. J. (2010). The eect of physician reimbursement on
  chemotherapy treatment decisions and patient outcomes. Unpublished Manuscript, Cornell Uni-
  versity.

Manning, W. G., Newhouse, J. P., Duan, N., Keeler, E. B., and Leibowitz, A. (1987). Health
  insurance and the demand for medical care: Evidence from a randomized experiment. American
  Economic Review, 77(3).

McFadden, D. (1974). Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior. In Zarembka, P.,
  editor, Frontiers in Econometrics. Academic Press, New York.

McWilliams, J. M., Hartfield, L. A., Chernew, M. E., Landon, B. E., and Schwartz, A. L. (2016).
  Early performance of accountable care organizations in medicine. New England Journal of
  Medicine, 374.

Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (2006). Report to the congress: Medicare payment policy.
  Technical report, Medicare Payment Advisory Commission.

Murphy, K. M. and Topel, R. H. (2006). The value of health and longevity. Journal of Political
  Economy, 114(5):871­904.



                                                45
Nevo, A. (2000). A practitioner's guide to estimation of random coe cients logit models of demand.
  Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 9(4):513­548.

Nevo, A. (2003). New products, quality changes and welfare meausres computed from estimated
  demand systems. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(2):266­275.

Newhouse, J. (1992). Medical care costs: How much welfare loss? Journal of Economic Perspectives,
  6(3):3­21.

Nord, E., Richardson, J., Street, A., Kuhse, H., and Singer, P. (1995). Maximizing health benefits
  vs. egalitarianism: An australian survey of health issues. Social Science and Medicine, 41(10).

Nosko, C. (2014). Competition and quality choice in the cpu market. Working Paper, Forthcoming.

Pakes, A., Berry, S. T., and Levinsohn, J. H. (1993). Applications and limitations of some recent
  advances in empirical industrial organization: Price indices and the analysis of environmental
  change. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 83.

Paramore, C. L., Thomas, S. K., Knopf, K. B., .s Cragin, L., and Fraeman, K. H. (2006). Estimating
  cost of care for patients with newly diagnosed metastatic colorectal cancer. Clinical Colorectal
  Cancer, 6(1).

Pauly, M. V. (2017). The questionable economic case for value-based drug pricing in market health
  systems. Value Health, 20(2).

Petrin, A. (2002). Quantifying the benefits of new products: The case of the minivan. Journal of
  Political Economy, 110(4):705­729.

Small, K. and Rosen, H. (1981). Applied welfare economics with discrete choice models. Econo-
  metrica, 49(1):105­130.

Smith, S., Newhouse, J., and Freeland, M. S. (2009). Income, insurance, and technology: Why
  does health spending outpace economic growth? Health Aairs, 28(5):1276­1284.

Song, M. (2007). Measuring consumer welfare in the cpu market: An application of the pure
  characteristics demand model. Rand Journal of Economics, 38(2):429­446.

Song, M. (2008). The quality-adjusted price index in the pure characteristics demand model.
  Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 28(1):190­199.

Song, M., Lucarelli, C., and Nicholson, S. (2017). Merger with inter-firm bundling: A case of
  pharmaceutical cocktails. RAND Journal of Economics, 48(3).

Stevens, W., Philipson, T. J., Khan, Z. M., MacEwan, J. P., Lintchicum, M. T., and Goldman,
  D. P. (2015). Cancer mortality reductions were greatest among countries where cancer care
  spending rose the most, 1995­2007. Health Aairs, 34(4).

Trajtenberg, M. (1989). The welfare analysis of product innovations, with an application to com-
  puted tomography scanners. Journal of Political Economy, 97(2).

                                               46
Trajtenberg, M. (1990). Product innovations, price indices, and the (mis)measurement of economic
  performance. NBER Working Paper No. 3261.




                                              47
