                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              FAMILY SPILLOVER EFFECTS OF MARGINAL DIAGNOSES:
                             THE CASE OF ADHD

                                         Petra Persson
                                          Xinyao Qiu
                                       Maya Rossin-Slater

                                      Working Paper 28334
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28334


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2021




We thank Amitabh Chandra, Liran Einav, Ben Handel, Andrew Hertzberg, Jon Kolstad, Adriana
Lleras-Muney, Nolan Miller, Ziad Obermeyer, and seminar participants at Stanford University,
the Electronic Health Economics Colloquium, American University, UC Berkeley, Philadelphia
Federal Reserve, McGill University, Penn State, and the University of Copenhagen for helpful
comments. We thank Katja Hoffman for excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Petra Persson, Xinyao Qiu, and Maya Rossin-Slater. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Family Spillover Effects of Marginal Diagnoses: The Case of ADHD
Petra Persson, Xinyao Qiu, and Maya Rossin-Slater
NBER Working Paper No. 28334
January 2021
JEL No. I14,I18,J13

                                         ABSTRACT

The health care system commonly relies on information about family medical history in the
allocation of screenings and in diagnostic processes. At the same time, an emerging literature
documents that treatment for "marginally diagnosed" patients often has minimal impacts. This
paper shows that reliance on information about relatives' health can perpetuate marginal
diagnoses across family members, thereby raising caseloads and health care costs, but without
improving patient well-being. We study Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), the
most common childhood mental health condition, and document that the younger siblings and
cousins of marginally diagnosed children are also more likely to be diagnosed with and treated
for ADHD. Moreover, we find that the younger relatives of marginally diagnosed children have
no better adult human capital and economic outcomes than the younger relatives of those who are
less likely to be diagnosed. Our analysis points to a simple adjustment to physician protocol that
can mitigate these marginal diagnosis spillovers.

Petra Persson                                   Maya Rossin-Slater
Department of Economics                         Department of Medicine
Stanford University                             Stanford University School of Medicine
579 Jane Stanford Way                           615 Crothers Way
Stanford, CA 94305                              Encina Commons, MC 6019
and NBER                                        Stanford, CA 94305-6006
perssonp@stanford.edu                           and NBER
                                                mrossin@stanford.edu
Xinyao Qiu
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Jane Stanford Way
Stanford, CA 94305
xyqiu@stanford.edu
1     Introduction
For hereditary diseases, an individual's diagnosis contains information about the risk of the
condition for their family members. Thus, the health care system often relies on family
medical history in the allocation of screenings and in diagnostic processes. For example, if a
woman is found to carry particular mutations of a breast cancer gene (BRCA), then her close
female family members are typically referred to genetic screening for BRCA.1 The benefits of
such "hereditary tagging" are clear: Screening the relatives of previously diagnosed patients
allows the health care system to target scarce screening resources toward ex ante high-risk
individuals, which reduces the social cost of identifying patients who need medical treatment
in the population.
    At the same time, an emerging literature documents that health care treatment for marginally
diagnosed patients often has minimal or even negative impacts on patient health and well-being
(Alalouf et al., 2019; Bos et al., 2020; Cuddy and Currie, 2020), while a closely related liter-
ature argues that a variety of conditions are frequently misdiagnosed (see, e.g., Mullainathan
and Obermeyer, 2017; Obermeyer et al., 2019).2 In this paper, we document that the use of
family medical history can perpetuate low (or even negative) value marginal diagnoses across
family members, thereby raising caseloads and health care costs, but without improving pa-
tient well-being. Our analysis also points to a simple adjustment to physician protocol that
can mitigate these marginal diagnosis spillovers.
    Specifically, we study this issue in the context of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
(ADHD), the most common mental health condition among children, affecting nearly ten
percent of children in the United States (Danielson et al., 2018) and seven percent of children
worldwide (Thomas et al., 2015). ADHD is characterized by a range of symptoms, including
having trouble paying attention, staying organized, and remembering details. While the full
   1
     See https://www.cdc.gov/genomics/disease/breast_ovarian_cancer/testing.htm for more details
about BRCA gene testing.
   2
     Mullainathan and Obermeyer (2017) and Obermeyer et al. (2019) highlight the role of machine learning
algorithms in propagating misdiagnoses, biases, and the mis-allocation of health care treatment. Additionally,
there exist studies on over-diagnoses of breast cancer (Brewer et al., 2007; Bond et al., 2013; Ong and Mandl,
2015; Einav et al., 2019) and pneumonia (Chan et al., 2019). One interpretation of low-value "marginal"
diagnoses is that they are erroneous. Another interpretation is that the scientifically agreed-upon threshold
for diagnosing a condition is "too low"; that is, even if a particular marginal diagnosis is not erroneous per se,
"the cure" that comes with a diagnosis is, from the patient's perspective, no better than "the disease."



                                                        1
set of causes is unknown, the etiology of ADHD has a strong genetic component (Levy et al.,
1997; Thapar and Cooper, 2016; Miller et al., 2019).3
       Our empirical design exploits a well-documented fact about ADHD: Children who are
younger for their grade level are on the margin more likely to be diagnosed and treated than
their older classmates.4 This diagnosis gap is typically interpreted as reflecting differences in
maturity between children who are almost one year apart in age--children who are youngest
in the classroom naturally have more difficulties paying attention and sitting still than their
older classmates. If one does not account for differences in children's relative age for grade,
then one may misinterpret these differences in maturity as differences in ADHD prevalence.
We use population-level Swedish administrative data on children born in 1990­1996, and start
by confirming this previously documented phenomenon in our data and sample. We find that
December-born children--who are born just before the Swedish school entry cutoff of January
1st and are therefore youngest in their grade--are 30.8 percent more likely to be diagnosed
with ADHD and 29.5 percent more likely to be treated with ADHD medication than their
January-born peers.
       We then take advantage of our ability to link family members in the data to document two
new facts about marginal diagnoses of ADHD. First, we show that the age-for-grade-induced
marginal diagnoses propagate to younger family members. The younger siblings and cousins
of children who are born just before the school entry cutoff are 12.0 and 13.0 percent more
likely to be diagnosed with ADHD, and 9.8 and 9.1 percent more likely to be treated with
ADHD drugs, respectively, than the younger siblings and cousins of children born shortly
after the cutoff. Importantly, these discontinuities exist conditional on the younger siblings'
and cousins' own relative age for grade. In fact, the combined magnitudes of the estimated
spillover effects on younger siblings and cousins amount to more than half of the younger
children's own relative age effects on ADHD diagnoses and drug treatment.
       Second, we examine the longer-term human capital and economic outcomes of the younger
children. Conditional on their own relative age for grade, younger siblings of children who are
   3
     Also see, e.g., Faraone et al. (1992); Barkley (2006); Tarver et al. (2014).
   4
     See, for example: Elder, 2010; Evans et al., 2010; Dalsgaard et al., 2012; Morrow et al., 2012; Zoëga et
al., 2012; Halldner et al., 2014; Krabbe et al., 2014; Pottegård et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2016; Schwandt and
Wuppermann, 2016; Layton et al., 2018; Whitely et al., 2018; Root et al., 2019; Furzer et al., 2020; Furzer,
2020.



                                                      2
born before the cutoff--i.e., those who are disproportionately more likely to be diagnosed with
and treated for ADHD--have 1.6 percent lower earnings at ages 23­28 and are 2.1 percent
less likely to have ever enrolled in college than younger siblings of children born after the
cutoff.5 Younger cousins of children who are born before the cutoff have a 1.0 percent lower
grade point average (GPA) in high school and are 2.6 percent less likely to have ever enrolled
in college than the younger cousins of children born after the cutoff. The spillover effect on
cousins' earnings is of the same sign as the one for siblings, but smaller in magnitude (and
statistically insignificant). In sum, our results on educational and economic outcomes suggest
that the younger siblings and cousins of marginally diagnosed children are no better off in
the long-term; if anything, there could be long-term economic costs associated with marginal
ADHD diagnosis spillovers.6
       The existence of the ADHD diagnosis spillovers suggests that information about the older
child's diagnosis is used in the process through which the younger child's ADHD diagnosis
comes about. As described in Section 2, the process of obtaining an ADHD diagnosis involves
two key steps: First, one must get a referral for an ADHD evaluation, and second, a physician
performs an ADHD screening. To understand how the ADHD spillovers arise, we investigate
the roles of the parties involved in each step.
       "Hereditary tagging" in the referral stage would imply that an ADHD diagnosis of one child
raises the likelihood that a younger family member receives a referral for an ADHD screening.
Indeed, the referral stage is generally where such tagging can help to target scarce screening
resources toward ex ante high-risk individuals. Schools and parents play important roles in
requesting ADHD screenings, and we present evidence consistent with both entities responding
to an older child's relative-age-induced marginal diagnosis. In particular, to analyze the role
   5
     In all of our models, we control for the younger child's own relative age for grade because a large body
of research documents that relative age for grade affects one's human capital, economic, and well-being out-
comes (Bedard and Dhuey, 2006; McEwan and Shapiro, 2008; Elder and Lubotsky, 2009; Black et al., 2011;
Kawaguchi, 2011; Fredriksson and Öckert, 2014; Hurwitz et al., 2015; Depew and Eren, 2016; Cook and Kang,
2016; Landersø et al., 2017; Dhuey et al., 2019).
   6
     There could be other channels through which an older child's relative age for grade influences the outcomes
of his/her household members--e.g., through changes in parental marital stability and maternal labor supply
(Landersø et al., 2019) or sibling "role model" effects (Karbownik and Özek, 2019). However, these channels
are less likely to explain the existence of ADHD spillovers across cousins who do not share a household. The
most conservative interpretation of our results on educational and economic outcomes is that any possible
benefits of marginal ADHD diagnosis spillovers do not come close to offsetting the negative impacts of being
a younger relative of a youngest-for-grade child.



                                                       3
of schools, we use variation stemming from Swedish school financing rules that give schools
different economic incentives to refer students for ADHD screenings,7 and find that the sibling
spillover effects are larger in municipalities with higher incentives. Moreover, the spillover
effects among cousins provide some insights into the role of families. We find that ADHD
spillovers exist even among cousin pairs that live in different municipalities and therefore do
not attend the same schools or see the same health care providers, but have parents--who
are siblings themselves--who likely communicate about their children's health issues. Thus,
the ADHD spillovers that we document appear to in part materialize due to a "referral gap"
between the younger family members of marginally-diagnosed and marginally-undiagnosed
children.
       Next, in the screening stage, the physician's diagnostic technology plays a critical role. For
conditions for which there exists a precise technology that rules out erroneous or low-value
diagnoses (e.g., a genetic test), "hereditary tagging" would only have the upside of improved
targeting of screening resources, but no downside.8 However, ADHD falls into a large class
of health conditions for which there is no precise technology that can rule out erroneous or
low-value diagnoses; instead, physicians have a noisy screening protocol. If the same (noisy)
diagnostic criteria are applied to all younger relatives of previously diagnosed patients, the
referral gap will translate into spillovers of marginal low-value--or potentially inaccurate--
diagnoses. We provide empirical evidence suggesting that physicians indeed apply the same
diagnostic criteria to all younger siblings of previously diagnosed patients, regardless of the
older sibling's relative age for grade. This finding suggests that physicians adhere to the current
protocol, which indicates that a prior diagnosis of ADHD in the family should be taken into
account, but which does not prescribe differentiating the significance of this information based
on the previously diagnosed family member's relative age for grade. In practice, however, when
a physician is screening a younger relative of a previously diagnosed child, the older child's
month of birth provides information about the expected severity of that child's condition and
hence the strength of the signal of the hereditary component of the younger child's risk of
ADHD. This points to a simple tool for mitigating the downsides of using family medical
   7
    Similar incentives also exist in the U.S., see Cullen, 2003; Morrill, 2018.
   8
    Specifically, the use of "hereditary tagging" would not result in any low-value or erroneous spillover diag-
noses.



                                                       4
history in the ADHD diagnostic process: Adjusting the screening protocol so that it attaches
less weight to information about a diagnosis of an older family member when he or she is
relatively young-for-grade.
       In sum, our two new empirical facts--(i) that marginal ADHD diagnoses propagate to
younger family members, and (ii) that the value of these spillover diagnoses appears to be
negligible (at least in terms of economic and human capital outcomes)--highlight an important
downside of the use of family medical history in health care. Importantly, this does not imply
that the use of family medical history should be eliminated--screening the family members of
previously diagnosed individuals helps target scarce screening resources toward ex ante high-
risk individuals. However, our analysis points to a simple modification that can equip the
health care system to leverage the targeting benefits of "hereditary tagging," while reducing
the potential costs of marginal diagnosis spillovers: Adjusting screening protocols so that a
family member's prior diagnosis is given more weight when it signifies a higher expected risk
of the condition in that individual.9
       Our paper contributes to three strands of literature. First, the idea that marginal or over-
diagnoses raise health care costs and sometimes adversely affect patients' well-being has been
documented in a variety of settings (Brewer et al., 2007; Bond et al., 2013; Ong and Mandl,
2015; Mullainathan and Obermeyer, 2017; Einav et al., 2019; Chan et al., 2019; Alalouf et al.,
2019; Obermeyer et al., 2019). Particularly relevant to our study of a mental health condition,
Bos et al. (2020) show that marginal diagnoses of mental illness have adverse impacts on the
future health and labor market outcomes of Swedish men in the military. We show that
in settings where family history is used as a tag for further screening, these costs can be
substantially amplified, as a single marginal diagnosis can spill over to multiple other family
members. More broadly, our analysis uncovers an unintended consequence of using tags to
target screening for a large set of medical conditions in which the diagnosing technology is
noisy--e.g., this is an issue for a wide range of mental illnesses, see Frank and McGuire (2000);
Anttila et al. (2018); Currie and Macleod (2020); Cuddy and Currie (2020)-- the tag may
propagate low-value (and potentially erroneous) diagnoses, and thereby the misallocation of
   9
    The exact information needed to infer the expected risk of the condition in the family member depends
on the condition. In the case of ADHD, it is sufficient to know the older child's month of birth. In the case
of diabetes, the information could be gleaned from data on the relative's blood sugar level relative to the
diagnosis threshold (Alalouf et al., 2019).


                                                     5
treatment, throughout society.
       Second, our paper contributes to a burgeoning literature about the drivers of the increase in
ADHD diagnoses in the last few decades (see, e.g., Chorniy et al., 2018). We document that
one well-known process that generates marginal ADHD diagnoses--differences in maturity
being interpreted as differences in ADHD--is amplified due to diagnosis spillovers throughout
the family tree. The large magnitudes of our estimated spillover effects on younger siblings and
cousins suggest that this mechanism can explain a sizeable share of the "exploding" caseloads
of ADHD (Hinshaw and Scheffler, 2014).
       Third, our results contribute to a growing body of evidence that establishes the family as
an important nexus of the transmission of spillovers. Spillovers in non-health-related choices
and outcomes are well documented.10 A smaller literature analyzes how health-related inter-
ventions and health shocks to one child affect his/her siblings' cognitive skills and educational
outcomes (see, e.g., Fletcher et al., 2012; Breining, 2014; Parman, 2015; Yi et al., 2015; Black
et al., 2017; Breining et al., 2019), arguing that shifts in parental resource allocation across
siblings may be an important mechanism. More closely related, Alsan (2017) finds that a
Turkish national vaccination campaign targeting children under five years old has spillover
effects on vaccine take-up among ineligible older siblings.11 Our evidence on families' role in
perpetuating ADHD diagnoses across siblings and cousins also relates to Chen et al. (2019),
who document spillovers of medical information within the family tree. The key difference in
our paper, however, is that the medical information that is transmitted across family members
may be de facto incorrect.



2        Institutional Background
In this section, we describe the key institutional features of the Swedish health care and school
systems that are relevant for our analysis of the spillovers of marginal diagnoses of ADHD.
  10
     For evidence on sibling spillovers in test scores, educational attainment, college choice, and major choice,
see, e.g., Aguirre and Matta (2018); Dustan (2018); Joensen and Nielsen (2018); Qureshi (2018a,b); Goodman
et al. (2019); Karbownik and Özek (2019); Nicoletti and Rabe (2019); Altmejd et al. (2020); Dahl et al.
(2020). For sibling spillovers in military service, see Bingley et al. (2019); for spillovers in program take-up
(e.g., paternity leave), see Dahl et al. (2014).
  11
     For other research on sibling spillovers in health outcomes, see also Altonji et al. (2017), who assess the
extent to which the large sibling correlations in substance abuse are causal.



                                                       6
2.1       Screening Referral, Diagnosis, and Treatment of ADHD in Swe-
          den

Sweden has a universal health care system in which the government operates as a large public
insurer and finances its expenditures using tax revenue. Coverage includes inpatient care,
primary and specialty outpatient care, and prescription pharmaceuticals.12 Patients incur
very low out-of-pocket costs, meaning that health care is effectively "affordable for all."13
       The process of obtaining an ADHD diagnosis for a child involves several stages: Referral,
screening, and diagnosis, which we describe below. Parents, schools, and physicians are all
involved in this process.


Referral for ADHD screening. In order to be screened for ADHD, an individual needs to
see a specialist provider (a psychiatrist). As discussed further below, referrals to screenings are
often initiated by children's schools, although parents can also request referrals themselves.14


ADHD evaluation and diagnosis. An ADHD screening involves several components,
described in detail in Socialstyrelsen (2014). First, using information from interviews with
parents and teachers or other caregivers, the child is assessed using the Diagnostic and Statis-
tical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), published by the American Psychiatric Association.
An ADHD diagnosis requires six or more symptoms of hyperactivity and impulsivity or six or
more symptoms of inattention, for children aged 16 or younger (from age 17, only five symp-
toms are required). Further, the symptoms need to be present in at least two settings, at home
  12
     Some clinics and hospitals are run privately, but are incorporated into the public health care system and
publicly funded. A subset of private clinics (also) serve patients who have a private health insurance policy
on top of the universal public one. Healthcare is organized at the regional level, so there are some (usually
minor) regional differences in coverage.
  13
     An individual's maximum out-of-pocket spending for health care is approximately $120 per year. For
prescription drugs, the maximum out-of-pocket spending per household is approximately ($247) over a rolling
twelve-month window. For the purposes of calculating a household's total out-of-pocket drug spending, a
household is defined as one adult plus all children aged 18 or below who reside in the same home.
  14
     Demand for these screenings often exceeds supply, as evidenced by long waiting periods be-
tween the time of referral and the actual screening. While exact statistics on such waiting times
are not available on an aggregate level, anecdotal evidence suggests that waiting times can be one
year in duration. (https://www.1177.se/behandling--hjalpmedel/undersokningar-och-provtagning/
psykiatriska-utredningar/neuropsykiatrisk-utredning/, accessed on November 11, 2020.)




                                                      7
and in school.15 Second, the ADHD screening includes a physical exam and an evaluation of
the child's family history of ADHD.16


ADHD treatment. Prescription drugs treating ADHD have been available in Sweden since
2002, when the first drug with the active substance Methylphenidate was permitted for treat-
ment of ADHD in children below age 18.17 Other active substances were subsequently autho-
rized as well, and Sweden's National Board of Health and Welfare (NBHW) has documented
a continuous and substantial increase in the rate of prescriptions of ADHD drugs since 2005
(Socialstyrelsen, 2012), which is the year when our prescription drug data begin. The NBHW
also reports that both prevalence (share treated) and incidence (share initiating treatment)
are highest among school-aged children (Socialstyrelsen, 2015). ADHD drugs can only be
prescribed by psychiatrists in Sweden.
      During our analysis sample period, ADHD drugs are only formally authorized for treatment
of individuals below age 18 (in some cases, exceptions are made for individuals who initiate
treatment before age 18 to continue treatment beyond that age). In practice, however, off-label
prescriptions to individuals ages 18 and older are common in the data. A subset of the drugs
authorized to treat ADHD are specifically recommended for children ages 5­18 in a national
guideline issued by the NBHW.18 In our analysis, we study both the broader set of ADHD
drugs as well as the narrower set recommended for children.
      Figure 1 plots the trend in ADHD diagnoses and drug treatment rates among children
ages 6­19 over the years 2006 to 2017. Consistent with the rise in ADHD cases worldwide,
the share of children who are diagnosed with ADHD has increased five-fold, while the share
 15
     The DSM lists nine symptoms of hyperactivity and impulsivity, and nine symptoms of inattention. The
DSM is revised continuously. See Appendix A for more information and the complete list of symptoms.
  16
     Interestingly, Socialstyrelsen (2014) does not specify more precisely how a family history of ADHD
should be incorporated into the diagnostic criteria, a fact that we return to in Section 5.4 be-
low.     Similarly, UpToDate, a service that aggregates medical research for clinical practice, states
that "Family history of similar behaviors is important because ADHD has a strong genetic compo-
nent," but does not provide more specific details on how the physician protocol for diagnosing ADHD
should incorporate a family history of the condition.           See: https://www.uptodate.com/contents/
attention-deficit-hyperactivity-disorder-in-children-and-adolescents-clinical-features-and-diagnosis?
search=ADHD&topicRef=623&source=see_link, accessed on November 9, 2020.
  17
     Methylphenidate's trade names in the U.S. include Concerta, Methylin, Ritalin, and Equasym XL.
  18
     As this guideline does not contain all molecules authorized for treatment of ADHD, it implicitly recognizes
that there exist off-label prescriptions among adults. See Section 3 for exact Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical
codes for all ADHD drugs, as well as for the subset of drugs that are recommended for children.



                                                 8
of children who are treated with ADHD drugs has increased six-fold over this time period in
Sweden.


2.2       The Swedish School System

The school entry cutoff. During the period that we study, all children in Sweden start
school in the fall of the year they turn seven years old; thus, the school entry cutoff is January
1.19 The law requires children to attend school ("skolplikt," which approximately translates
to "school duty"), and homeschooling is not permitted. There exists some limited scope for
"redshirting," or holding a child back by a year when starting school, though this practice is
uncommon.20


School financing and ADHD detection. Swedish school financing rules generate eco-
nomic incentives for schools to help detect and initiate the treatment of children's mental
health conditions. Municipalities provide funding to schools--the law prohibits charging par-
ents any direct school fees--and typically offer schools additional resources for students who
have "special needs," which include mental health conditions like ADHD. Thus, school prin-
cipals, teachers, and other administrators have an incentive to help parents detect and treat
ADHD in their children. Indeed, Hjörne (2012) argues that most ADHD evaluations are ini-
tiated by teachers, who alert parents of their children's behavioral problems at school, and
suggest that they seek further evaluation.
       The Swedish school health care system (Skolhälsovården ) facilitates this process. All chil-
dren attending school in Sweden receive free annual health check-ups, and the most recent
guidelines (issued in 2002) state that these check-ups must include evaluations of children's
mental health and concentration skills in some years (Socialstyrelsen, 2002). The guidelines
also state that all students have the right to additional evaluations for any health issues de-
tected in these screenings at school. Thus, the school health care system plays an explicit role
in referring children to specialists for a variety of issues, including ADHD.21
  19
     The law has subsequently changed and children now start in the fall of the year they turn six.
  20
     Because the school system is organized at the municipal level, exact statistics on the share of students who
delay school entry are not available. That said, the law stipulates that a "delayed school duty" (uppskjuten
skolplikt) is to be used sparingly, and must be authorized by the municipal school board after a formal
application is made by the parents.
  21
     In other countries, families may have their own incentives to obtain certain diagnoses for their children

                                                       9
3        Data and Sample
For our main analysis, we merge population register data from Statistics Sweden containing
demographic and labor market information with outpatient and prescription drug claims data
from the National Board of Health and Welfare. In some analyses, we also make use of birth
records data from the NHBW. The population register data are available annually from 1990 to
2018, except information about the high school grade point average (GPA), which is available
through 2016; outpatient records are available for years 2001­2016; prescription drug claims
are available for the period July 2005 to December 2017; and birth records are available for
years 1995­2016.
    Two of our primary outcomes on ADHD treatment are measured using the prescription
drug claims data. Therefore, we construct our main analysis sample such that our cohorts
are old enough to be observed with prescriptions for ADHD medications. We begin with all
individuals born in the years 1990­1996 who have at least one full younger sibling (born in
1990 or later). We drop families that have any non-singleton births. We only keep one sibling
pair per family (i.e., for every individual born in 1990­1996, we only keep the next younger
sibling). We also identify all of the first cousins of these sibling pairs, and then for each older
sibling from the original sample, keep his/her next younger cousin.
    The population register data have information on every individual's year and month of
birth, which we use to construct the running variable in our RD analysis (described below in
Section 4). While this information is available for all Swedish residents regardless of whether
they are born in or outside of Sweden, Appendix Figure B1 makes it clear that individuals
born outside of Sweden, Norway, and the European Union (EU) are disproportionately likely
to have January recorded as their month of birth. Thus, to reduce the scope for measurement
error in our running variable, we only keep sibling pairs in which both children are born in
Sweden, Norway, or any of the 28 EU countries. We also only keep younger cousins who are
born in these countries. Our final sample consists of 293,994 sibling pairs and 208,437 cousin
pairs.
because they can then receive public benefits (see, e.g. Quadagno, 1997; Kubik, 1999 for evidence for the U.S.).
In Sweden, however, a child's ADHD diagnosis does not confer any additional public assistance to families.




                                                      10
Key variables. We examine ADHD diagnoses using outpatient data, which includes visits
to psychiatrists. Our main outcome is an indicator for having at least one outpatient claim
with an ICD-10 code that starts with "F90" (the category for Attention Deficit Hyperactivity
Disorders).
       We study ADHD drug treatment using the prescription drug data. Our main outcome from
the drug data is an indicator that is equal to one if a child has at least one claim for a drug
used to treat ADHD ever observed in the prescription drug data. As an alternative outcome,
we also consider an indicator for a claim based on a narrower definition of ADHD drugs, which
are specifically recommended for children ages 5­18, as discussed in Section 2.22 When coding
the child-specific ADHD drug indicator, we further limit the observation window such that
children born within the same fiscal year (July-June) are observed for the same number of
months (see Appendix Table B1 for more details).
       We additionally use the population register data to study educational and labor market
outcomes of the younger siblings and cousins. We measure earnings in 2018, the most recent
year of data that we can access.23 We also create an indicator for ever having been enrolled
in college by 2018, and analyze individuals' high school GPA (as reported in 2016, the last
year that we observe this outcome). To ensure that our cohorts are old enough to measure
these outcomes, we use a sample of sibling and cousin pairs in which the younger siblings and
cousins are born in 1990­1995 only (i.e., they are aged 23­28 in 2018).
       The population register data also provides us with a number of family-level control vari-
ables, including sibling/cousin birth spacing (in months), each child's gender, whether each
parent is foreign-born, parental education level, and household income.24
       Lastly, we use the birth records data for some supplementary analyses to test the identifying
  22
     Specifically, for the broader ADHD drug definition, we consider all claims with Anatomical Therapeutic
Chemical (ATC) codes that start with "N06BA" except "N06BA07", as well the ATC code "C02AC02". For
the narrower ADHD drug definition, we use all claims with the following ATC codes: "N06BA04", "N06BA12",
"N06BA09", "N06BA02", "C02AC02".
  23
     We examine two measures of earnings: Employment earnings as well as a broader measure that additionally
includes employment-based transfers such as parental leave benefits.
  24
     While we also observe parental age and marital status, we do not include these control variables in our
main specifications because these variables are recorded on an annual (calendar year) basis and thus exhibit
a mechanical discontinuity between children born in December and January within any given fiscal year. For
example, parents of children born in January are mechanically on average approximately one year older than
parents of children born in December. However, as we show in Panel A of Appendix Table B10, our main
results are unchanged when we add these controls.



                                                    11
assumptions of our RD model. These data contain information on exact dates of birth and
gestation length for all children born in Sweden, allowing us to examine potential manipulation
of the running variable in our RD models.


Sample means. Appendix Table B2 presents sample means of some of the key variables in
our analysis. The first column uses our main sibling analysis sample, while the second and
third columns are split into families with older siblings born in July-December and January-
June, respectively. About 3.9 (4.4) and 4.8 (5.5) percent of older and younger siblings in
our sample have an ADHD diagnosis (ever have an ADHD drug claim), respectively. About
4.6 (5.3) percent of the younger cousins have an ADHD diagnosis (ever have an ADHD drug
claim). Mean birth spacing is about 36.6 months, approximately 15.3 percent of children
have a foreign-born mother, while 11.6 percent have a mother with a college degree or higher.
Families with children born in the two halves of the year are fairly similar in terms of observable
characteristics, although rates of ADHD diagnosis and drug treatment are noticeably higher
among children in families with July-December than January-June births. We explore these
differences more formally in subsequent analyses.



4       Empirical Design
Our goal is to analyze how a marginal ADHD diagnosis among older children affects their
younger siblings' and cousins' ADHD-related outcomes. To do so, we leverage the discontinuity
in the older child's likelihood of own ADHD diagnosis and drug treatment generated by the
difference in relative age for grade between children born just before and just after the Swedish
school entry cutoff of January 1. As noted in Section 3, we do not have information on exact
dates of birth for the main cohorts of older siblings in our analysis, and we therefore use the
older child's month of birth relative to January as the running variable in our RD models.25
       We begin by estimating an RD model to study the own relative age effect on ADHD
diagnosis and drug treatment among the older siblings in our sample:
  25
    Following Lee and Card (2008)'s guidance on RD estimation with a discrete running variable, we estimate
a parametric RD model with standard errors clustered on the running variable (i.e., the older child's month of
birth). Our results are also robust to using the wild cluster bootstrap to conduct inference (Cameron et al.,
2008; Cameron and Miller, 2015), see Appendix Table B12.


                                                     12
                                                                        y
   ADHDi = 0 + 1 1[Mi  c] + f (Mi - c) + 1[Mi  c] × f (Mi - c) + x i  + i +            i    (1)


for every older sibling i. ADHDi is an ADHD-related outcome (i.e., an indicator for either
a diagnosis or drug take-up). c denotes January, the school entry cutoff month. The variable
1[Mi  c] is an indicator for the older sibling i being born in months January-June of every
year, and zero otherwise. f (Mi - c) is a linear function of the running variable, the older
child's month of birth centered around January, which we allow to have different slopes on
opposite sides of the cutoff. Since our running variable is centered around January, our cohorts
represent fiscal (i.e., July-June) rather than calendar years. Thus, we control for fiscal year
               y
fixed effects, i . The vector xi includes the following controls: an indicator for whether the
older child is male, indicators for whether each parent is foreign-born, indicators for each
parent's education categories in the year of the older child's birth (high school only, some
college, college degree or more), and the log household income of the family averaged over the
year of the older child's birth and the following two years. The main coefficient of interest is
1 , which represents the difference in ADHD diagnoses or drug treatment rates between older
children who are born before and after January within every fiscal year.
   Then, to study spillover effects on younger siblings' and cousins' outcomes, we estimate
models of the following form:




              Yij = 0 + 1 1[Mi  c] + f (Mi - c) + 1[Mi  c] × f (Mi - c)

                       +2 1[Mj  c] + f (Mj - c) + 1[Mj  c] × f (Mj - c)

                                                      +x ij  + y   y
                                                               i + j + ij                   (2)


for each family with an older sibling i and a younger sibling or cousin j . Yij is an outcome of
interest, such as an indicator for the younger child having an ADHD diagnosis. In addition to
the variables capturing the older sibling's month of birth relative to January that are the same
as in equation (1), we control for the younger sibling's/cousin's own relative age for grade by
including analogous variables based on the younger child's month of birth centered around

                                              13
January: 1[Mj  c] and f (Mj - c). We also control for fixed effects for every fiscal year of
birth of the older and younger child, y     y
                                      i and j , respectively. The vector xij now includes

the following family-level controls: sibling or cousin birth spacing (in months), indicators for
whether the older and younger sibling/cousin is male, indicators for whether each parent is
foreign-born, indicators for each parent's education categories in the year of the older child's
birth, and the log household income of the family averaged over the first three years of the older
child's life. The main coefficient of interest is 1 , which represents the difference in outcomes
between children in families where the older children are born before and after January in every
fiscal year, holding constant the younger sibling's/cousin's birth month relative to January.


Identification and interpretation. The RD design relies on the assumption that only the
treatment variable is changing discontinuously at the cutoff; all other variables possibly related
to the outcomes we study should be continuous functions of the running variable (Imbens and
Lemieux, 2008; Lee and Lemieux, 2010).
   In our regression models, the running variable is the older child's month of birth relative to
January, and the treatment variable is an indicator for the older child being born in January­
June and thus relatively older-for-grade than his/her counterparts born in the preceding six
months of the same fiscal year. This treatment variable, in turn, generates a discontinuity in
ADHD diagnoses among the older children. We discuss two potential issues for identification
and interpretation in this setting: (1) Non-random sorting of families at the school-entry
cutoff, and (2) non-ADHD-related channels through which an older child's relative age for
grade might influence his/her younger family members' outcomes.
   To assess issue (1), we begin by plotting a histogram of births at a daily level using
birth records data in Appendix Figure B2. We use data on all children born in Sweden
between January 1995 and December 2014 with information on exact date of birth, and
consider a bandwidth of 180 days surrounding the January 1 cutoff. The figure makes it
clear that there tend to be fewer births in December than in January, with noticeable dips
during the December holiday season. The RD manipulation test (Cattaneo et al., 2018) yields
a statistically significant t-statistic of 13.06.
   To investigate this difference in the density of births between December and January fur-



                                                    14
ther, we use the same sample to check whether there are any systematic differences in average
gestational age. If parents were trying to either delay or speed up childbirth through, for ex-
ample, planned inductions or caesarean section deliveries, then there may be a discontinuity
in observed gestational age at the cutoff. We plot the average length of gestation in days
by the child's birth month for all children born between January 1995 and December 2014
with non-missing information on gestation length in Appendix Figure B3. There is no visible
discontinuity in mean gestation length between December and January births. Column (1) of
Appendix Table B3 reports results from an RD regression that uses gestation length in days
as the outcome--the coefficient on the indicator for being born after the January cutoff is
insignificant and very small in magnitude.
   Importantly, the significant difference in the number of births between December and Jan-
uary only poses a concern if the sorting is systematically related to our outcomes of interest.
To assess this possibility, we turn to our main analysis sample of siblings and study whether
there are any differences in family background characteristics between December and January
births. We do not observe any discontinuous changes in average birth spacing, the gender
composition of older and younger siblings, or parental education levels in Appendix Figures
B4, B5, and B6, respectively. Appendix Figure B7 plots predicted ADHD diagnosis and drug
treatment indicators of the older and younger siblings, as well as the younger cousins, by the
birth month of the older sibling. The predicted variables are constructed by regressing each
of the ADHD outcomes on birth spacing (in months), indicators for whether the older and
younger sibling/cousin is male, indicators for whether each parent is foreign-born, indicators
for each parent's education categories in the year of the older child's birth, and the log house-
hold income averaged over the year of the older child's birth and the following two years. If
anything, it appears that predicted ADHD is slightly higher in families in which the older
siblings are born in January than those in which the older siblings are born in December,
which goes in the opposite direction of our main results. Columns (2)­(6) of Appendix Table
B3 report results from RD regressions that use the family background characteristics as out-
comes; we find no evidence of statistically significant discontinuities based on the older child
being born before versus after the January cutoff.
   In sum, our analysis of gestation length and family background characteristics does not


                                               15
reveal any systematic discontinuities at the school-entry cutoff, and suggests that the sorting
observed in Appendix Figure B2 is unlikely to bias our RD design. To further address the
concern about sorting, we also conduct a robustness check in which we estimate a "doughnut-
RD" model that omits all families with older children born in December or January, which
yields similar results to those from our baseline models (see Appendix Table B11).
       While it does not appear that there is any selection on observable characteristics, one may
still be concerned about selection into different birth months across families with different
underlying mental health issues. For instance, it could be that families with a higher propensity
for ADHD are more likely to have all their children in December than in January, inducing
a correlation between one sibling's relative age and the other sibling's likelihood of ADHD
diagnosis. We investigate this possibility by checking whether the younger sibling's relative
age for grade predicts the older sibling's ADHD-related outcomes. In Appendix Figure B8,
we find no evidence of higher ADHD diagnoses or drug treatment among older siblings whose
younger siblings are born in December versus January. We also estimate model (2), which
includes both the older and younger sibling's relative age for grade variables, using the older
child's ADHD outcomes as the dependent variables. Appendix Table B4 shows that while the
older child's own relative age for grade predicts ADHD diagnoses and drug treatment (as we
discuss further in Section 5.1 below), we find no consistent evidence of a discontinuity in the
older sibling's ADHD outcomes based on the younger sibling's relative age for grade.26
       When it comes to issue (2), we recognize that the spillover effects of an older sibling's
relative age for grade on his/her younger sibling's outcomes could in principle operate through
various family dynamics. For example, Landersø et al. (2019) document that mothers of
children who are oldest for their grade are more likely to be employed when their children
are 7 years old, and parents of oldest-for-grade children are more likely to remain married or
cohabiting by the time their children are 15 years old. Karbownik and Özek (2019) propose
that there is a "role model" effect--younger siblings of children who are oldest for their grade
may be more likely to follow in their footsteps and experience better educational outcomes
  26
     Out of the five regressions reported in Appendix Table B4, only one shows a significant spillover from
younger to older siblings--the spillover effect on diagnoses among siblings who are three years apart in age
or less. Since these siblings are close in age (and likely attend the same schools), it seems possible that the
"hereditary tagging" mechanism could explain this spillover as in our main analysis. See Section 5.4 for more
detailed discussion of the mechanisms underlying our spillover effects.



                                                      16
than their counterparts with older siblings who are youngest for their grade.27
       However, these family dynamics are less likely to be relevant for relatives who do not share
a household or the same set of parents. We therefore believe that our evidence of ADHD
diagnosis spillovers across cousins assuages concerns about these other channels, although of
course it is impossible to definitively rule out all other alternative explanations.
       Moreover, because an older child's relative age for grade may influence his/her younger
relatives' human capital and economic outcomes through other channels, we do not use the
older child's relative age for grade as an instrument for the younger child's ADHD diagnosis
in an instrumental variables model (as the exclusion restriction may not be satisfied). That
said, the fact that we find large negative effects on these outcomes (see Section 5.3) implies
that even if there were any economic benefits of the spillover ADHD diagnoses, they do not
come close to offsetting the costs of being a younger relative of a youngest-for-grade child.



5        Results
We begin by using our main sample of older siblings to confirm prior evidence (e.g., Elder,
2010; Evans et al., 2010; Dalsgaard et al., 2012; Morrow et al., 2012; Zoëga et al., 2012;
Halldner et al., 2014; Krabbe et al., 2014; Pottegård et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2016; Schwandt
and Wuppermann, 2016; Layton et al., 2018; Whitely et al., 2018; Root et al., 2019; Furzer
et al., 2020) that children who are youngest for their grade are more likely to be diagnosed
with and treated for ADHD than those who are oldest for their grade. Next, we document
spillover effects of the older children's relative-age-induced marginal diagnoses of ADHD on
their younger siblings' and cousins' likelihoods of ADHD diagnosis and drug treatment. To
assess whether there are any economic costs or benefits associated with these spillovers, we
also study younger siblings' and cousins' educational and labor market outcomes. Lastly, we
explore possible mechanisms and present several robustness tests.
  27
    See also Goodman et al. (2019) and Altmejd et al. (2020) for evidence of sibling spillovers in college
enrollment and college choice.




                                                   17
5.1       Own Relative Age Effects on Older Children's ADHD Diag-
          noses and Drug Treatment

Figure 2 uses our main siblings sample and plots ADHD-related outcomes of the older siblings
by their own birth month (centered around January). Sub-figure (a) plots the share of children
with an ADHD diagnosis in the outpatient data, while sub-figure (b) plots the share of children
with at least one ADHD drug claim in the prescription drug data. Both graphs show clear
discontinuities between December and January births--children who are youngest for their
grade (i.e., born in December) are substantially more likely to be diagnosed with ADHD and
to use ADHD prescription drugs than those who are oldest for their grade.
       Table 1 reports results from estimating model (1) and confirms the graphical evidence.
The outcome in columns (1) and (2) is an indicator equal to one if the older sibling ever has
an outpatient claim with an ADHD diagnosis. The outcome in columns (3) and (4) is an
indicator equal to one if the older sibling has at least one ADHD drug claim. In columns (2)
and (4), the main sample is further limited to sibling pairs with an age difference of no more
than 36 months. The outcome in column (5) is an indicator equal to one if the older sibling
has at least one ADHD drug claim that is specifically recommended for children between ages
5 and 18. In addition, the observation period for drug claims in column (5) is restricted such
that children born in the same fiscal year are observed for the same number of months (see
Appendix Table B1).
       Across all columns, we find that being born after the school entry cutoff is associated with
a significantly lower likelihood of being diagnosed with and treated for ADHD. Specifically,
focusing on the estimates in columns (1) and (3), we observe that children born after the
cutoff are 1.2 and 1.3 percentage points less likely to be diagnosed with ADHD and treated
with ADHD drugs, respectively. Relative to the corresponding sample means, these estimates
yield large effect size magnitudes of 30.8 and 29.5 percent, respectively.28
  28
    Note that here, and in all of our regression tables, we report the coefficients on indicators for being born
after the school entry cutoff (i.e., the effects of being the oldest-for-grade child). In our introduction, we
instead discuss our results in terms of the impacts of being the youngest-for-grade child (or the sibling/cousin
of a youngest-for-grade child), i.e., flipping the signs on these coefficients.




                                                      18
Interpreting the ADHD gap. To interpret this gap, it is helpful to consider the etiology
of ADHD. Unlike conditions for which there is a precise screening mechanism that yields a
discrete outcome--e.g., an X-ray can determine whether or not someone has a broken bone; a
genetic test can identify women who are BRCA-gene positive or not--ADHD, like many mental
health conditions, is diagnosed differently.29 As noted by Levy et al. (1997), "ADHD is best
viewed as the extreme of a behavior that varies genetically throughout the entire population
rather than a disorder with discrete determinants." Put differently, ADHD symptoms--such
as immaturity, impulsiveness, and attentiveness--vary naturally within the population, and an
ADHD diagnosis is given to individuals whose symptoms fall in the tails of these distributions.
       With this understanding of ADHD, what can we interpret about the additional diagnoses
among December-born children relative to January-born children? Figure 3 presents a styl-
ized visual framework to aid the interpretation of the ADHD diagnosis gap at the school-entry
cutoff. The bell curves represent the distributions of underlying ADHD symptoms in the pop-
ulations of children born in December and January, respectively. The yellow areas under each
of the curves signify the children who receive positive ADHD diagnoses. This framework high-
lights that among both groups, children with the most extreme ADHD traits are diagnosed.
However, on the margin, children with lighter symptoms are diagnosed if they are born in De-
cember, but not if they are born in January. This observation has an immediate implication,
to which we return in our discussion of how to mitigate spillovers from "hereditary tagging"
in Section 5.4: If we restrict attention only to children who are diagnosed with ADHD, then
the average severity of ADHD will be higher among January-born than December-born chil-
dren. This follows directly from the fact that the "compliers"--children who are diagnosed
because they are born in December but would not have been diagnosed if they were born in
January--have the lightest ADHD symptoms; that is, they are "on the margin."
       The extensive literature that documents the relative-age-induced diagnosis gap in various
contexts is often cited as evidence that ADHD is a commonly over-diagnosed condition, and
that over-diagnoses contribute to the substantial rise in ADHD caseloads over the last few
decades (Bruchmüller et al., 2012; Hinshaw and Scheffler, 2014; Schwarz, 2017; Merten et
  29
   This is a fact that we discuss in more detail in Section 5.4 below, as the diagnosis technology at the
physician's disposal has implications for whether "hereditary tagging" can entail adverse consequences, and
whether such consequences can be mitigated.



                                                    19
al., 2017). In particular, a popular interpretation of the diagnosis gap is that immaturity
is mis-classified as ADHD among children who are the youngest in the classroom and have
more difficulties paying attention and sitting still than classmates who are nearly one year
older. Thus, youngest-for-grade children are over-diagnosed with ADHD. By the same logic,
however, children who are oldest in the classroom may be under-diagnosed due to their relative
maturity when compared to their (younger) peers in the classroom.30
       More generally, the simple framework described in Figure 3 highlights that there are in
fact several possible interpretations of the ADHD diagnosis gap: (i) Over-diagnosis among
December-born children, potentially coupled with under-diagnosis among January-born (the
most common interpretation, as just discussed); (ii) over-diagnosis among all children, but
more among December-born; and (iii) under-diagnosis among all children, but less among
December-born. As illustrated in Appendix Figure B9, the "correct" interpretation depends
on the "true" ADHD cutoff, i.e., the threshold in the distribution of ADHD symptoms at which
the scientific community decides to define an individual as having ADHD. This is something
that is unobserved in our data (or any other data set available to researchers), and we therefore
do not take a stance on the direction of error represented by the diagnosis gap.
       Instead, what is key to our empirical design is that the school entry cutoff generates addi-
tional marginal diagnoses among December-born children, and, under all three interpretations,
December-born children with lighter symptoms are diagnosed on the margin. Thus, in the
rest of the analysis, we use the discontinuity in the diagnosis rate between children born on
opposite sides of the school-entry cutoff to study spillover effects of marginal diagnoses on
younger family members.31
  30
      Age-for-grade is not the only characteristic with respect to which there may be over- or under-diagnosis.
For example, some studies point to the risk of under-diagnosis of ADHD, especially among girls (Visser, 2014;
Furzer et al., 2020), and demonstrate heterogeneity in the types of diagnostic errors with respect to child
gender, race, and socioeconomic status (Furzer, 2020; Marquardt, 2020).
   31
      One other alternative interpretation is that children who are young-for-grade develop ADHD as a conse-
quence of being youngest in their grade (i.e., the development of ADHD is endogenous to one's relative age for
grade). Such a scenario would imply that the distribution of ADHD risk in our figures should be shifted to the
right among December-born children. If so, the diagnosis gap would not reflect differential rates of diagnoses
for the same severity of ADHD symptoms, but instead a higher share of children with sufficiently severe ADHD
traits among children who are young-for-grade. Thus, conditional on diagnosis, we would not observe that
children who are young-for-grade have lighter symptoms, on average. This contrasts with evidence from, e.g.,
Furzer (2020), who finds that youngest-for-grade children in Canada have a relatively lower risk of mental
illness. Further, while the diagnosis gap is present in many contexts, there exist settings in which it does not
(e.g., Dalsgaard et al., 2012), which would be inconsistent with younger-for-grade children developing ADHD
symptoms.


                                                      20
5.2       Spillover Effects on ADHD Diagnoses and Drug Treatment of
          Younger Siblings and Cousins

In Figure 4, we present graphical evidence that a younger sibling's likelihood of ADHD diag-
nosis and drug treatment depends on his/her older sibling's relative age for grade. The figure
is analogous to Figure 2, except that it plots the younger sibling's ADHD diagnosis and drug
treatment rates on the respective sub-figure y -axes. We find that younger siblings of older
children born in December are more likely to be diagnosed with ADHD and to be treated with
ADHD drugs than their counterparts with older siblings born in January.
       Table 2 presents the corresponding regression estimates of model (2) for the same outcomes
as in Table 1, except that they are now measured for the younger sibling. Not surprisingly, the
younger sibling's own relative age for grade has an effect on the probability of ADHD diagnosis
and drug treatment--columns (1) and (3) show that younger siblings born after the school
entry cutoff are 1.6 percentage points less likely to have an ADHD diagnosis or an ADHD drug
claim than those born before the cutoff. However, conditional on the younger sibling's own
relative age for grade, we also see a significant effect of the older sibling's relative age for grade
on the younger sibling's likelihood of ADHD diagnosis and drug treatment. Younger siblings
of older children who are born after the school entry cutoff are 0.6 percentage points less likely
to have an ADHD diagnosis or an ADHD drug claim, corresponding to 12.0 and 9.8 percent
effect sizes when evaluated at the respective dependent variable means. The magnitudes of
the spillovers on ADHD diagnoses and drugs are 38.1 and 33.5 percent, respectively, of the
sizes of the younger child's own relative age-for-grade effects on these outcomes.32
       As noted previously, an older child's relative age for grade could in principle influence
a younger sibling's outcomes through a variety of family dynamics. However, such alterna-
tive mechanisms are unlikely to be relevant for family members who do not share the same
household. To that end, we examine spillover effects on ADHD-related outcomes among first
cousins. Figure 5 plots ADHD-related outcomes of the younger cousins by their older cousin's
  32
    Appendix Table B5 examines heterogeneity in the spillover effects across sibling pairs with differing gender
composition. We find that the spillovers on ADHD diagnoses are somewhat larger in sibling pairs with at least
one girl, while the spillovers on ADHD drugs are stronger in sibling pairs with at least one boy. However, the
coefficients are not all significantly different from one another, suggesting that these spillovers exist regardless
of the siblings' gender mix. We also explored heterogeneity with respect to various measures of the families'
socioeconomic status, finding no consistent patterns.


                                                        21
birth month (i.e., the birth months of the older siblings from our main sample). Sub-figure
(a) shows the graph for ADHD diagnoses in the outpatient data, while sub-figure (b) plots
ADHD drug treatment rates. We find that younger cousins whose older cousins are born in
December are more likely to be diagnosed with ADHD and to be treated with ADHD drugs
than those whose older cousins are born in January. Table 3 reports the corresponding regres-
sion estimates--we find that younger cousins whose older cousins are born after the school
entry cutoff are 0.6 percentage points (13.0 percent) and 0.5 percentage points (9.1 percent)
less likely to be diagnosed with ADHD and to be treated with ADHD drugs, respectively, than
their counterparts whose older cousins are born before the cutoff. These spillovers amount
to 32.1 and 24.2 percent of the younger cousins' own relative age-for-grade effects on ADHD
diagnoses and drug treatment, respectively.


5.3       The Economic Impacts of Spillovers of Marginal ADHD Diag-
          noses

What are the economic implications of the spillovers of marginal ADHD diagnoses? To help
shed light on this question, we examine spillover effects on younger siblings' and cousins'
economic and educational outcomes. In Figures 6 and 7, and Table 4, we analyze the younger
siblings' and cousins' earnings (using two measures described in Section 3), high school GPA,
and college enrollment. As noted in Section 3, we use a sample of siblings and cousins who
are born in 1990­1995 in these analyses, and measure the labor market outcomes in the latest
year of data that we have. Thus, our cohorts are 23 to 28 years old at the time of observation.
We also observe whether they are ever enrolled in college through 2018, and measure their
high school GPA in 2016.
      Consistent with the existing evidence of the effect of relative age for grade on children's own
human capital attainment (Bedard and Dhuey, 2006; McEwan and Shapiro, 2008; Elder and
Lubotsky, 2009; Black et al., 2011; Kawaguchi, 2011; Fredriksson and Öckert, 2014; Hurwitz
et al., 2015; Depew and Eren, 2016; Cook and Kang, 2016; Landersø et al., 2017; Dhuey et
al., 2019), Table 4 shows that younger siblings and cousins who are born after the cutoff have
a higher high school GPA than those born before the cutoff.33 We also see negative effects
 33
      At the same time, we see a negative effect of own relative age on college enrollment for younger siblings


                                                       22
of own relative age for grade on both of the measures of labor market earnings. These labor
market effects of own relative age for grade are largely mechanical, however, because these
outcomes are measured on an annual basis--within each fiscal year, relative to children born
before the school entry cutoff, children who are born after the cutoff graduate one year later
and therefore have less work experience in any given (calendar) year of observation.
    When we examine spillovers on younger siblings and cousins conditional on own relative
age for grade, such mechanical effects are no longer pertinent.34 Table 4 shows that younger
siblings whose older siblings are born after the cutoff have 1.6 percent higher labor market
earnings and are 2.1 percent more likely to have ever enrolled in college than those whose
older siblings are born before the cutoff (Columns 1 and 5, Panel A of Table 4). We also find
that younger cousins of children who are born after the cutoff have a 1.0 percent higher GPA
and are 2.6 percent more likely to have ever enrolled in college than the younger cousins of
children born before the cutoff.
    Our analysis of educational and labor market outcomes suggests that the younger siblings
and cousins of December-born children tend to be worse off than the younger family members
of January-born ones. While, as noted previously, we cannot definitively rule out all other
channels by which an older child's relative age for grade influences his/her younger relatives'
outcomes, these results suggest that there are no clear economic benefits associated with
marginal ADHD diagnosis spillovers. If anything, the most conservative interpretation of our
results is that even if there were some benefits of marginal ADHD diagnosis spillovers, they
do not come close to offsetting the costs of being the younger relative of a youngest-for-grade
child.35
    Moreover, our results on educational and economic outcomes are complementary to the
existing clinical evidence on the impacts of ADHD treatment. A positive ADHD diagnosis
and an insignificant relationship between own relative age and college enrollment for younger cousins.
  34
     Moreover, all of our models account for the effects of age on the educational and labor market outcomes
measured in 2018 (or 2016 in the case of high school GPA) because we control for the running variable for
both the older and younger child (i.e., month of birth), as well as fiscal year of birth fixed effects for each
child. Thus, our estimated impacts are not driven by the mechanical difference in age between January- and
December-born children when they are observed in our outcome data.
  35
     It is also possible that having an older child in the family who is more likely to be treated with ADHD
medication makes the home environment calmer for everyone else. Thus, we might expect that younger siblings
of children who are youngest for their grade actually fare better than their counterparts whose older siblings
are oldest for their grade. This type of mechanism would imply that our spillover effects are biased downward.



                                                      23
typically leads to long-term use of ADHD prescription drugs--50 percent of patients who
initiate ADHD drugs remain on them five years later (Socialstyrelsen, 2012). Existing evidence
on the impacts of using ADHD drugs is mixed and limited to studies of selected short- and
medium-term behavioral and educational outcomes.36 To date, we know very little about the
long-run impacts of ADHD drug treatment on measures of individuals' well-being, especially
when it comes to economic outcomes.37 Our estimates provide suggestive evidence that there
could be important long-term costs associated with the use of ADHD drugs on the margin.


5.4       Understanding the Mechanisms Behind Marginal ADHD Spillovers

We have established that there are substantial spillovers of marginal ADHD diagnoses to
younger siblings and cousins, and that there appear to be no economic benefits (and may even
be costs) associated with these spillovers. Now, we turn to an investigation of the underlying
mechanisms generating these spillovers. This analysis, in turn, informs a discussion about
whether such spillovers can be mitigated.
       As described in Section 2, the ADHD diagnosis process involves two key steps: First, one
must get a referral for an ADHD evaluation, and second, a physician performs a screening
(which may result in a diagnosis). The existence of spillovers means that somewhere in this
two-step process, a marginal diagnosis of an older child affects the likelihood that a younger
family member is diagnosed. Next, we seek to understand where and how this happens.


5.4.1      Medical Family History in the Referral Stage

If information about an individual's medical family history is used in the referral stage, then
a child with a family history of ADHD should have a higher likelihood of being referred to
an ADHD screening than a child without such a family history. Indeed, the referral stage is
one in which "hereditary tagging" can be used to allocate scarce screening resources toward
ex-ante high-risk individuals.
  36
     See, e.g., Jensen, 1999; Wilens et al., 2003; Charach et al., 2004; Dalsgaard et al., 2012; Humphreys et al.,
2013; Molina et al., 2013; Currie et al., 2014; Chorniy and Kitashima, 2016; Cortese et al., 2018. Moreover, a
child's positive mental health diagnosis may impose stigma costs and result in unfavorable expectations from
teachers and school administrators (Moses, 2010; Ohan et al., 2011; Bharadwaj et al., 2017).
  37
     A search of UpToDate® , a website that synthesizes medical research and is widely used by clinicians to
inform treatment decisions, yields no information about the long-term effects of ADHD drug treatment on
adult economic outcomes, such as earnings.

                                                       24
   In our setting, "hereditary tagging" in the referral stage would imply that a relative-age-
induced marginal diagnosis of one child will influence the likelihood that a younger sibling or
cousin gets referred to an ADHD screening. As both schools and parents play important roles
in requesting ADHD screenings, we investigate the roles of each of these two parties.


The role of schools. As described in Section 2, teachers and school administrators can refer
children to psychiatrists for ADHD evaluations; further, schools often have direct economic
incentives to detect ADHD in their students. Since siblings often attend the same school,
teachers and administrators may be more likely to refer the younger siblings of older children
who have ADHD diagnoses than the younger siblings of older children who do not. This
practice may thus propagate marginal diagnoses across siblings.
   While we do not observe schools' referrals to psychiatrists in our data, we conduct two
empirical tests to shed light on the potential role of schools in generating marginal ADHD
spillovers. First, in Appendix Table B6, we analyze whether the spillover effects on younger
siblings' ADHD outcomes are larger or smaller when they are observed before or after the child
graduates high school. Intuitively, if schools play an important role in perpetuating marginal
diagnoses, then we would expect larger spillovers onto younger siblings while those younger
siblings are still in school. Indeed, we find that the spillover effects on younger siblings'
ADHD diagnoses and drug claims are stronger when they happen before the child graduates
high school. However, the spillover on ADHD drug treatment also exists beyond high school,
suggesting that schools may not be the only places where an older child's ADHD diagnosis
leads to a higher likelihood of referral for the younger sibling.
   Second, we explore whether the spillover effect is greater in municipalities in which schools
have larger financial incentives to identify ADHD in their students. In Appendix Table B7, we
examine heterogeneity in the sibling spillover effect across municipalities with a higher versus
lower share of school funding targeted for special needs education. We augment model (2)
with municipality fixed effects as well as with interaction terms between the RD variables and
the share of funding for special needs as measured in the mother's municipality of residence
when her youngest child is aged seven years old. The negative coefficients on the interaction
terms indicate that the sibling spillover effects are larger when special needs funding is higher,



                                               25
which is consistent with schools responding to funding incentives by identifying more children
for possible ADHD diagnoses.38
       In sum, both of these empirical tests suggest that schools may play a role in generating
spillovers in the referral stage.


The role of families. In addition, families may also perpetuate marginal diagnoses in the
referral stage. This would occur if an older child's (marginal) diagnosis raises the likelihood
that the family requests a screening for the younger child as well.39
       The existence of a spillover effect among first cousins provides some indication that families
play a role. Cousins are less likely to attend the same school than siblings within one nuclear
family, but their parents could communicate about their children's ADHD diagnoses and
treatments.
       To further assess the role of families relative to the role of schools, Appendix Table B8
presents separate estimates of the spillover effects across cousin pairs that reside in the same
versus different municipalities. It appears that the spillover effect is somewhat stronger for
cousin pairs that reside in the same municipality (and thus could potentially attend the same
schools) than those who live in different municipalities. At the same time, for cousin pairs who
are no more than 36 months apart in age, the spillover effects are similar regardless of whether
they live in the same or different municipalities. Taken as a whole, these results suggest that
both schools and families likely play a role in perpetuating the spillover effects of marginal
ADHD diagnoses.


5.4.2      Medical Family History in the Diagnosis Stage

The above analysis suggests that schools and families are more likely to refer to screenings
the younger siblings and cousins of older children who are marginally diagnosed with ADHD
than the younger family members of older children who are not. Thus, as a consequence of
such "hereditary tagging" at the referral stage, more children with an older relative born in
  38
     See Cullen (2003) and Morrill (2018) for evidence on schools responding to financial incentives to classify
students as having ADHD in the United States.
  39
     There are multiple reasons for why an older child's diagnosis reduces the costs of the family requesting an
ADHD screening for the younger child. For example, families in which one child is being treated for ADHD
have an established connection with a child psychiatrist. In addition, drug treatment of a one child may make
the parents less worried about side effects and thus less hesitant to seek treatment for another child.


                                                      26
December end up in the doctor's office for an ADHD screening than children with an older
relative born in January.
   At this point, understanding the physician's diagnostic technology is important. If there
existed a technology that could precisely identify children as being ADHD-positive or negative
(e.g., as is the case in BRCA genetic screening), then regardless of the fact that the younger
family members of December-born children may be over-referred to ADHD screenings com-
pared to the younger family members of January-born children, the physician would simply use
the technology to accurately diagnose all children who show up in her office. Thus, "hereditary
tagging" would only have an upside--improved targeting of scarce screening resources--but
no downside in terms of spillovers of low-value or even erroneous diagnoses.
   However, ADHD falls into a large class of health conditions for which there is no discrete
test or diagnostic procedure that allows the physician to precisely determine which patients do
and do not have the condition. Instead, physicians have a noisy screening protocol. Then, if
the same (noisy) diagnostic criteria are applied to all younger relatives of previously diagnosed
patients, the referral gap will translate into spillovers of marginal low-value--or potentially
inaccurate--diagnoses. Thus, when the diagnosis technology is noisy, the practice of "heredi-
tary tagging" can generate costs.
   In Appendix Table B9, we provide empirical evidence that physicians apply the same
diagnostic criteria to all younger siblings of previously diagnosed patients, regardless of the
older child's relative age for grade. We estimate our main regression model (2), using a sub-
sample of sibling pairs in which the older child is diagnosed with ADHD. In this sub-sample,
we find no discontinuity in the younger child's likelihood of ADHD diagnosis based on whether
the older child is oldest- or youngest-for-grade. In other words, conditional on the older child's
diagnosis, physicians are equally likely to diagnose their younger siblings, regardless of the older
sibling's relative age for grade. Importantly, this finding confirms that physicians correctly
follow the current protocol. As discussed in Section 2, while the protocol prescribes that the
presence of ADHD in the family is taken into account in the diagnostic process, it does not
indicate that the physician should attach differential weight to this information depending on
the previously diagnosed family member's relative age for grade.
   However, recall that Figure 3 highlights that among children who are diagnosed with


                                                27
ADHD, the average severity of ADHD symptoms should be lower among December-born than
January-born children. This follows from the fact that the "compliers"--the children who are
diagnosed because they are December-born but who would not have been diagnosed if they
were January-born--have the weakest ADHD symptoms; that is, they are "on the margin" of
diagnosis.
   Thus, when a physician is screening a younger relative of a previously diagnosed child, the
older child's month of birth provides information about the expected severity of that child's
condition and hence the strength of the signal of the hereditary component of the younger
child's risk of ADHD. A positive ADHD diagnosis of an older child who is born in December
implies a lower expected ADHD risk of the younger child relative to a positive diagnosis of
an older child who is born in January.
   This discussion suggests that there exists a simple adjustment to physician protocol that
can mitigate marginal ADHD spillovers. We propose that physicians should take into account
information about the older child's relative age for grade, and attach less weight to the older
child's ADHD diagnosis if that child is youngest-for-grade than if that child is oldest-for-grade.
More broadly, our findings suggest that designing physician protocols that take into account
whether a previously diagnosed relative's diagnosis may be marginal--and thus the strength
of the signal of ex ante hereditary risk that stems from family medical history--could reduce
the costs of marginal diagnosis spillovers, while allowing the health care system to leverage
the targeting benefits of "hereditary tagging."


5.5    Additional Results

We perform a series of additional analyses to examine the sensitivity of our estimates. First, as
noted in footnote 24, our baseline models do not include controls for parental characteristics
that are measured on an annual level--age and marital status--because of the mechanical
discontinuity they exhibit when comparing December- and January-born children. However,
Panel A of Appendix Table B10 demonstrates that our results on spillover effects on younger
siblings' and cousins' ADHD outcomes are robust to including them. In Panel B of Appendix
Table B10, we also document that our results are largely unchanged if we use a quadratic
polynomial in the running variable when estimating the RD models.


                                               28
    In addition, to further address concerns about potential sorting of families across birth
months, we estimate "doughnut-RD" specifications that drop all families with older children
born in December or January of any year. As we show in Appendix Table B11, our results
remain similar with this sample limitation.
    Finally, we examine the sensitivity of our results to an alternative method of inference. Ap-
pendix Table B12 demonstrates that our estimated spillover discontinuities remain significant
when using the wild cluster bootstrap (Cameron et al., 2008; Cameron and Miller, 2015).



6     Conclusion
Growing evidence suggests that patients who are diagnosed "on the margin"--i.e., they would
not have been diagnosed if there were a small change in their underlying symptoms or indica-
tors of the disease--do not appear to be better off as a result of the diagnosis. In some cases,
these patients may even be worse off than if they had not been diagnosed. Since diagnosed
patients usually receive medical treatment, this means that marginal diagnoses increase health
care spending without clear benefits for patients. Thus, understanding the drivers of low-value
marginal diagnoses and mitigating their spread is an important goal for health policy.
    At the same time, a large class of conditions have a hereditary component in their etiology,
and information about family members' prior diagnoses is used to "tag" patients for screening
as well as in the diagnostic process. While such "hereditary tagging" is more efficient than
screening individuals at random, our paper uncovers an important cost of this common health
care practice--the propagation of marginal, low-value diagnoses across family members. We
focus on the case of ADHD, which is the most common mental disorder among children, and
for which there exists a well-known determinant of marginal diagnoses--children's relative age
for grade. We use Swedish administrative data and an RD design to show that children who
are born shortly before the school entry cutoff and are youngest for their grade are 30.8 and
29.5 percent more likely to be diagnosed with ADHD and to be treated with ADHD drugs,
respectively, than their oldest-for-grade peers born after the cutoff.
    We then study the spillover effects of these marginal ADHD diagnoses on the focal chil-
dren's younger siblings and cousins. We find that younger siblings of children born before


                                               29
the cutoff are 12.0 and 9.8 percent more likely to be diagnosed with and treated for ADHD,
respectively, than the younger siblings of children born after the cutoff. For younger cousins,
the corresponding spillover effect magnitudes are 13.0 and 9.1 percent, respectively. These
effects exist conditional on the younger children's own relative age for grade.
   To investigate the long-term implications of these diagnosis spillovers, we also show that
younger siblings and cousins of children born before the school entry cutoff have worse eco-
nomic and human capital outcomes than the younger siblings and cousins of children born
after the cutoff. While we cannot completely rule out that other changes in family behaviors
associated with the older child's relative age for grade contribute to these effects, our results
suggest that there are no clear benefits and may even be important costs of ADHD diagnoses
induced by the marginal diagnoses of older family members.
   Additional analyses suggest that schools and families play important roles in the "tagging
process" at the referral stage, in which younger relatives of previously diagnosed children are
systematically more likely to be referred for ADHD screenings. Moreover, although physicians
follow protocol by incorporating information about the older child's ADHD diagnosis in their
diagnostic criteria, they do not undo the "referral gap" because they do not take into account
the older child's relative age for grade. Our analysis suggests that low-value marginal diagnosis
spillovers could be mitigated with a small adjustment to this protocol that would assign less
weight to information about the older child's diagnosis if that child is young-for-grade rather
than old-for-grade.
   Our evidence of large family spillover effects of marginal ADHD diagnoses also helps explain
the rapid increase in ADHD caseloads both in the United States and in other countries. Our
results underscore that a single marginal diagnosis can trigger the diagnoses of multiple other
family members, thus spreading them rapidly throughout the population. Further research
is needed to understand how these processes affect the propagation of diagnoses of many
other medical conditions that have noisy diagnosing technologies and in which links between
individuals are used for targeting screening.


References
Aguirre, Josefa and Juan Matta, "Walking in your footsteps: Sibling spillovers in higher
 education choices," 2018. Available at SSRN 3255875.

                                                30
Alalouf, Mattan, Sarah Miller, and Laura R Wherry, "What Difference Does a Diag-
 nosis Make? Evidence from Marginal Patients," Working Paper 26363, National Bureau of
 Economic Research October 2019.

Alsan, Marcella, "The Gendered Spillover Effect of Young Children's Health on Human
 Capital: Evidence from Turkey," Working Paper 23702, NBER 2017.

Altmejd, Adam, Andres Barrios-Fernandez, Marin Drlje, and Christopher Neil-
 son, "Siblings' Spillover Effects on College and Major Choice: Evidence from Chile, Croatia
 and Sweden," 2020. Princeton University, unpublished manuscript.

Altonji, Joseph G., Sarah Cattan, and Iain Ware, "Identifying Sibling Influence on
 Teenage Substance Use," Journal of Human Resources, 2017, 52 (1), 1­47.

Anttila, Verneri, Brendan Bulik-Sullivan, Hilary K Finucane, Raymond K Wal-
 ters, Jose Bras, Laramie Duncan, Valentina Escott-Price, Guido J Falcone,
 Padhraig Gormley, Rainer Malik et al., "Analysis of shared heritability in common
 disorders of the brain," Science, 2018, 360 (6395), eaap8757.

Barkley, Russell A, "Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder," in D.A. Wolfe and E.J.
 Mash, eds., Behavioral and emotional disorders in adolescents: Nature, assessment, and
 treatment, Guilford Publications, 2006.

Bedard, Kelly and Elizabeth Dhuey, "The persistence of early childhood maturity: In-
 ternational evidence of long-run age effects," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2006,
 121 (4), 1437­1472.

Bharadwaj, Prashant, Mallesh M Pai, and Agne Suziedelyte, "Mental health stigma,"
 Economics Letters, 2017, 159, 57­60.

Bingley, Paul, Petter Lundborg, and Stéphanie Vincent Lyk-Jensen, "Brothers in
  Arms: spillovers from a draft lottery," Journal of Human Resources, 2019, pp. 0317­8646R3.

Black, Sandra E, Paul J Devereux, and Kjell G Salvanes, "Too young to leave the
  nest? The effects of school starting age," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2011, 93
  (2), 455­467.

  , Sanni Breining, David N Figlio, Jonathan Guryan, Krzysztof Karbownik, He-
  lena Skyt Nielsen, Jeffrey Roth, and Marianne Simonsen, "Sibling spillovers," Work-
  ing Paper w23062, National Bureau of Economic Research 2017.

Bond, Mary, Toby Pavey, Karen Welch, Chris Cooper, Ruth Garside, Sarah Dean,
 and Christopher J Hyde, "Psychological consequences of false-positive screening mam-
 mograms in the UK," BMJ evidence-based medicine, 2013, 18 (2), 54­61.

Bos, Marieke, Andrew Hertzberg, and Andres Liberman, "Are we Overdiagnosing
 Mental Illnessses? Evidence from Randomly Assigned Doctors," 2020. Federal Reserve
 Bank of Philadelphia, unpublished manuscript.



                                             31
Breining, Sanni, Meltem Daysal, Marianne Simonsen, Sandra E Trandafir Mircea,
 Sanni Breining, David N Figlio, Jonathan Guryan, Krzysztof Karbownik, He-
 lena Skyt Nielsen, Jeffrey Roth, and Marianne Simonsen, "Spillover Effects of
 Early-Life Medical Interventions," Working Paper 9086, IZA Working Paper 2019.

Breining, Sanni Nørgaard, "The presence of ADHD: Spillovers between siblings," Eco-
 nomics Letters, 2014, 124 (3), 469­473.

Brewer, Noel T, Talya Salz, and Sarah E Lillie, "Systematic review: the long-term
 effects of false-positive mammograms," Annals of internal medicine, 2007, 146 (7), 502­510.

Bruchmüller, Katrin, Jürgen Margraf, and Silvia Schneider, "Is ADHD diagnosed in
 accord with diagnostic criteria? Overdiagnosis and influence of client gender on diagnosis.,"
 Journal of consulting and clinical psychology, 2012, 80 (1), 128.

Cameron, A Colin and Douglas L Miller, "A practitionerâs guide to cluster-robust
 inference," Journal of human resources, 2015, 50 (2), 317­372.

  , Jonah B Gelbach, and Douglas L Miller, "Bootstrap-based improvements for infer-
  ence with clustered errors," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2008, 90 (3), 414­427.

Cattaneo, Matias D, Michael Jansson, and Xinwei Ma, "Manipulation testing based
 on density discontinuity," The Stata Journal, 2018, 18 (1), 234­261.

Chan, David C, Matthew Gentzkow, and Chuan Yu, "Selection with variation in
 diagnostic skill: Evidence from radiologists," Working Paper w26467, National Bureau of
 Economic Research 2019.

Charach, Alice, Abel Ickowicz, and Russell Schachar, "Stimulant treatment over five
 years: adherence, effectiveness, and adverse effects," Journal of the American Academy of
 Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 2004, 43 (5), 559­567.

Chen, Mu-Hong, Wen-Hsuan Lan, Ya-Mei Bai, Kai-Lin Huang, Tung-Ping Su,
 Shih-Jen Tsai, Cheng-Ta Li, Wei-Chen Lin, Wen-Han Chang, Tai-Long Pan
 et al., "Influence of relative age on diagnosis and treatment of attention-deficit hyperactivity
 disorder in Taiwanese children," The Journal of pediatrics, 2016, 172, 162­167.

Chen, Yiqun, Petra Persson, and Maria Polyakova, "The Roots of Health Inequality
 and the Value of Intra-Family Expertise," Working Paper 25618, NBER 2019.

Chorniy, Anna and Leah Kitashima, "Sex, drugs, and ADHD: The effects of ADHD
 pharmacological treatment on teens' risky behaviors," Labour Economics, 2016, 43, 87­105.

  , Janet Currie, and Lyudmyla Sonchak, "Exploding asthma and ADHD caseloads:
  The role of medicaid managed care," Journal of Health Economics, 2018, 60, 1­15.

Cook, Philip J and Songman Kang, "Birthdays, schooling, and crime: Regression-
 discontinuity analysis of school performance, delinquency, dropout, and crime initiation,"
 American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2016, 8 (1), 33­57.


                                               32
Cortese, Samuele, Nicoletta Adamo, Cinzia Del Giovane, Christina Mohr-Jensen,
 Adrian J Hayes, Sara Carucci, Lauren Z Atkinson, Luca Tessari, Tobias Ba-
 naschewski, David Coghill et al., "Comparative efficacy and tolerability of medications
 for attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder in children, adolescents, and adults: a systematic
 review and network meta-analysis," The Lancet Psychiatry, 2018, 5 (9), 727­738.

Cuddy, Emily and Janet Currie, "Rules vs. Discretion: Treatment of Mental Illness in
 U.S. Adolescents," Working Paper 27890, National Bureau of Economic Research October
 2020.

Cullen, Julie Berry, "The impact of fiscal incentives on student disability rates," Journal
 of Public Economics, 2003, 87 (7-8), 1557­1589.

Currie, Janet and W Bentley Macleod, "Understanding Physician Decision Making: The
 Case of Depression," 2020.

  , Mark Stabile, and Lauren Jones, "Do stimulant medications improve educational
  and behavioral outcomes for children with ADHD?," Journal of health economics, 2014, 37,
  58­69.

Dahl, Gordon B, Dan-Olof Rooth, and Anders Stenberg, "Family Spillovers in Field
 of Study," Working Paper 27618, National Bureau of Economic Research July 2020.

Dahl, Gordon B., Katrine V. LÃzken, and Magne Mogstad, "Peer Effects in Program
 Participation," American Economic Review, July 2014, 104 (7), 2049­74.

Dalsgaard, Søren, Maria Knoth Humlum, Helena Skyt Nielsen, and Marianne
 Simonsen, "Relative standards in ADHD diagnoses: the role of specialist behavior," Eco-
 nomics Letters, 2012, 117 (3), 663­665.

Danielson, Melissa L, Rebecca H Bitsko, Reem M Ghandour, Joseph R Holbrook,
 Michael D Kogan, and Stephen J Blumberg, "Prevalence of parent-reported ADHD
 diagnosis and associated treatment among US children and adolescents, 2016," Journal of
 Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology, 2018, 47 (2), 199­212.

Depew, Briggs and Ozkan Eren, "Born on the wrong day? School entry age and juvenile
 crime," Journal of Urban Economics, 2016, 96, 73­90.

Dhuey, Elizabeth, David Figlio, Krzysztof Karbownik, and Jeffrey Roth, "School
 starting age and cognitive development," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 2019,
 38 (3), 538­578.

Dustan, Andrew, "Family networks and school choice," Journal of Development Economics,
 2018, 134, 372­391.

Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, Tamar Oostrom, Abigail J Ostriker, and Heidi L
  Williams, "Screening and selection: The case of mammograms," Working Paper w26162,
  National Bureau of Economic Research 2019.



                                              33
Elder, Todd E, "The importance of relative standards in ADHD diagnoses: evidence based
  on exact birth dates," Journal of health economics, 2010, 29 (5), 641­656.

   and Darren H Lubotsky, "Kindergarten entrance age and childrenÂs achievement im-
  pacts of state policies, family background, and peers," Journal of human Resources, 2009,
  44 (3), 641­683.

Evans, William N, Melinda S Morrill, and Stephen T Parente, "Measuring inappro-
 priate medical diagnosis and treatment in survey data: The case of ADHD among school-age
 children," Journal of health economics, 2010, 29 (5), 657­673.

Faraone, Stephen V, Joseph Biederman, Wei J Chen, B Krifcher, K Keenan,
  C Moore, S Sprich, and MT Tsuang, "Segregation analysis of attention deficit hyper-
  activity disorder.," Psychiatric Genetics, 1992.

Fletcher, Jason, Nicole L Hair, and Barbara L Wolfe, "Am I my brother's keeper?
  Sibling spillover effects: The case of developmental disabilities and externalizing behavior,"
  Working Paper w18279, National Bureau of Economic Research 2012.

Frank, Richard G and Thomas G McGuire, "Economics and mental health," in M. V.
  Pauly, T. G. McGuire, and P. P. Barros, eds., Handbook of Health Economics, Vol. 1,
  Elsevier, 2000, pp. 893­954.

Fredriksson, Peter and Björn Öckert, "Life-cycle effects of age at school start," The
  Economic Journal, 2014, 124 (579), 977­1004.

Furzer, Jill, "Diagnostic Errors in Child Mental Health: Assessing Treatment Selection and
  Its Long-Term Consequences," 2020. University of Toronto, unpublished manuscript.

  , Elizabeth Dhuey, and Audrey Laporte, "ADHD Misidentification in School: Causes
  and Mitigators," Working Paper 200001, Canadian Centre for Health Economics 2020.

Goodman, Joshua, Michael Hurwitz, Christine Mulhern, and Jonathan Smith, "O
 brother, where start thou? Sibling spillovers in college enrollment," Working Paper w26502,
 National Bureau of Economic Research 2019.

Halldner, Linda, Annika Tillander, Cecilia Lundholm, Marcus Boman, Niklas
 Långström, Henrik Larsson, and Paul Lichtenstein, "Relative immaturity and
 ADHD: findings from nationwide registers, parent-and self-reports," Journal of child psy-
 chology and psychiatry, 2014, 55 (8), 897­904.

Hinshaw, Stephen P and Richard M Scheffler, The ADHD explosion: Myths, medica-
 tion, money, and today's push for performance, Oxford University Press, 2014.

Hjörne, Eva, "Det har skett en stor förändring hemma," Elevidentitet, föräldrars motstånd
 och ADHD i den svenska skolan. Utbildning & demokrati, 2012, pp. 91­96.

Humphreys, Kathryn L, Timothy Eng, and Steve S Lee, "Stimulant medication and
 substance use outcomes: a meta-analysis," JAMA psychiatry, 2013, 70 (7), 740­749.


                                              34
Hurwitz, Michael, Jonathan Smith, and Jessica S Howell, "Student age and the
 collegiate pathway," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 2015, 34 (1), 59­84.

Imbens, Guido W and Thomas Lemieux, "Regression discontinuity designs: A guide to
  practice," Journal of econometrics, 2008, 142 (2), 615­635.

Jensen, Peter S, "A 14-month randomized clinical trial of treatment strategies for attention-
  deficit/hyperactivity disorder," Archives of general psychiatry, 1999, 56 (12), 1073­1086.

Joensen, Juanna Schrøter and Helena Skyt Nielsen, "Spillovers in education choice,"
  Journal of Public Economics, 2018, 157, 158­183.

Karbownik, Krzysztof and Umut Özek, "Setting a Good Example? Examining Sibling
 Spillovers in Educational Achievement Using a Regression Discontinuity Design," Working
 Paper w26411, National Bureau of Economic Research 2019.

Kawaguchi, Daiji, "Actual age at school entry, educational outcomes, and earnings," Journal
 of the Japanese and International Economies, 2011, 25 (2), 64­80.

Krabbe, EE, ED Thoutenhoofd, M Conradi, SJ Pijl, and L Batstra, "Birth month
 as predictor of ADHD medication use in Dutch school classes," European Journal of Special
 Needs Education, 2014, 29 (4), 571­578.

Kubik, Jeffrey D, "Incentives for the identification and treatment of children with disabil-
 ities: the supplemental security income program," Journal of Public Economics, 1999, 73
 (2), 187­215.

Landersø, Rasmus, Helena Skyt Nielsen, and Marianne Simonsen, "School starting
  age and the crime-age profile," The Economic Journal, 2017, 127 (602), 1096­1118.

Landersø, Rasmus Kløve, Helena Skyt Nielsen, and Marianne Simonsen, "Effects
  of school starting age on the family," Journal of Human Resources, 2019, pp. 1117­9174R1.

Layton, Timothy J, Michael L Barnett, Tanner R Hicks, and Anupam B Jena,
  "Attention deficit­hyperactivity disorder and month of school enrollment," New England
  Journal of Medicine, 2018, 379 (22), 2122­2130.

Lee, David S and David Card, "Regression discontinuity inference with specification er-
  ror," Journal of Econometrics, 2008, 142 (2), 655­674.

Lee, David S. and Thomas Lemieux, "Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics,"
  Journal of Economic Literature, June 2010, 48 (2), 281­355.

Levy, F, DA Hay, M McStephen, C Wood, and I. Waldman, "Attention deficit
  hyperactivity disorder," J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry, 1997, 36 (6), 737­44.

Marquardt, Kelli, "Mis(sed) Diagnosis: Physician Decision Making and ADHD," 2020.
 University of Arizona, unpublished manuscript.



                                             35
McEwan, Patrick J and Joseph S Shapiro, "The benefits of delayed primary school
 enrollment discontinuity estimates using exact birth dates," Journal of human Resources,
 2008, 43 (1), 1­29.
Merten, Eva Charlotte, Jan Christopher Cwik, Jürgen Margraf, and Silvia Schnei-
 der, "Overdiagnosis of mental disorders in children and adolescents (in developed coun-
 tries)," Child and adolescent psychiatry and mental health, 2017, 11 (1), 5.
Miller, Meghan, Erica D. Musser, Gregory S. Young, Brent Olson, Robert D.
 Steiner, and Joel T. Nigg, "Sibling Recurrence Risk and Cross-aggregation of Attention-
 Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder and Autism Spectrum Disorder," JAMA Pediatrics, 02 2019,
 173 (2), 147­152.
Molina, Brooke SG, Stephen P Hinshaw, L Eugene Arnold, James M Swanson,
 William E Pelham, Lily Hechtman, Betsy Hoza, Jeffery N Epstein, Timothy
 Wigal, Howard B Abikoff et al., "Adolescent substance use in the multimodal treatment
 study of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)(MTA) as a function of childhood
 ADHD, random assignment to childhood treatments, and subsequent medication," Journal
 of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 2013, 52 (3), 250­263.
Morrill, Melinda Sandler, "Special education financing and ADHD medications: A bitter
 pill to swallow," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 2018, 37 (2), 384­402.
Morrow, Richard L, E Jane Garland, James M Wright, Malcolm Maclure, Suzanne
 Taylor, and Colin R Dormuth, "Influence of relative age on diagnosis and treatment of
 attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in children," CMAJ, 2012, 184 (7), 755­762.
Moses, Tally, "Being treated differently: Stigma experiences with family, peers, and school
 staff among adolescents with mental health disorders," Social science & medicine, 2010, 70
 (7), 985­993.
Mullainathan, Sendhil and Ziad Obermeyer, "Does machine learning automate moral
 hazard and error?," American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (5), 476­80.
N., Melissa L. Danielson Rebecca H. Bitsko Joseph R. Holbrook Michael D. Ko-
 gan Reem M. Ghandour Ruth Perou Stephen J. Blumberg Visser Susanna,
 "Trends in the Parent-Report of Health Care Provider-Diagnosed and Medicated Attention-
 Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder: United States, 2003-2011," Journal of The American
 Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 2014.
Nicoletti, Cheti and Birgitta Rabe, "Sibling spillover effects in school achievement,"
 Journal of Applied Econometrics, 2019, 34 (4), 482­501.
Obermeyer, Ziad, Brian Powers, Christine Vogeli, and Sendhil Mullainathan, "Dis-
 secting racial bias in an algorithm used to manage the health of populations," Science, 2019,
 366 (6464), 447­453.
Ohan, Jeneva L, Troy AW Visser, Melanie C Strain, and Linda Allen, "Teachers' and
 education students' perceptions of and reactions to children with and without the diagnostic
 label "ADHD"," Journal of School Psychology, 2011, 49 (1), 81­105.

                                             36
Ong, Mei-Sing and Kenneth D Mandl, "National expenditure for false-positive mammo-
 grams and breast cancer overdiagnoses estimated at $4 billion a year," Health Affairs, 2015,
 34 (4), 576­583.

Parman, John, "Childhood health and sibling outcomes: Nurture Reinforcing nature during
 the 1918 influenza pandemic," Explorations in Economic History, 2015, 58 (C), 22­43.

Pottegård, Anton, Jesper Hallas, and Helga Zoëga, "Children's relative age in class
 and use of medication for ADHD: a Danish Nationwide Study," Journal of Child Psychology
 and Psychiatry, 2014, 55 (11), 1244­1250.

Quadagno, Jill, "Incentives to disability in federal disability insurance and supplemental
 security income," Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research®, 1997, 336, 11­17.

Qureshi, Javaeria A., "Additional Returns to Investing in Girls' Education: Impact on
 Younger Sibling Human Capital," The Economic Journal, 2018, 128 (616), 3285­3319.

Qureshi, Javaeria A, "Siblings, teachers, and spillovers on academic achievement," Journal
 of Human Resources, 2018, 53 (1), 272­297.

Root, Adrian, Jeremy P Brown, Harriet J Forbes, Krishnan Bhaskaran, Joseph
 Hayes, Liam Smeeth, and Ian J Douglas, "Association of relative age in the school
 year with diagnosis of intellectual disability, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and
 depression," JAMA pediatrics, 2019, 173 (11), 1068­1075.

Schwandt, Hannes and Amelie Wuppermann, "The youngest get the pill: ADHD mis-
  diagnosis in Germany, its regional correlates and international comparison," Labour Eco-
  nomics, 2016, 43, 72­86.

Schwarz, Alan, ADHD nation: Children, doctors, big pharma, and the making of an Amer-
  ican epidemic, Simon and Schuster, 2017.

Socialstyrelsen, "Socialstyrelsens riktlinjer för skolhälsovården," Socialstyrelsens Rapporter,
  2002.

  , "Användning av centralstimulantia vid adhd," Socialstyrelsens Rapporter, 2012.

  , "Utredning och diagnostik av adhd hos barn och ungdomar," Socialstyrelsen, 2014.

  , "Förskrivning av centralstimulerande läkemedel vid adhd," Socialstyrelsens Rapporter,
  2015.

Tarver, Joanne, David Daley, and Kapil Sayal, "Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder
  (ADHD): an updated review of the essential facts," Child: care, health and development,
  2014, 40 (6), 762­774.

Thapar, Anita and Miriam Cooper, "Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder," The
 Lancet, 2016, 387 (10024), 1240­50.



                                              37
Thomas, Rae, Sharon Sanders, Jenny Doust, Elaine Beller, and Paul Glasziou,
 "Prevalence of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a systematic review and meta-
 analysis," Pediatrics, 2015, 135 (4), e994­e1001.

Whitely, Martin, Melissa Raven, Sami Timimi, Jon Jureidini, John Phillimore,
 Jonathan Leo, Joanna Moncrieff, and Patrick Landman, "Attention deficit hyperac-
 tivity disorder late birthdate effect common in both high and low prescribing international
 jurisdictions: systematic review.," Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 2018.

Wilens, Timothy E, Stephen V Faraone, Joseph Biederman, and Samantha Gu-
 nawardene, "Does stimulant therapy of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder beget later
 substance abuse? A meta-analytic review of the literature," Pediatrics, 2003, 111 (1), 179­
 185.

Yi, Junjian, James J Heckman, Junsen Zhang, and Gabriella Conti, "Early Health
 Shocks, Intra-household Resource Allocation and Child Outcomes," The Economic Journal,
 2015, 125 (588), F347­F371.

Zoëga, Helga, Unnur A Valdimarsdóttir, and Sonia Hernández-Díaz, "Age, academic
  performance, and stimulant prescribing for ADHD: a nationwide cohort study," Pediatrics,
  2012, 130 (6), 1012­1018.




                                            38
7      Figures and Tables

               Figure 1: Trends in the Share of Children Ages 6­19 with ADHD




    Note: The sample includes children between the ages of 6 and 19 who are born in Sweden,
     Norway, or the EU 28. For every year, the figure plots the share of these children with
     at least one ADHD diagnosis in the outpatient data (in blue-filled dots) and at least one
     ADHD drug claim (in red-outlined squares), respectively.




                                              39
Figure 2: ADHD Diagnoses and Drug Treatment by Own Month of Birth, Older Siblings Only
                  (a) Diagnoses                            (b) Drug Treatment




 Note: The sample of analysis is the universe of singleton sibling pairs born in Sweden, Nor-
  way, or the EU 28, where the older sibling is born between January 1990 and December
  1996. These graphs plot ADHD-related outcomes for older siblings by their own birth
  month. Sub-figure (a) plots the share of older siblings with an ADHD diagnosis in the
  outpatient data, while sub-figure (b) plots the share of older siblings with at least one
  ADHD drug claim in the prescription drug data.




                Figure 3: Stylized Framework for Interpreting ADHD Gap




 Note: This figure depicts a stylized visual framework for interpreting the ADHD gap at
  the school-entry cutoff. The bell curves represent the distributions of underlying ADHD
  symptoms in the populations of children born in December and January, respectively. The
  yellow areas under each of the curves signify the children who receive a positive ADHD
  diagnosis.



                                            40
Figure 4: Younger Siblings' ADHD Diagnoses and Drug Treatment by Older Sibling's Month
of Birth
                  (a) Diagnoses                            (b) Drug Treatment




 Note: The sample of analysis is the universe of singleton sibling pairs born in Sweden, Nor-
  way, or the EU 28, where the older sibling is born between January 1990 and December
  1996. These graphs plot ADHD-related outcomes for younger siblings (on the y-axes)
  by the birth month of the older sibling (on the x-axes). Sub-figure (a) plots the share
  of younger siblings with an ADHD diagnosis in the outpatient data, while sub-figure (b)
  plots the share of younger siblings with at least one ADHD drug claim in the prescription
  drug data.




                                            41
Figure 5: Younger Cousins' ADHD Diagnoses and Drug Treatment by Older Cousin's Month
of Birth
                  (a) Diagnoses                             (b) Drug Treatment




 Note: To construct the analysis sample for these figures, we identify all cousins of the older
  siblings in our main sample (see notes under Figure 2), and then keep for each older sib-
  ling, his/her next younger cousin. We only keep cousins who are born in Sweden, Norway,
  or the EU 28. These figures plot ADHD-related outcomes of the younger cousins (on the
  y-axes) by the birth month of the older cousin (on the x-axes). Sub-figure (a) plots the
  share of younger cousins with an ADHD diagnosis in the outpatient data, while sub-figure
  (b) plots the share of younger cousins with at least one ADHD drug claim in the prescrip-
  tion drug data.




                                             42
Figure 6: Younger Siblings' Educational and Labor Market Outcomes by Older Sibling's
Month of Birth
               (a) Earnings, 2018                       (b) Broad Earnings, 2018




               (c) HS GPA, 2016                      (d) College Enrollment, by 2018




 Note: These figures plot average educational and labor market outcomes of younger sib-
  lings (on the y-axes), by the birth month of the older sibling (on the x-axes). The sample
  is limited to sibling pairs with younger siblings born in 1990-1995 only (see notes under
  Figure 2 for further description of the main siblings sample).




                                            43
Figure 7: Younger Cousins' Educational and Labor Market Outcomes by Older Cousin's
Month of Birth
               (a) Earnings, 2018                       (b) Broad Earnings, 2018




                (c) HS GPA, 2016                     (d) College Enrollment, by 2018




 Note: These figures plot average educational and labor market outcomes of younger cousins
  (on the y-axes), by the birth month of the older cousin (on the x-axes). The sample is
  limited to cousin pairs with younger cousins born in 1990-1995 only (see notes under Fig-
  ure 5 for further description of the main cousins sample).




                                           44
     Table 1: Effect of Older Sibling Being Born After Cutoff on Own ADHD Diagnosis and Drug Treatment

                                            ADHD Diagnoses                                       ADHD Drugs
                                          (1)                (2)                (3)                 (4)                  (5)
                                     Main Sample        Age Diff  3        Main Sample         Age Diff  3        Balanced Timing
     Born after cutoff                -0.0117            -0.0122            -0.0125             -0.0127              -0.0112
     [Own Relative Age Effect]          (0.001)            (0.002)            (0.001)             (0.002)              (0.001)
     Mean(Y)                             0.039              0.040              0.044               0.045                0.025
     N                                 271,388            175,445            271,388             175,445              271,388
           Notes: Each column reports results from a separate regression estimating model (1). The sample of analysis
           is the universe of older siblings born between January 1990 and December 1996, among singleton sibling pairs
           born in Sweden, Norway, or the EU 28. The dependent variable in columns (1) and (2) is an indicator equal
45




           to one if the older sibling ever has an outpatient claim with an ADHD diagnosis. The dependent variable in
           columns (3) and (4) is an indicator equal to one if the older sibling has at least one ADHD drug claim in the
           prescription drug data. In columns (2) and (4), the main sample is further limited to sibling pairs with an age
           difference of no more than 3 years (36 months). The dependent variable in column (5) is an indicator equal
           to one if the older sibling has at least one ADHD drug claim that is specifically recommended for children
           between ages 5 and 18. In addition, the observation period for drug claims in column (5) is restricted such that
           children born in the same fiscal year (July-June) are observed for the same number of months (see Appendix
           Table B1). All regressions control for a linear spline function for the older sibling's month of birth centered
           around January (i.e., the running variable in the RD specification), and also include controls for an indicator
           for whether the older sibling is male, indicators for whether each parent is foreign-born, indicators for each
           parent's education categories in the year of the older child's birth (high school only, some college, college degree
           or more), the log household income averaged over the year of the older child's birth and the following two
           years, and fixed effects for the fiscal years of birth of the older siblings. Robust standard errors are clustered
           on the older sibling's month of birth.
           Significance levels: * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05 *** p < 0.01
     Table 2: Effect of Older Sibling Being Born After Cutoff on Younger Sibling's ADHD Diagnosis and Drug Treatment

                                                      ADHD Diagnoses                                       ADHD Drugs
                                                    (1)                 (2)                (3)                (4)                  (5)
                                               Main Sample         Age Diff  3        Main Sample        Age Diff  3        Balanced Timing
       Older sibling born after cutoff          -0.0059             -0.0072            -0.0055            -0.0068              -0.0046
       [Spillover Effect]                         (0.002)             (0.001)            (0.001)            (0.002)              (0.001)
       Younger sibling born after cutoff          -0.0155            -0.0148            -0.0164            -0.0155               -0.0151
       [Own Relative Age Effect]                    (0.002)            (0.001)            (0.001)            (0.002)               (0.001)
       Mean(Y)                                       0.049              0.048              0.056              0.054                 0.043
       N                                           271,388            175,445            271,388            175,445               271,388
                 Notes: Each column reports results from a separate regression estimating model (2). The sample of analysis
                 is the universe of singleton sibling pairs born in Sweden, Norway, or the EU 28, where the older sibling is born
46




                 between January 1990 and December 1996. The dependent variable in columns (1) and (2) is an indicator equal
                 to one if the younger sibling ever has an outpatient claim with an ADHD diagnosis. The dependent variable
                 in columns (3) and (4) is an indicator equal to one if the younger sibling has at least one ADHD drug claim in
                 the prescription drug data. In columns (2) and (4), the main sample is further limited to sibling pairs with an
                 age difference of no more than 3 years (36 months). The dependent variable in column (5) is an indicator equal
                 to one if the younger sibling has at least one ADHD drug claim that is specifically recommended for children
                 between ages 5 and 18. In addition, the observation period for drug claims in column (5) is restricted such that
                 children born in the same fiscal year (July-June) are observed for the same number of months (see Appendix
                 Table B1). All regressions control for linear spline functions of the older and younger child's month of birth
                 centered around January (i.e., the running variables in the RD specifications), and also include controls for
                 birth spacing (in months), indicators for whether the older and younger sibling is male, indicators for whether
                 each parent is foreign-born, indicators for each parent's education categories in the year of the older child's
                 birth (high school only, some college, college degree or more), the log household income averaged over the year
                 of the older child's birth and the following two years, and fixed effects for the fiscal years of birth of the older
                 and younger siblings. Robust standard errors are clustered on the older sibling's month of birth.
                 Significance levels: * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05 *** p < 0.01
     Table 3: Effect of Older Cousin Being Born After Cutoff on Younger Cousin's ADHD Diagnosis and Drug Treatment

                                                    ADHD Diagnoses                                     ADHD Drugs
                                                   (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)                 (5)
                                              Main Sample       Age Diff  3        Main Sample       Age Diff  3       Balanced Timing
       Older cousin born after cutoff          -0.0060           -0.0097            -0.0048           -0.0089             -0.0050
       [Spillover Effect]                        (0.001)           (0.002)            (0.001)           (0.001)             (0.001)
       Younger cousin born after cutoff         -0.0187           -0.0158            -0.0198           -0.0148              -0.0195
47




       [Own Relative Age Effect]                  (0.002)           (0.002)            (0.002)           (0.002)              (0.002)
       Mean(Y)                                     0.046             0.044              0.053             0.049                0.040
       N                                         208,437           126,380            208,437           126,380              208,437
                 Notes: To construct the analysis sample for these regressions, we identify all cousins of the older siblings in
                 our main sample, and then keep for each older sibling, his/her next younger cousin. We only keep cousins
                 who are born in Sweden, Norway, or the EU 28. See notes under Table 2 for more details about the sample,
                 specifications, control variables, and outcomes. Robust standard errors are clustered on the older sibling's
                 month of birth.
                 Significance levels: * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05 *** p < 0.01
     Table 4: Effect of Older Sibling/Cousin Being Born After Cutoff on Younger Siblings' and Cousins' Educational and Labor
     Market Outcomes

                                                                     (1)              (2)                (3)             (4)
                                                                   Earnings      Broad Earnings        HS GPA        Coll Enroll
                       Panel A: Younger Siblings
                       Older sibling born after cutoff            32.8370            29.5572            0.1336        0.0086
                       [Spillover Effect]                          (7.846)            (7.100)           (0.089)        (0.003)
                       Younger sibling born after cutoff         -75.1359           -80.9148           0.4663        -0.0144
                       [Own Relative Age Effect]                   (22.487)           (22.250)          (0.054)        (0.005)
                       Mean(Y)                                    2001.360           2061.876            12.948         0.420
                       N                                           142,034            142,034           125,824       144,294
48




                       Panel B: Younger Cousins
                       Older cousin born after cutoff              10.8254             9.3314          0.1309          0.0120
                       [Spillover Effect]                          (13.527)           (14.385)         (0.049)         (0.006)
                       Younger cousin born after cutoff          -65.0976           -75.8078           0.6099          0.0058
                       [Own Relative Age Effect]                   (14.320)           (14.052)          (0.081)        (0.005)
                       Mean(Y)                                    2116.893           2194.843           13.105          0.450
                       N                                           108,588            108,588           96,880         110,561
                     Notes: Each column in each panel reports results from a separate regression, estimating equation (2). We
                     restrict our main sample to sibling and cousin pairs where the younger sibling/cousin is born in 1990-1995
                     only. The earnings measures are measured in 2018. High school GPA is measured in 2016. College enrollment
                     is an indicator set to 1 if an individual is ever enrolled in college by 2018. "Broad earnings" refers to income
                     from employment and employment-based transfers such as parental leave benefits. See notes under Table 2
                     for more details about the sample, specifications, and control variables. Robust standard errors are clustered
                     on the older child's month of birth.
                     Significance levels: * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05 *** p < 0.01
ONLINE APPENDIX

A        Symptoms and Diagnosis of ADHD
Health care providers use the guidelines in the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual, Fifth edition (DSM-5) to diagnose ADHD.40 Individuals with ADHD
show a persistent pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity that interferes with
functioning or development. The following are listed as symptoms of ADHD:
Inattention Symptoms:

  1. Often fails to give close attention to details or makes careless mistakes in schoolwork, at
        work, or with other activities.

  2. Often has trouble holding attention on tasks or play activities.

  3. Often does not seem to listen when spoken to directly.

  4. Often does not follow through on instructions and fails to finish schoolwork, chores, or
        duties in the workplace (e.g., loses focus, side-tracked).

  5. Often has trouble organizing tasks and activities.

  6. Often avoids, dislikes, or is reluctant to do tasks that require mental effort over a long
        period of time (such as schoolwork or homework).

  7. Often loses things necessary for tasks and activities (e.g. school materials, pencils, books,
        tools, wallets, keys, paperwork, eyeglasses, mobile telephones).

  8. Is often easily distracted.

  9. Is often forgetful in daily activities.

Hyperactivity and Impulsivity Symptoms:

  1. Often fidgets with or taps hands or feet, or squirms in seat.

  2. Often leaves seat in situations when remaining seated is expected.
 40
      https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/adhd/diagnosis.html

                                                 49
  3. Often runs about or climbs in situations where it is not appropriate (adolescents or
     adults may be limited to feeling restless).

  4. Often unable to play or take part in leisure activities quietly.

  5. Is often "on the go" acting as if "driven by a motor".

  6. Often talks excessively.

  7. Often blurts out an answer before a question has been completed.

  8. Often has trouble waiting their turn.

  9. Often interrupts or intrudes on others (e.g., butts into conversations or games).

An ADHD diagnosis is indicated when the following conditions must be met:

  · Six or more symptoms of inattention for children up to age 16 years, or five or more
     symptoms for individuals age 17 years and older.

  · Symptoms have been present for at least 6 months to an extent that is disruptive or
     inappropriate for the person's developmental level.

  · Several inattentive or hyperactive-impulsive symptoms were present before age 12 years.

  · Several symptoms are present in two or more settings (such as at home, school or work;
     with friends or relatives; in other activities).

  · There is clear evidence that the symptoms interfere with, or reduce the quality of, social,
     school, or work functioning.

  · The symptoms are not better explained by another mental disorder (such as a mood dis-
     order, anxiety disorder, dissociative disorder, or a personality disorder). The symptoms
     do not happen only during the course of schizophrenia or another psychotic disorder.




                                               50
B   Additional Results

Figure B1: Number of Births by Month of Birth, January 1990 to December 2016 Births
     (a) Number of Births in Sweden / EU 28        (b) Number of Births Outside EU 28




Note: The figures plot the number of births as a ratio relative to the number of births
 in December, by birth month for Swedish residents born in Sweden, Norway, and EU 28
 (sub-figure a) and Swedish residents born in the rest of the world (sub-figure b), using all
 births between January 1990 and December 2016.




                                              51
Figure B2: Distribution of Births at the Daily Level, Children Born Between January 1995
and December 2014




 Note: The sample includes all children born in Sweden between January 1995 and Decem-
  ber 2014 with information on exact date of birth. The figure shows a histogram of the
  distribution of births at the daily level, with a bandwidth of 180 days around the cutoff
  (January 1).




                                           52
Figure B3: Average Gestation Length by Month of Birth, Children Born Between January
1995 and December 2014




 Note: The sample includes all children born in Sweden between January 1995 and Decem-
  ber 2014 with information on gestation length. The figure plots the average length of
  gestation in days by the child's birth month.



      Figure B4: Age Difference Between Siblings by Month of Birth of Older Sibling
               (a) All Sibling Pairs                  (b) Age Difference  3 Years




 Note: See notes under Figure 2 for more information about the sample. These figures plot
  the average age difference between siblings (in months) by the birth month of the older
  sibling. Sub-figure (a) uses our main sample of sibling pairs, while sub-figure (b) limits
  our main sample to the pairs with an age difference of no more than 3 years (36 months).



                                            53
      Figure B5: Sibling Gender Composition by Month of Birth of Older Sibling
          (a) Share Boys, Older Siblings            (b) Share Boys, OS, Age Diff  3




        (c) Share Boys, Younger Siblings            (d) Share Boys, YS, Age Diff  3




Note: See notes under Figure 2 for more information about the sample. These figures plot
 the share of boys among older and younger siblings by the birth month of the older sib-
 ling. Sub-figure (a) plots the share of boys among older siblings in our main sample of
 sibling pairs, and sub-figure (b) limits our main sample to pairs with an age difference of
 no more than 3 years (36 months). Sub-figure (c) plots the share of boys among younger
 siblings in our main sample of sibling pairs, and sub-figure (d) limits our main sample to
 pairs with an age difference of no more than 3 years (36 months).




                                           54
         Figure B6: Parental Education Level by Month of Birth of Older Child
                  (a) Mothers                                 (b) Fathers




Note: See notes under Figure 2 for more information about the sample. Sub-figure (a) plots
 the share of mothers with some college education (in blue) and the share of mothers with
 college or higher level of education (in red), by their older child's month of birth. Sub-
 figure (b) plots the share of fathers with some college education (in blue) and the share
 of fathers with college or higher level of education (in red), by their older child's month
 of birth.




                                           55
       Figure B7: Predicted ADHD Outcomes by Month of Birth of Older Sibling
         (a) Pred. Diagnoses, Older Sibs           (b) Pred. Drug Treatment, Older Sibs




        (c) Pred. Diagnoses, Younger Sibs        (d) Pred. Drug Treatment, Younger Sibs




      (e) Pred. Diagnoses, Younger Cousins      (f) Pred. Drug Treatment, Younger Cousins




Note: See notes under Figure 2 for more information about the sample. These graphs plot
 predicted ADHD-related outcomes for the older siblings, younger siblings, and younger
 cousins, respectively, by the birth month of the older sibling. The predicted outcomes
 are constructed by regressing each ADHD outcome on birth spacing (in months), indica-
 tors for whether the older and younger sibling is male, indicators for whether each parent
 is foreign-born, indicators for each parent's education categories in the year of the older
 child's birth (high school only, some college, college degree or more), and the log house-
 hold income averaged over the year of the56 older child's birth and the following two years.
Figure B8: Older Sibling's ADHD Diagnoses and Drug Treatment by Younger Sibling's Month
of Birth
                 (a) Diagnoses                           (b) Drug Treatment




 Note: See notes under Figure 2 for more information about the sample. These figures plot
  the share of older siblings who ever have an ADHD diagnosis in the outpatient data (sub-
  figure a) and who have at least one ADHD drug claim in the prescription drug data (sub-
  figure b) by the birth month of the younger sibling.




                                           57
Figure B9: Stylized Framework for Interpreting ADHD Gap; Three Possible Interpretations
                      (a) Over-Diagnosis in December, Under-Diagnosis in Jan-
                      uary




 (b) More Over-Diagnosis in December than January    (c) Less Under-Diagnosis in December than January




 Note: These figures depict a stylized visual framework for interpreting the ADHD gap at the
  school-entry cutoff. The bell curves represent the distributions of underlying ADHD risk
  in the populations of children born in December and January, respectively. The yellow ar-
  eas under each of the curves signify the children who receive a positive ADHD diagnosis.
  The vertical dashed line in each sub-figure represents different assumptions about the un-
  derlying "natural rate" of ADHD in the population, which is assumed to be independent
  of the child's birth month.




                                                58
                  Table B1: Balanced Timing Drug Claim Observation Period

 Month/Year of Birth                  Drug Claim Observation Period                     Ages Observed
  01/1990   -   06/1990                       07/2005    -   06/2008                   16y0m - 18y0m
  07/1990   -   06/1991                       07/2005    -   06/2009                   15y0m - 18y0m
  07/1991   -   06/1992                       07/2005    -   06/2010                   14y0m - 18y0m
  07/1992   -   06/1993                       07/2005    -   06/2011                   13y0m - 18y0m
  07/1993   -   06/1994                       07/2005    -   06/2012                   12y0m - 18y0m
  07/1994   -   06/1995                       07/2005    -   06/2013                   11y0m - 18y0m
  07/1995   -   06/1996                       07/2005    -   06/2014                   10y0m - 18y0m
  07/1996   -   06/1997                       07/2005    -   06/2015                   9y0m - 18y0m
  07/1997   -   06/1998                       07/2005    -   06/2016                   8y0m - 18y0m
  07/1998   -   06/1999                       07/2005    -   06/2017                   7y0m - 18y0m
  07/1999   -   06/2000                       07/2005    -   06/2017                   6y0m - 17y0m
  07/2000   -   06/2001                       07/2005    -   06/2017                   5y0m - 16y0m
  07/2001   -   06/2002                       07/2006    -   06/2017                   5y0m - 15y0m
  07/2002   -   06/2003                       07/2007    -   06/2017                   5y0m - 14y0m
  07/2003   -   06/2004                       07/2008    -   06/2017                   5y0m - 13y0m
  07/2004   -   06/2005                       07/2009    -   06/2017                   5y0m - 12y0m
  07/2005   -   06/2006                       07/2010    -   06/2017                   5y0m - 11y0m
  07/2006   -   06/2007                       07/2011    -   06/2017                   5y0m - 10y0m
  07/2007   -   06/2008                       07/2012    -   06/2017                    5y0m - 9y0m
  07/2008   -   06/2009                       07/2013    -   06/2017                    5y0m - 8y0m
  07/2009   -   06/2010                       07/2014    -   06/2017                    5y0m - 7y0m
Notes: This table reports the drug claim observation period for all individuals in our data when we use the
"balanced timing" definition of ADHD drug claims. Specifically, our aim is to measure ADHD drug claims
over the same number of months for all children within each fiscal year (July-June) of birth.




                                                    59
                             Table B2: Sample Means of Key Variables

                                                         Full Sample      Jul-Dec Births      Jan-Jun Births
 Older siblings, share w/ ADHD diagnosis                    0.039              0.043                0.035
 Older siblings, share w/ ADHD drug use                     0.044              0.048                0.040
 Younger siblings, share w/ ADHD diagnosis                  0.048              0.050                0.047
 Younger siblings, share w/ ADHD drug use                   0.055              0.057                0.053
 Younger cousins, share w/ ADHD diagnosis                   0.046              0.048                0.044
 Younger cousins, share w/ ADHD drug use                    0.053              0.055                0.051
 Birth spacing (in months)                                  36.591             36.585               36.597
 Mother is foreign-born                                     0.153              0.162                0.146
 Father is foreign-born                                     0.165              0.173                0.157
 Log household income                                       7.493              7.487                7.498
 Mother has college degree+                                 0.116              0.116                0.116
 Father has college degree+                                 0.128              0.126                0.130
 Observations                                              293,994            136,308              157,686
Notes: This table reports sample means of some of the variables in our analysis. The first column uses our
full analysis sample of singleton sibling pairs born in Sweden, Norway, or the EU 28, where the older sibling is
born between January 1990 and December 1996. The second and third columns split the sample into families
with older siblings born in July-December and January-June, respectively.




                                                      60
                                                    Table B3: Results for Placebo Outcomes

                                                 (1)                   (2)                 (3)                    (4)                   (5)            (6)
                                           Gestation length       Birth spacing      Share boys (OS)        Share boys (YS)        Fathers' educ   Mothers' educ
     Born after cutoff                         0.1645
                                               (0.291)
     Older sibling born after cutoff                                  -0.0241               0.0015                -0.0008             0.0056         0.0040
                                                                      (0.017)              (0.004)                (0.002)              (0.003)        (0.002)
     Younger sibling born after cutoff                               6.1786                -0.0062                -0.0005            -0.0068         -0.0042
                                                                      (0.011)              (0.004)                (0.003)              (0.002)        (0.002)
                                                                                           (0.001)                (0.001)              (0.001)        (0.000)
     Mean(Y)                                     278.155               36.289               0.516                  0.513                0.129          0.117
     N                                          1,891,751             271,388              271,388                271,388             271,388        271,388
61




                     Notes: Each column reports results from a separate regression. In column (1), the sample includes children
                     born between January 1995 and December 2014 with information on gestation length, while we use our main
                     sample of sibling pairs in columns (2)-(6) (see notes under Table 2). The dependent variables in columns (5)
                     and (6) are indicators for whether each parent has a college degree or higher. In column (1), we control for a
                     linear spline in the running variable (month of birth centered around January), as well as the following control
                     variables: indicator for the child being male, indicators for each parent being foreign-born, indicators for each
                     parent's education category (high school only, some college, college degree or more), the log household income
                     averaged over the year of birth and the following two years, and fiscal year of birth fixed effects. In columns
                     (2)-(6), we include the same control variables as in our main specifications (see notes under Table 2), except we
                     omit birth spacing in column (2) and indicators for the older and younger sibling's child gender in columns (3)
                     and (4), respectively. We also omit the father's education categories in column (5) and the mother's education
                     categories in column (6). In column (2), we also drop the younger sibling's birth month and the interaction
                     term with being born after the cutoff due to collinearity. Robust standard errors are clustered on the older
                     sibling's month of birth.
                     Significance levels: * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05 *** p < 0.01
     Table B4: Effect of Older Sibling Being Born After Cutoff on Own ADHD Diagnoses and Drug Treatment, Controlling for
     Younger Sibling's Relative Age

                                                              Diagnoses                                         Drugs
                                                        (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)                 (5)
                                                   Main Sample       Age Diff  3       Main Sample       Age Diff  3       Balanced Timing
          Older sibling born after cutoff           -0.0116           -0.0118           -0.0124           -0.0125             -0.0113
          [Own Relative Age Effect]                   (0.001)           (0.002)           (0.001)           (0.002)             (0.001)
62




          Younger sibling born after cutoff           -0.0022          -0.0033            -0.0009            -0.0002             -0.0016
          [Younger Sib. Relative Age Effect]          (0.001)           (0.001)           (0.002)            (0.002)             (0.001)
          Mean(Y)                                      0.039             0.040             0.044              0.045               0.025
          N                                           271,388           175,445           271,388            175,445             271,388
                     Notes: Each column reports results from a separate regression. See notes under Table 2 for more details about
                     the sample, specifications, control variables, and outcomes. Robust standard errors are clustered on the older
                     sibling's month of birth.
                     Significance levels: * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05 *** p < 0.01
Table B5: Effect of Older Sibling Being Born After Cutoff on Younger Sibling's ADHD Out-
comes, by Gender

                                                   (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)
                                                 Boy-Boy        Boy-Girl      Girl-Boy      Girl-Girl
       Panel A: ADHD Diagnoses
       Older sibling born after cutoff            -0.0037      -0.0073        -0.0077       -0.0050
       [Spillover Effect]                         (0.003)        (0.002)       (0.004)       (0.002)
       Younger sibling born after cutoff         -0.0171       -0.0099       -0.0198        -0.0147
       [Own Relative Age Effect]                   (0.003)      (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.004)
       Mean(Y)                                     0.057          0.038        0.060           0.041
       N                                           71,743        68,388        67,588         63,669
       Panel B: ADHD Drugs
       Older sibling born after cutoff           -0.0055       -0.0065       -0.0079         -0.0022
       [Spillover Effect]                         (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)
       Younger sibling born after cutoff         -0.0173       -0.0110       -0.0214        -0.0155
       [Own Relative Age Effect]                   (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.004)
       Mean(Y)                                      0.064         0.044         0.067          0.048
       N                                           71,743        68,388        67,588         63,669
Notes: Each column in each panel reports results from a separate regression estimating model (2). See notes
under Table 2 for more details about the sample, specifications, and control variables. The dependent variable
in Panel A is an indicator equal to one if the younger sibling ever has an outpatient claim with an ADHD
diagnosis. The dependent variable in Panel B is an indicator equal to one if the younger sibling has at least
one ADHD drug claim in the prescription drug data. Column (1) restricts our main sample to sibling pairs in
which both the older and younger siblings are male; column (2) uses sibling pairs in which the older sibling is
male and the younger sibling is female; column (3) uses sibling pairs in which the older sibling is female and
the younger sibling is male; column (4) uses sibling pairs in which the older and younger siblings are female.
Robust standard errors are clustered on the older sibling's month of birth.
Significance levels: * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05 *** p < 0.01




                                                      63
     Table B6: Effect of Older Sibling Being Born After Cutoff on Younger Sibling's ADHD Outcomes Measured Before and After
     High School Graduation

                                                               Diagnoses                                                Drugs
                                                     (1)                       (2)                          (3)                        (4)
                                           Before HS graduation        After HS graduation        Before HS graduation        After HS graduation
      Older sibling born after cutoff            -0.0051                     -0.0007                    -0.0045                     -0.0011
      [Spillover Effect]                           (0.001)                   (0.001)                      (0.001)                    (0.000)
      Younger sibling born after cutoff           -0.0112                    -0.0043                     -0.0128                     -0.0036
64




      [Own Relative Age Effect]                     (0.002)                    (0.000)                     (0.001)                     (0.000)
      Mean(Y)                                        0.042                      0.007                       0.047                       0.009
      N                                            271,388                    271,388                     271,388                     271,388
                      Notes: Each column reports results from a separate regression. See notes under Table 2 for more details
                      about the sample, specifications, and control variables. The dependent variables in columns (1) and (3) are
                      indicators equal to one if the younger sibling's first ADHD diagnosis and ADHD drug claim are observed
                      before graduating from high school, respectively, while the dependent variables in columns (2) and (4) are
                      indicators equal to one if the younger sibling's first ADHD diagnosis and drug claim are observed after high
                      school graduation, respectively. Robust standard errors are clustered on the older sibling's month of birth.
                      Significance levels: * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05 *** p < 0.01
     Table B7: Effect of Older Sibling Being Born After Cutoff on Younger Sibling's ADHD Diagnoses and Drug Treatment, by Share
     Funding for Special Needs

                                                                   Diagnoses                                         Drugs
                                                            (1)                (2)              (3)                (4)                 (5)
                                                        Main Sample       Age Diff  3       Main Sample        Age Diff  3       Balanced Timing
        Older sibling born after cutoff                   -0.0016          -0.0049           -0.0025            -0.0052              -0.0016
                                                          (0.002)            (0.001)          (0.001)            (0.002)             (0.001)
        Younger sibling born after cutoff                 -0.0125           -0.0101           -0.0131            -0.0110                -0.0120
                                                            (0.002)           (0.002)           (0.002)            (0.003)                (0.002)
65




        Funding × Older sib born after cutoff             -0.0008             -0.0005          -0.0006            -0.0003               -0.0007
                                                            (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.001)                (0.000)
        Funding × Younger sib born after cutoff           -0.0007           -0.0012             -0.0005           -0.0007               -0.0005
                                                           (0.000)            (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)                (0.000)
        Mean(Y)                                             0.049              0.047             0.056             0.053                  0.043
        N                                                  239,052           154,493            239,052           154,493               239,052
                      Notes: Each column reports results from a separate regression. See notes under Table 2 for more details about
                      the sample, specifications, control variables, and outcomes. All regressions additionally include interaction
                      terms with the share of school funding for special needs education in the mother's municipality of residence
                      when the younger sibling is aged 7 years old, as well as municipality fixed effects. Robust standard errors are
                      clustered on the older sibling's month of birth.
                      Significance levels: * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05 *** p < 0.01
     Table B8: Effect of Older Cousin Being Born After Cutoff on Younger Cousin's ADHD Diagnoses and Drug Treatment, Same
     versus Different Municipalities
                                                                Same Municipality                                 Different Municipalities
                                                Diagnoses                  Drugs                    Diagnoses                    Drugs
                                                            Main Sample   Age Diff  3    Bal Tim                Main Sample    Age Diff  3   Bal Tim
             Older cousin born after cutoff     -0.0066      -0.0084       -0.0094      -0.0102     -0.0059      -0.0028        -0.0096      -0.0021
66




             [Spillover Effect]                   (0.001)      (0.003)       (0.002)      (0.002)    (0.002)      (0.001)         (0.003)     (0.001)
             Younger cousin born after cutoff   -0.0200      -0.0192       -0.0148      -0.0174     -0.0184      -0.0203         -0.0149     -0.0215
             [Own Relative Age Effect]            (0.004)      (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.002)      (0.002)         (0.002)     (0.002)
             Mean(Y)                               0.047        0.052         0.047        0.040       0.046        0.054           0.051       0.040
             N                                    86,225       86,225        54,022       86,225      116,026      116,026         69,343      116,026
                        Notes: See the notes under Tables 2 and 3 for more details about the sample, specifications, control variables,
                        and outcomes. Here, we split the sample into cousin pairs that reside in the same municipality and those that
                        reside in different municipalities. Robust standard errors are clustered on the older child's month of birth.
                        Significance levels: * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05 *** p < 0.01
Table B9: Effect of Older Sibling Being Born After Cutoff on Younger Sibling's ADHD Diag-
nosis, Conditional on Older Sibling Having ADHD Diagnosis

                                                      Younger Sibling's ADHD Diagnosis
                                                          (1)                    (2)
                                                      Main Sample            Age Diff  3
             Older sibling born after cutoff            0.0062                 -0.0059
             [Spillover Effect]                         (0.014)                (0.015)
             Younger sibling born after cutoff            -0.0378               -0.0114
             [Own Relative Age Effect]                     (0.017)              (0.026)
             Mean(Y)                                        0.210                0.203
             N                                             10,655                6,979
Notes: See the notes under Table 2 for more details about the sample, specifications, control variables, and
outcomes. In this table, the sample is additionally limited to sibling pairs in which the older sibling has an
ADHD diagnosis. Robust standard errors are clustered on the older sibling's month of birth.
Significance levels: * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05 *** p < 0.01




                                                     67
Table B10: Robustness of Main Results: Additional Controls and Quadratic Specifications

                                                    Younger siblings                 Younger cousins
                                                    (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)
                                                 Diagnoses         Drugs         Diagnoses          Drugs
  Panel A: Additional Controls
  Older sibling born after cutoff                -0.0038         -0.0034         -0.0046          -0.0035
  [Spillover Effect]                              (0.001)         (0.001)          (0.001)         (0.001)
  Younger sibling born after cutoff              -0.0156         -0.0164
  [Own Relative Age Effect]                        (0.002)         (0.001)
  Younger cousin born after cutoff                                               -0.0187         -0.0197
  [Own Relative Age Effect]                                                        (0.002)         (0.002)
  Mean(Y)                                          0.049           0.056            0.046           0.053
  N                                               271,388         271,388         208,437         208,437
  Panel B: Quadratic Polynomial in Running Variables
  Older sibling born after cutoff                -0.0031         -0.0065          -0.0028          -0.0015
  [Spillover Effect]                               (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.001)
  Younger sibling born after cutoff              -0.0188         -0.0159
  [Own Relative Age Effect]                        (0.003)         (0.003)
  Younger cousin born after cutoff                                               -0.0224         -0.0199
  [Own Relative Age Effect]                                                        (0.004)         (0.004)
  Mean(Y)                                          0.049           0.056            0.046           0.053
  N                                               271,388         271,388         208,437         208,437
Notes: Each column in each panel reports results from a separate regression. The first two columns present
results for younger siblings, while the second two columns present results for younger cousins. The outcomes
are indicators for any ADHD diagnoses and any ADHD drug claims, as noted in the column headers. All
regressions include the same controls as in the main specifications (see notes under Table 2). In Panel A, we
add the following additional control variables: indicators for each parent ever being married in the year of the
older sibling's birth or the following two years, and each parent's age and age squared in the year of the older
sibling's birth. In Panel B, we include quadratic polynomials in the running variables (month of birth relative
to January for each sibling). Robust standard errors are clustered on the older sibling's month of birth.
Significance levels: * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05 *** p < 0.01




                                                      68
Table B11: Robustness of Main Results: "Doughnut-RD" Dropping December and January
Births

                                                    Younger siblings                Younger cousins
                                                    (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)
                                                Diagnoses          Drugs        Diagnoses          Drugs
  Older sibling born after cutoff               -0.0081         -0.0052         -0.0072         -0.0073
  [Spillover Effect]                              (0.002)         (0.001)         (0.002)         (0.001)
  Younger sibling born after cutoff             -0.0159         -0.0162
  [Own Relative Age Effect]                       (0.002)         (0.001)
  Younger cousin born after cutoff                                              -0.0182         -0.0194
  [Own Relative Age Effect]                                                       (0.002)         (0.002)
  Mean(Y)                                          0.049           0.056           0.046           0.053
  N                                               228,737         228,737        175,699         175,699
Notes: Each column reports results from a separate regression. The first two columns present results for
younger siblings, while the second two columns present results for younger cousins. The outcomes are indicators
for any ADHD diagnoses and any ADHD drug claims, as noted in the column headers. All regressions include
the same controls as in the main specifications (see notes under Table 2). In this table, we omit all families
with older siblings who are born in December or January of any year. Robust standard errors are clustered
on the older sibling's month of birth.
Significance levels: * p < 0.1 ** p < 0.05 *** p < 0.01



 Table B12: Robustness of Main Results to Using the Wild Cluster Bootstrap for Inference

                                                    Younger siblings                Younger cousins
                                                    (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)
                                                Diagnoses         Drugs         Diagnoses          Drugs
  Older sibling born after cutoff               -0.0059         -0.0055         -0.0060          -0.0048
  [Spillover Effect]                             [0.0010]        [0.0040]        [0.0030]         [0.0250]
  Younger sibling born after cutoff             -0.0155         -0.0164
  [Own Relative Age Effect]                      [0.0000]        [0.0000]
  Younger cousin born after cutoff                                              -0.0187         -0.0198
  [Own Relative Age Effect]                                                      [0.0000]        [0.0000]
  Mean(Y)                                          0.049           0.056           0.046           0.053
  N                                               271,388         271,388        208,437         208,437
Notes: Each column reports results from a separate regression. The first two columns present results for
younger siblings, while the second two columns present results for younger cousins. The outcomes are indicators
for any ADHD diagnoses and any ADHD drug claims, as noted in the column headers. All regressions include
the same controls as in the main specifications (see notes under Table 2). In this table, p-values calculated
using the wild bootstrap method are reported in brackets.



                                                      69
