                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  HOW DO PHYSICIANS RESPOND TO MALPRACTICE ALLEGATIONS? EVIDENCE
               FROM FLORIDA EMERGENCY DEPARTMENTS

                                        Caitlin Carroll
                                       David M. Cutler
                                        Anupam Jena

                                      Working Paper 28330
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28330


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2021




We would like to thank Alice Chen, Lindsay Jacobs, Kosali Simon and Kathy Zeiler for serving
as discussants. We also thank seminar participants at the American Economic Association Annual
Meeting, the American Society of Health Economists Annual Meeting, the Electronic Health
Economics Colloquium, the Empirical Health Law Conference, Harvard Medical School, the
Minneapolis Federal Reserve, the Midwest Health Economics Conference, and the University of
Minnesota. Caitlin Carroll gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality T32 trainee program and the National Science Foundation
Graduate Research Fellowship. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Caitlin Carroll, David M. Cutler, and Anupam Jena. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How do Physicians Respond to Malpractice Allegations? Evidence from Florida Emergency
Departments
Caitlin Carroll, David M. Cutler, and Anupam Jena
NBER Working Paper No. 28330
January 2021
JEL No. I11,J44,K41

                                          ABSTRACT

A substantial literature has studied the influence of malpractice pressure on physician behavior.
However, these studies generally focus on malpractice pressure stemming from state laws that
govern liability exposure, which may be unknown or not salient to physicians. We test how
physicians respond to malpractice allegations made directly against them. Our sample is
Emergency Department physicians in Florida, where we have the universe of data on patients and
how they are treated along with a census of malpractice complaints. We find that physicians
oversee 9% fewer discharges after malpractice allegations and treat each discharge 4% more
expensively after an allegation. These effects are true for both allegations that result in money
paid and allegations which are dropped. Further, the increase in treatment is generalized, i.e., not
limited to patients with conditions similar to what the physician is reported for. The results
suggest significant, if modest, impacts of malpractice claims on medical practice.


Caitlin Carroll                                          Anupam Jena
University of Minnesota                                  Department of Health Care Policy
Department of Health Policy and Management               Harvard Medical School
420 Delaware Street SE, MMC 729                          180 Longwood Avenue, Door A
Minneapolis, MN 55455                                    Boston, MA 02115
carrollc@umn.edu                                         and NBER
                                                         jena@hcp.med.harvard.edu
David M. Cutler
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1875 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dcutler@harvard.edu
1       Introduction
The influence of malpractice liability on physician behavior has generated considerable de-
bate. While academic research has generally concluded that malpractice exposure has only a
modest effect on providers (Chandra, Jena and Seabury, 2013; CBO, 2019), the importance
of malpractice liability continues to attract attention among practitioners and policy makers
(Frakes and Gruber, 2019). The core empirical question underlying this debate is whether
malpractice liability leads to defensive medicine, wherein physicians alter their treatment
decisions for fear of being sued, not for expected medical benefit.
    Although defensive medicine has motivated a large empirical literature, existing research
focuses almost exclusively on physicians' responses to state-level malpractice reforms, specif-
ically caps on non-economic damage awards.1 The effects of these tort reforms, however, are
unlikely to capture the full impact of malpractice liability. Most physicians are not finan-
cially liable for malpractice damages (Zeiler et al., 2007) and evidence on the relationship
between damage caps and suit frequency is mixed (Mello and Kachalia, 2016); thus, chang-
ing damage limits may have little direct impact on practice.2 Moreover, not all physicians
know the malpractice environment in their state and state-level policies may not be salient
to physician decision-making. Empirical work shows that physicians' perceptions of liability
risk are not strongly correlated with state tort laws (Carrier et al., 2010).
    A different question is how physicians respond to direct accusations of malpractice. Under
this premise, the key issue is whether physicians' practice patterns are influenced by their
actual experience with malpractice liability, rather than the severity of potential sanctions
that are determined by state laws.3 Understanding how being accused of malpractice affects
practice is also important because malpractice allegations have uninsured costs - time and
emotional energy - that monetary payment by itself does not (Mello et al., 2010).
    In this paper, we test how physicians change their labor supply and treatment decisions
in response to accusations of malpractice made against them. Allegations of malpractice are
common. Approximately 75% of physicians will face a malpractice allegation during their
career and on average physicians spend 11% of their career with an open malpractice claim
(Jena et al., 2011). In our sample, 3% of emergency medicine physicians are accused of
    1
     See Mello and Kachalia (2016), Paik, Black and Hyman (2017) and CBO (2019) for reviews.
    2
     Even when physicians lose a malpractice claim, plaintiffs' awards are typically less than the insurance
limit. Premiums for malpractice insurance are community rated and do not rise based on personal malpractice
history. Premiums for hospital-based physicians are often the responsibility of the hospital.
   3
     A broader literature on deterrence has characterized these dynamics as general deterrence (response to
threat of punishment) and specific deterrence (response to experience of punishment); there is clear evidence
that risk perceptions are influenced by past experience, but less evidence that these perceptions relate to
policies that govern sanctions (Chalfin and McCrary, 2017).


                                                     2
malpractice per year and 25% are accused at some point during the eight-year study period.
    The primary challenge to studying the impact of malpractice allegations is that malprac-
tice claims may be endogenous to physician behavior (Jena et al., 2015). We address this
concern by leveraging quasi-random variation in the timing of malpractice allegations across
physicians. Malpractice claims are often unexpected: negligence rarely leads to malpractice
allegations and even appropriate care can trigger frivolous claims (Danzon, 1991; Studdert
et al., 2006). We exploit this variation to estimate the causal effect of malpractice allegations
in an event study, difference-in-differences (DD) design. We study physician practice pat-
terns in a four-year panel around the allegations, comparing physicians who were reported
for malpractice to unreported peers who were otherwise similar to the accused physicians.
Our control physicians do not necessarily differ in their propensity to be negligent, given im-
perfections in the operation of the malpractice system, but they do differ in their exposure
to malpractice allegations.
    Our data come from Emergency Department (ED) physicians in Florida. We combine
physician-level data on malpractice claims with the universe of ED discharges. Studying mal-
practice pressure in the ED has several advantages. First, uncertainty and risk surrounding
patient care are high in the ED relative to other settings, elevating concerns about mal-
practice allegations. Second, physician productivity is important in EDs, which have faced
increased crowding (IOM, 2006). Lastly, there is limited scope for patient demand responses
to malpractice in the ED, since patients rarely choose their ED physician. Thus, we can
isolate the impact of malpractice on physician decisions, separately from patient choice.
    We consider two broad margins of physician behavior: labor supply and treatment in-
tensity. We measure labor supply by the volume of patients seen and where the physician
practices (e.g., does the physician continue to work in the same hospital where they were
reported?), then measure treatment intensity by services provided. We find that physicians
decrease their labor supply in response to malpractice allegations and this reduction is per-
sistent over time. Overall, physicians who are accused of malpractice oversee 9.3% fewer
discharges after malpractice allegations, relative to their unaccused peers. This decrease in
labor supply is driven by responses on the intensive margin; specifically, physicians reduce
the number of discharges they oversee but maintain practice in the state. However, we also
find that accused physicians are more likely to stop practicing at the hospital where the
alleged negligence occurred and move their practice to observably similar hospitals.
    We then examine how physicians adjust their treatment intensity among their remaining
patients. Malpractice allegations lead to an increase in treatment intensity, with reported
physicians increasing costs per discharge by 4.3% after an allegation, relative to their peers.
There is no evidence that these results are driven by differential selection of patients after


                                               3
malpractice allegations. We find that increases in intensity among accused physicians are
concentrated in laboratory spending, consistent with a larger role for malpractice pressure in
providers' use of diagnostic care, where errors of commission are unlikely to result in injury
(Baicker, Fisher and Chandra, 2007; Frakes, 2015; Frakes and Gruber, 2019).
    To the extent that malpractice accusations help physicians correct errors they were mak-
ing, one would expect physicians' reactions to be related to the alleged error in the treatment
of the harmed patient. However, our results show that physicians change their behavior gen-
erally, rather than concentrating their behavior changes among claimant-similar patients.
For example, a physician accused of malpractice for treatment of a pregnant woman would
treat all their patients more intensively after the allegation, not only pregnant patients. Ad-
ditionally, physicians have similar responses to allegations regardless of how much money is
paid, including claims that were resolved in the physicians' favor. Thus, our results suggest
that the additional care provided after a malpractice allegation may not stem from an intent
to correct clinical decision-making, which could be welfare enhancing. Finally, we look to
see whether the responses to malpractice allegations are concentrated among potential "bad
apples" - physicians accused repeatedly of malpractice. Contrary to the theory, we find
that responses among physicians accused multiple times are no larger than responses among
physicians accused just once.
    Our results are consistent with defensive medicine but are not definitive. Defensive
medicine is generally defined as providing additional care in response to malpractice concerns
where the value of the care is less than the cost (Kessler and McClellan, 1996). We do not
have a way to assess the value of all the additional care provided. However, we can examine
specific types of care that other researchers have characterized as high-value and low-value
in emergency settings. For example, diagnostic lumbar scans have been shown to be low-
value for patients presenting with uncomplicated low back pain (Schwartz et al., 2014), while
chest scans are valuable for patients with a history of cancer or chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. We find that increases in treatment intensity after malpractice allegations are not
limited to high-value services.
    Our results have implications for system-level spending, which we take up in a discussion
section. Our analysis suggests that aggregate spending among reported physicians decreases
after malpractice allegations. However, seeing fewer patients does not have the same social
cost implications as delivering additional services. Even when reported physicians reduce
their labor supply, patients not treated by the accused physician will be seen by other
physicians, assuming the same number of patients come to the ED. Thus, the system-level
impact is driven by the increase in treatment intensity among reported physicians and by
any difference in spending patterns between reported physicians and the unreported peers


                                              4
who care for the reallocated patients. In back-of-the-envelope calculations, we estimate that
the net effect of all allegations is a modest, 1% increase in ED spending.
    This paper is related to several literatures. First, we build on a large body of work
studying the influence of malpractice liability on physician behavior. This research has
shown that laws governing the expected consequences of malpractice liability, such as damage
caps, have modest effects on aggregate spending and little effect on the overall supply of
physicians. As discussed previously, the effects of state-level tort reforms are unlikely to
capture the full influence of malpractice liability. Moreover, these estimates will understate
the effect of malpractice liability if malpractice pressure causes physicians to simultaneously
increase spending per patient and see fewer patients.4 The literature is aware of these
phenomena (Dubay, Kaestner and Waidmann, 2001); they are termed "positive" (providing
more care) and "negative" (seeing fewer patients) defensive medicine, but they are rarely
studied separately. One advantage of our data is the ability to separately identify the effect
of malpractice liability on these two margins. Relative to the tort reform literature, we show
large behavioral changes among accused physicians.
    Our results also build on a growing literature studying malpractice liability outside of tort
reforms. This work has leveraged variation in liability from military immunity (Frakes and
Gruber, 2019) and jury verdicts (Lakdawalla and Seabury, 2012). Closely related work has
studied the effect of malpractice allegations against obstetricians, which the literature notes
may capture both supply responses of physicians and changes in patient demand.5 Our work
isolates provider supply decisions, showing robust evidence of positive and negative responses
to allegations, and sheds light on the mechanisms behind changes in physician behavior.
    More broadly, our paper relates to a large literature on physician behavior and variation
in practice styles. This literature has studied the influence of physicians' financial incentives
(Clemens and Gottlieb, 2014), diagnostic decision-making (Abaluck et al., 2016; Currie and
Macleod, 2017), practice environment (Chandra and Staiger, 2007; Molitor, 2018), beliefs
about treatment (Cutler et al., 2019) and response to new information (Cutler, Huckman and
Landrum, 2004; Dranove et al., 2004; Kolstad, 2013; Shurtz, 2013; Shapiro, 2017; Sarsons,
2019). Our results complement this literature by addressing differences in practice style due
to differential exposure to the malpractice system.
   4
     DD estimates of changes in aggregate spending surrounding state tort laws will likewise underestimate
the impact of malpractice liability if physicians' perceptions of liability are informed by the experiences of
colleagues in other states.
   5
     This literature has found minimal effect of allegations on cesarean section rates (Grant and McInnes,
2004; Dranove and Watanabe, 2010; Gimm, 2010; Durrance and Hankins, 2018). Changes in the volume
of deliveries have been interpreted as a supply response (Gimm, 2010) and a demand response (Dranove,
Ramanarayanan and Watanabe, 2012). Recent work has also studied the association between physician labor
supply and the number of paid malpractice claims (Studdert et al., 2019).



                                                      5
   The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides background on malpractice claims and
Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 discusses our empirical strategy. Section 5 describes
our labor supply results. Section 6 describes our treatment intensity results. Section 7
explores heterogeneous responses to malpractice allegations across claim and physician char-
acteristics. Section 8 discusses the aggregate impact of malpractice reports and concludes.


2       Background on Malpractice Allegations
Malpractice allegations begin with a patient perceiving an injury. Importantly, patient
injuries are unlikely to prompt immediate concerns about malpractice allegations. First,
physicians are often not aware of the patient injury at the time of treatment. This lag is
especially relevant in the context of the Emergency Department (ED), where many patient
injuries manifest after the patient has left the provider's care.6 In addition, patient injuries
do not necessarily imply physician negligence. Moreover, even in cases of negligence, the
majority of injuries go unreported; less than 2% of patients harmed by provider negligence
pursue a malpractice claim (Danzon, 1991; Localio et al., 1991).7
     When a patient reports an injury as malpractice, there is often a substantial lag between
the injury and the report. Malpractice reports are not filed until a patient successfully
recruits legal representation. Injured patients initiate malpractice claims by retaining a
personal injury lawyer, who consults with an independent medical examiner to determine if
there are grounds to pursue the claim. If there is sufficient evidence to build a case, the lawyer
contacts the hospital and the physicians involved in the case, who in turn report the contact
to their malpractice insurer (Dranove and Watanabe, 2010). This report represents the first
time a physician knows with certainty that she will be facing a malpractice claim. In our
sample, malpractice reports occur on average five quarters after the patient injury (Figure 1,
Panel A). Almost all malpractice reports are filed within two years of the alleged negligence,
consistent with statute of limitations laws in Florida (Florida Statute 95.11(4)(b)).
     Once a report is filed, malpractice allegations are slow to resolve (Jena et al., 2012).
Malpractice reports typically prompt settlement talks between the claimant's attorney, the
physician's malpractice insurer and the hospital's risk managers. The physician is sometimes
present for these negotiations, but rarely participates. In Florida, plaintiffs in medical mal-
practice cases must notify the defendants of an intent to file suit at least 90 days prior to the
filing; this notification prompts a pre-suit discovery phase. In the event that a suit is filed,
    6
     For example, one malpractice claim in our sample reads, "patient was diagnosed with a migraine and
discharged. approximately [sic] 9 days later the patient was [diagnosed] with a cerebral hemorrhage."
   7
     Approximately 40% of malpractice claims result in no payment to the claimant (Studdert et al., 2006).



                                                    6
settlement talks continue as both parties prepare for a trial.8 The average time from report
to final disposition is over two years in our sample (Figure 1, Panel B).


3       Data

3.1      Data Sources
Our analysis relies on two primary datasets. First, we use administrative discharge data from
Florida's Agency for Health Care Administration (AHCA). These data contain the universe
of ED discharges in Florida between 2005 and the third quarter of 2013. ED visits that result
in inpatient stays at the same hospital, rather than discharges, are not included in this data.9
Each discharge record identifies the attending physician as well as the facility where the care
was delivered. We additionally observe year and quarter time stamps, patient demographics,
diagnoses and procedures, and hospital charges across different service types. Procedures
are identified primarily through documentation of Current Procedural Terminology (CPT)
codes; this documentation changed in 2010 when the AHCA released a new version of the
data.10
    We link the discharge data with additional information on physician and hospital charac-
teristics. Physician characteristics are from the Florida Department of Health Practitioner
Profile and from Doximity, a networking service for medical professionals which has assem-
bled a comprehensive database of physician characteristics similar to the American Medical
Association Physician Masterfile; these datasets provide snapshots of provider characteristics
at a point in time, including specialty, tenure and gender. Hospital characteristics are from
the Dartmouth Atlas, the Florida AHCA and the Impact Files from the Centers for Medicare
& Medicaid Services. These datasets provide annual information on hospital characteristics,
including cost-to-charge ratios, teaching status and Hospital Referral Region (HRR). We fur-
ther use the discharge data to identify (1) safety net hospitals, defined as facilities with top
quartile shares of uninsured and Medicaid discharges, and (2) high-volume hospitals, defined
as facilities with top quartile discharge volumes. Finally, we link discharges to the Agency for
    8
     In a small minority of claims, the suit is filed before a report is issued to the malpractice insurer. This
occurs in under 3% of our sample.
   9
     These visits are included in the Florida inpatient data. It is not possible to follow patients across hospital
settings. Discharge data does include patients who die in the ED and those discharged to another facility.
  10
     In the older data release, hospitals were required to report a principal CPT code, typically an evaluation
and management code, and had the option to report "other" CPT codes. About 20% of hospitals reported
no radiology CPT codes. In the newer data release, the principal CPT field was eliminated. Evaluation and
management CPT codes were reported in separate, required fields, and the hospital had the option to report
"other" CPT codes. The 20% of hospitals not reporting radiology CPT codes prior to the change saw large
jumps in radiology coding (Figure A15).


                                                        7
Healthcare Research and Quality's (AHRQ) Clinical Classifications Software (CCS), which
categorizes discharges into related clinical groups according to listed diagnoses.
    Our second primary dataset is information about physicians' malpractice histories. We
use administrative data from the Florida Office of Insurance Regulation containing malprac-
tice claims that were closed in Florida between 1994 and 2016. Each record includes the
identity of the accused physician as well as the hospital where the alleged negligence occurred.
When a single malpractice claim involves multiple physicians, we observe separate records
for each physician. We additionally observe the date that the patient injury occurred and the
date that the alleged malpractice was first reported. The patient injury date indicates when
the alleged negligence occurred, even if the injury manifested after treatment had completed.
The data also include a free text description of the patient injury. We use this description
to categorize injuries into clinical groups. For example, we construct a "head" clinical group
including claims with the key phrases such as "headache" and "stroke" in the free text field
(Figure A1). See Appendix for more detail. Each record also indicates whether the claim
resulted in a lawsuit, was settled out of court, was resolved in favor of the patient or the
physician, and the amount of any financial compensation that was dispensed. Importantly,
while our data cover all claims that resolved in favor of the patient, claims that resolved in
favor of the provider are included only if there was a court approved settlement or if the
malpractice insurer incurred costs of at least $5,000 in the course of investigating the claim
(Florida Statute 627.912(4)). As a result, the data are likely to omit allegations that were
abandoned early in the claim development or were easily refuted by malpractice insurance
companies.11


3.2     Dependent Variable Definitions
Our first set of dependent variables focus on physician labor supply. We define total labor
supply for each physician as the volume of ED discharges overseen in a given quarter. We
then decompose total labor supply across extensive and intensive margins. On the exten-
sive margin, we study whether physicians maintain any ED practice in the state, defined as
overseeing one or more discharges. By this definition, discontinuation of ED practice indi-
cates a final exit from Florida ED work and is analogous to retirement.12 On the intensive
margin, we study the total volume of discharges that a physician oversees in a given quarter,
  11
     We are unable to determine the share of claims omitted due to this restriction. A claimant and their
attorney might abandon a case if they discover new information that decreases the expected value of the
claim; a physician's policy limits could be too low to justify filing a suit, for example. Attorneys are generally
paid on a contingency basis and thus face incentives to pursue claims with high potential damages.
  12
     As a counterexample, if a physician practices in the state, oversees no discharges for two quarters and
then resumes practicing, this does not count as a discontinuation of practice.


                                                        8
conditional on maintaining any ED practice in the state. We additionally measure physi-
cian labor supply at different locations, tracking physician discharge volumes at the hospital
where the patient injury occurred (hereafter the "injury hospital") and the HRR where the
injury occurred (hereafter the "injury region").13
    Our second set of dependent variables focus on treatment intensity. Our data come from
hospital discharge records and include hospital charges, which we adjust using hospitals'
annual cost-to-charge ratios in order to capture a measure of resource utilization.14 We
cannot observe physician charges. We study total costs at the discharge level, as well as
costs in the following service categories: laboratory, radiology, and general emergency room
(ER) services. These service categories are defined using revenue codes from the UB-04.15
We report costs in 2009 dollars, adjusting for inflation using the Producer Price Index.
    We further measure treatment intensity through rates of diagnostic radiology testing. We
first calculate the prevalence of two low-value imaging tests: lumbar imaging among patients
presenting with uncomplicated low back pain and head imaging among patients presenting
with uncomplicated headache.16 We also calculate the rate of one high-value imaging test:
chest CT scans and x-rays for patients presenting with shortness of breath or chest pain who
also have diagnoses of cancer or COPD. Diagnostic imaging tests are identified using ICD-9
codes and CPT codes.


3.3     Sample Construction
Our sample is Emergency Medicine (EM) specialists, who provide the majority of care in
the ED (Figure A2). Because our interest is in tracking the effect of malpractice pressure
over time, we restrict our sample to EM specialists who practiced in the ED for at least
four quarters and oversaw at least 100 discharges during our study period. For data quality
purposes, we further exclude physicians if they oversaw 3,000 discharges or more in any
quarter. After these restrictions, there are approximately 2,700 EM specialists who practiced
  13
     We are able to identify the injury hospital for 96% of the reported physicians in our main sample.
  14
     We are able to merge cost-to-charge ratios for about 90% of hospital-years. For hospitals where cost-to-
charge ratios were missing for only some years, we impute missing values as the average cost-to-charge ratio
at the hospital in the non-missing years. For hospitals with missing cost-to-charge ratios in all years, we use
the average annual cost-to-charge ratio among all non-missing observations. We assess the sensitivity of our
results to the cost-to-charge adjustment in Figure A14.
  15
     General ER services encompass the 045X revenue codes. ER charges depend, for example, on whether
the hospital provided EMTALA screening services only or services beyond screening.
  16
     We use definitions of low-value care from Schwartz et al. (2014) and the Choosing Wisely campaign.
Lumbar imaging includes x-rays, CT scans and MRIs; the population of patients presenting with low back
pain excludes those with diagnoses that would warrant lumbar imaging, for example cancer, trauma, IV
drug abuse and neurological trauma. Head imaging includes CT scans and MRIs; the population of patients
presenting with headache excludes those with comorbidities that would warrant an image such as cancer,
head trauma and altered mental status.


                                                      9
at some point during our study sample. Collectively, they oversaw over 43 million discharges.
More information about sample construction is available in the Appendix.
    We construct two cohorts of physicians to study the effect of malpractice allegations.
To begin, we combine the discharge data and closed claims data to identify EM physicians
who experienced a malpractice claim. Approximately 680 physicians were reported for mal-
practice during our study period. To create a balanced panel, we restrict our analysis to
physicians who we can follow for at least two years before and after the report.17 Function-
ally, this restriction limits our focus to reports that are filed between the first quarter of 2007
and the third quarter of 2011 (Figure A3). Importantly, this restriction does not imply that
physicians must provide care in the ED continually for four years to be included in our sam-
ple. Because our data contain the universe of ED discharges, we can observe quarters when
physicians oversaw zero discharges and count them toward the four-year sample restriction.
Once a physician appears in the data, we track their labor supply until the end of the study
period, including quarters where they did not oversee any discharges. This approach allows
us to capture extensive margin labor supply changes such as exits from Florida ED practice.
    We construct a pool of potential controls who were similar to the reported physicians
prior to their malpractice allegations but were not reported themselves.18 For each reported
physician, we select controls from the group of unreported physicians who were practicing
in the ED during the same time period. In addition, the pool of potential controls is limited
to physicians who we can observe for at least four years that are contemporaneous with a
reported physician.
    One challenge in selecting controls is that reported physicians had different practice pat-
terns than their unreported peers, even prior to the report. Specifically, reported physicians
tended to oversee more discharges per quarter (Figure A4). We address this challenge in
two ways. First, we drop both reported and unreported physicians with average baseline
discharge volumes below the tenth percentile of volumes among reported physicians. For re-
ported physicians, we calculate average discharge volumes using data in the two years prior
to the report. For unreported physicians, we calculate average discharge volumes during
their eligible match period.19
    Second, we use a propensity score match to choose controls who had similar characteristics
as the reported physicians. We perform a two-to-one caliper match with replacement based
on pre-report discharge volume trends, specifically the average linear trend in the two years
  17
     If a physician is reported twice during our study period, we use the date of the first report.
  18
     Physicians who were reported prior to our study period are included in the potential controls.
  19
     To mirror the restriction on reported physicians, we compute a rolling two-year average of discharge
volumes in each quarter of the eligible period. If a physician is match eligible in multiple periods, we take
the average across all eligible periods.



                                                     10
before the report. The match also includes the following characteristics: Medical Doctor
(MD) versus Doctor of Osteopathy, tenure, gender, hospital type and hospital region.20
Hospital type variables include an indicator for teaching hospitals and safety net hospitals.
In cases where physicians practice at multiple hospitals, characteristics are based on the
hospital where the physician had the plurality of their practice. To ensure that control
physicians were practicing contemporaneously with the reported physician, we require an
exact match on the date of the (real or placebo) report. Thus, we obtain a control group of
physicians who had similar characteristics and exactly the same quarter of exposure as the
reported physicians.


3.4     Descriptive Statistics of Reported Physicians and Controls
Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of reported and unreported physicians in the pre-
report period, before and after the propensity score match. For reported physicians, statis-
tics are based on the quarter prior to the report.21 For unreported physicians, statistics
are calculated based on data from the chronological midpoint of their practice. The first
set of columns show that reported physicians were more experienced than the unreported
physicians, less likely to be female, more likely to be in central Florida and less likely to be
in teaching hospitals. 25% of EM specialists in our sample were reported for malpractice
during our study period, implying that approximately 3% of EM specialists in Florida faced
malpractice claims in a given year. This estimate is conservative relative to existing litera-
ture (Jena et al., 2011), likely because our closed claims database omits certain claims, as
described previously.
    Reported physicians oversaw more discharges than unreported physicians in the baseline
period. A natural question is how malpractice risk changes as physicians see more patients.
In our sample, the rate of malpractice allegations is relatively stable as physician discharge
volumes increase, consistent with a mechanical increase in malpractice risk from treating
additional patients (Figure A5).22
    The second set of columns describe the balanced panel of physicians that enter into the
  20
      We control for tenure quartiles during the eligible period and control for region using broad location
bins: northern HRRs, central HRRs and southern HRRs.
   21
      We cannot observe any pre-report data for physicians reported in the first quarter of 2005, so we do not
include them in this table.
   22
      Figure A5 does not include very low-volume physicians, who have high rates of malpractice. Excluding
these low volume physicians, we estimate a statistically insignificant relationship between discharge volume
and the rate of malpractice allegations. More generally, theory is ambiguous on the relationship between
discharge volume and malpractice risk. Rates of malpractice allegations could decrease as volume increases
if physicians learn by doing and are less likely to make mistakes (Hannan et al., 2003). Conversely, rates of
malpractice could increase with discharge volume if physicians change their treatment patterns when they
are short on time or overworked (Chan, 2018).


                                                     11
propensity score match. We require physicians in this panel to have two years of data before
and after the report (real or placebo), reducing the number of physicians in our sample by
approximately half (Figure A3). Differences between reported and unreported physicians
were similar in the balanced panel, relative to the full sample of EM specialists.23
    The third set of columns describe the matched analytic sample. The propensity score
match identifies controls for all but one reported physician.24 Physician covariates are well
balanced across the treatment and control group and we find no statistically significant
difference in the covariate means across the reported and unreported physicians: average
tenure is similar across the two cohorts, as is the distribution of physicians by gender and
across hospital characteristics. Discharge volume levels remain different across reported and
unreported physicians after the match but volume trends are well matched; we discuss this
topic further in Section 5.25


3.5     Descriptive Statistics of Malpractice Claims
Table 2 describes the malpractice allegations levied against physicians in our sample. Panel A
describes physicians' malpractice histories. Consistent with previous work, multiple reports
were fairly common (Studdert et al., 2016). Of the reported physicians in our sample, 26%
had faced a malpractice allegation in the past and 29% faced an additional allegation after
the initial report in our sample. The full distribution of reports per physician is plotted in
Figure A6.
    A natural question is whether physicians who experience multiple allegations are different
from other providers, perhaps providing lower quality care (Studdert et al., 2019). We cannot
address this question directly, but we can observe the characteristics of the complaints against
physicians with single and multiple reports. In Figure A7, we compare the initial reports
among physicians who go on to have multiple claims to reports among physicians with a
single claim. We find few differences across the groups; initial reports among physicians
with multiple claims had similar shares of suit filings, payments, and permanent injuries as
reports among physicians with a single claim.26
  23
      One exception is average costs per discharge, which were lower among reported physicians in the full
sample and higher among reported physicians in the balanced panel, although neither difference is statistically
significant. This change results from excluding physicians with low baseline discharge volumes (described
previously), who tend to have high costs per discharge.
   24
      Since we select controls with replacement, the unreported physicians in Table 1 can match to multiple
reported physicians.
   25
      We do not match on discharge volume levels explicitly because matching on the baseline value of an
outcome variable can introduce regression to the mean into the analysis (Daw and Hatfield, 2018).
   26
      Ex ante, the direction of this relationship is not clear. To the extent that multiple reports signal low
quality care provision, the severity or negligence of initial claims among physicians with multiple reports
could be higher than reports among physicians with a single claim. Conversely, since physicians must survive


                                                      12
    Panel B describes how malpractice claims developed through the litigation process. The
majority of reports resulted in a suit filing. In cases that included a suit, filings tended to
happen relatively quickly after the report; nearly all suits were filed within two quarters of
the report, while final dispositions occurred slowly over time (Figure A8). The majority of
reports resulted in a payment to the claimant, with an average payment of over $200,000.27
Panel C describes the timing and duration of malpractice claims in our sample. As discussed
previously, malpractice reports are slow to resolve. The claims in our sample took nearly 3
years to reach their final disposition if a suit was filed and over a year if no suit was filed.
    The bottom half of Table 2 describes the patient injuries that prompted malpractice
reports in our sample. Panel D shows the distribution of patient injuries across clinical
categories. The most common injuries are related to chest, head, trauma, back and abdom-
inal conditions. While some clinical injury types occurred in proportion to the frequency
of related discharges, others are more common than discharge volumes would suggest (Fig-
ure A9). Reported abdominal injuries, for example, occurred in proportion to the number
of patients presenting to the ED with an abdominal condition, while reported head injuries
occurred more frequently. Panel E describes the severity of patient injuries. The reports in
our sample tended to be serious: approximately 80% involved a permanent injury.
    Panel F shows the characteristics of hospitals where malpractice reports originated. Ap-
proximately 5% of malpractice reports occurred at teaching hospitals, proportional to the
frequency of discharges in that setting (Figure A10, Panel C). About 40% of reports occurred
at high volume hospitals and 26% occurred in safety net hospitals, also proportional to the
frequency of discharges in these locations (Figure A10, Panels A and B).28 Our finding on
safety net hospitals is consistent with prior literature, which generally concludes that low-
income patients are not more likely to sue for malpractice than high-income patients, despite
physicians' perceptions to the contrary (Burstin et al., 1993; McClellan et al., 2012).
their first malpractice report in order to have a second, the severity of initial claims among physicians with
multiple reports might be mechanically lower. An alternative explanation is that plaintiffs' attorneys are
adept at picking winning cases, such that claims against high and low quality physicians are similar on
observables.
  27
     We measure payments in 2009 dollars, adjusting for inflation using the year of the disposition and using
the Producer Price Index for consistency with our analysis of ED costs. The difference between the average
claimant payment among all physicians ($361,000) versus our matched sample is driven by one report with
an unusually high payout.
  28
     High volume hospitals account for a relatively high share of discharges by definition.




                                                     13
4      Methods
We estimate the effect of malpractice reports on physician behavior using an event-study,
difference-in-differences (DD) approach. The treatment group includes physicians who were
reported for malpractice during our study period. The control group consists of observably
similar physicians who practiced contemporaneously in the ED but did not experience a
report during the study period, as selected by our propensity score match. This empirical
strategy allows us to leverage the quasi-random timing of malpractice allegations while also
controlling for any secular trends in practice patterns that occurred during our study period.
We estimate the following specification:


             8                                      8
    Yjt =          k  1(k qtrs since report)jt +          k  1(k qtrs since report)jt  Reportedj
            k=-8                                   k=-8                                              (1)
            k=-1                                   k=-1

            + T enurejt + j + t +      jt


where Yjt measures labor supply outcomes for physician j in quarter t. j are a set of
physician fixed effects, t are year-quarter fixed effects,  measure the time-varying effects
of physician tenure, and jt are error terms that allow for correlation between observations
from the same physician.29 The coefficients of interest, k , measure the effect of malpractice
reports in the eight quarters before and after the allegation. The quarter before the report
serves as the omitted category.30 We include a set of event time indicators that apply to all
physicians (k ), as well as the set of indicators that apply only to the reported physicians
(k ). This approach gives the k a traditional, DD interpretation and addresses the concern
that trends in physician practice patterns around a report cannot be fully explained by
tenure, calendar time and physician fixed effects. In particular, if a physician is reported in
time t, she is mechanically more likely to have practiced medicine in times T  t than times
T > t, since the physician must have been practicing at the time of the precipitating injury.
The event time indicators that are common to reported and unreported physicians account
for such mechanical effects.
    In the course of our analysis, we estimate two variants of Equation 1. First, for brevity
we specify a regression to estimate the overall, pre-post effect of malpractice reports, rather
than estimating the effect separately for each quarter.31 Second, to estimate the impact
  29
     We group tenure into five-year bins.
  30
     The k = 0 quarter is a partial exposure period. Physicians who experience reports between January 1,
2009 and March 31, 2009, for example, all have k = 0 in the first quarter of 2009.
  31
     Yjt =   P ost +   P ost  Reported + T enurejt + j + t + jt


                                                     14
of malpractice allegations on treatment intensity, we run regressions at the discharge level,
rather than the physician-quarter level. This unit of analysis allows us to estimate changes
in average costs per discharge, as opposed to total costs per period, and to include additional
controls for patient characteristics that may influence treatment intensity: reason for visiting
the ED, age, race/ethnicity, gender, insurance status and weekend care.32
    We model costs using a log transformation to account for skewness. For service categories
such as laboratory or radiology where costs can take a zero value, we employ two-part
models, estimating the probability of receiving any care and then the level of costs conditional
on treatment provision. We winsorize costs at the 99th percentile within each presenting
condition CCS group to minimize the influence of outliers.
    For our analyses of diagnostic imaging, we run regressions at the discharge level and also
include hospital fixed effects interacted with an indicator for the new data version (2010
forward) to account for the change in CPT code reporting, as discussed previously. We
further exclude hospitals with large increases in radiology coding across the new and old
data versions.33 In our main analysis, we exclude hospitals with (1) a 20+ percentage point
increase in radiology coding rates or (2) a baseline radiology coding rate of under 1% in the
old data, although we run sensitivity checks on that sample restriction (Figures A15 and
A16).


5      Effects of Malpractice Reports on Physician Labor
       Supply
We begin by studying the effect of malpractice reports on physician labor supply. Figure 2
plots physicians' total discharge volumes before and after the report. In Panel A, we compare
unadjusted discharge volumes per quarter for reported and unreported physicians. In Panel
B, we plot DD coefficients from Equation 1 (k ), which indicate the impact of the malpractice
report k quarters after it occurs.
   Malpractice reports had a large and persistent effect on physician labor supply. Prior to
the malpractice allegations, reported physicians oversaw approximately 100 more discharges
per quarter than unreported physicians. Discharge volumes were relatively stable for both
reported and unreported physicians in the pre-report period. After the reports were filed,
labor supply patterns of reported physicians diverged sharply from the controls. Discharge
  32
      For patient covariates, we control for the reason for ED visit with CCS condition bins. We include the
following age bins: 0-4, 5-17, 18-25, ten-year bins covering ages 25-84, and a bin for 85+. Controls for patient
race and ethnicity include indicators for white non-Hispanic and black non-Hispanic.
   33
      We assess changes in the rate of any radiology coding, not just the diagnostic radiology tests in our
analysis.


                                                      15
volumes among reported physicians decreased by approximately 75 discharges per quarter
within 6 months of the report, and remained at this new, lower level for the remainder
of the study period. In contrast, average discharge volumes among unreported physicians
remained stable throughout the study period. These results are summarized in Table 3, which
documents the overall, pre-post effect of malpractice reports on physician labor supply. In
column 1, we present estimates from our baseline model, analogous to the specification in
Figure 2. Consistent with the visual evidence, we find that malpractice reports led to a
reduction in labor supply of 78 discharges per quarter, or 9.3%.
    We test the robustness of our results in columns 2 and 3 of Table 3. In column 2, we
assess whether our results are influenced by the timing of other key events in the claim
development: the patient injury, suit filing if relevant, and final disposition of the case. For
reported physicians, these analyses are based on actual dates in the claim development;
for matched controls, we simulate dates to mirror the elapsed time between the events and
the report for the matched reported physician. Our results are largely unchanged when we
include controls for these developments. We estimate a statistically significant decrease of
68 discharges per quarter after the report and estimate statistically insignificant impacts
of other claim events. We find a relatively large and positive effect of the final disposition,
although it is imprecisely estimated; non-parametric event-study results suggest this is driven
by a recovery in labor supply immediately following the disposition (Figure A11).34
    In column 3, we test the robustness of our results to including physician-specific time
trends. This specification accounts for any differential trends between the reported and un-
reported physicians, but can over-correct for time-varying treatment effects (Wolfers, 2006;
Goodman-Bacon, 2019). We find that our estimates are largely unchanged using this spec-
ification, estimating a 9.2% decrease in discharge volumes. Further robustness checks are
available in the Appendix (Figure A12); we draw similar conclusions if we re-run our propen-
sity score match (1) with a stricter restriction on baseline volume, (2) without matching on
baseline volume trends and (3) if we select controls using a one-to-one coarsened exact match
(Iacus, King and Porro, 2012).


5.1     Understanding the Decline in Physician Labor Supply
One possible driver of the labor supply decline is risk avoidance behaviors by physicians. ED
physicians provide care to patients with a variety of clinical conditions, ranging from simple
  34
     Figure A11 estimates changes in labor supply patterns surrounding the patient injury, suit filing and
claim disposition. To model the effect of the patient injury, we re-estimate our propensity score model to
choose control physicians based on characteristics in the quarter before the injury. To model the effect of the
suit and the disposition, we use the main analytic sample in our original propensity score model, imputing
suit and disposition dates for unreported physicians based on their matched reported physician.


                                                      16
ailments such as sprained ankles to high risk conditions such as chest pain. To the extent
that physicians want to minimize uncertainty in response to liability pressure, malpractice
reports may prompt physicians to avoid patients with high-risk clinical conditions, where an
adverse outcome is more likely. In EDs where physicians assume responsibility for patients
at their own discretion, reported physicians may choose to ignore patients who present with
high risk clinical conditions, leaving these patients in the queue to be cared for by their peers
(Chang and Obermeyer, 2020). In EDs where physicians are assigned patients in rotation, a
potential strategy for avoiding complicated patients is to admit them to the inpatient setting,
transferring the risk of care provision to inpatient providers. Because our data include only
ED discharges, as discussed previously, an increase in admission rates by reported physicians
would appear as a decrease in ED discharges.35
    We test for risk-avoidance behavior by assessing whether physicians decreased their dis-
charge volumes differentially for patients diagnosed with low risk, high risk and uncertain
risk clinical conditions. The idea is that a change in inpatient admission rates will have
larger effects on high or uncertain risk clinical conditions, relative to low acuity conditions
that are inappropriate for inpatient care. Likewise, avoiding patients who present in the
queue with high risk clinical conditions will also result in a decrease in high risk discharges.
    We define low risk conditions to include patients under 80 years old with primary di-
agnoses of minor injuries, minor infections and back pain.36 High risk discharges include
patients with diagnoses of pneumonia, coronary atherosclerosis, cardiac dysrhythmias, con-
gestive heart failure, acute cerebrovascular disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
chest pain, urinary tract infection, and skin and subcutaneous tissue infections and also
include all patients over 80 years old. Uncertain risk conditions include abdominal pain,
headache, and other "ill-defined conditions" as identified by the AHRQ CCS. Admission
rates for patients with low risk, uncertain risk and high risk conditions are 2%, 7% and 39%,
respectively.37 Our results are in Table 4, Panel A. Overall, we find little evidence of clinical
risk avoidance. Malpractice reports led to statistically similar decreases in discharge volume
of 9%, 12% and 9% for low, uncertain and high risk conditions, respectively.
    A second issue to understand is whether physicians reduce practice or leave practice
entirely. In Panels B and C, we decompose the decrease in discharge volume into extensive
  35
      We cannot calculate changes in physician-specific admission rates in our data. Because the Florida
inpatient data lists the attending physician overseeing inpatient care, and the Florida ED data lists the
attending physician overseeing ED care, it is not possible to track admissions using physician IDs. As
discussed previously, we likewise cannot track patients across hospital settings.
   36
      Low risk conditions include the following CCS conditions: other upper respiratory infection, spondylosis,
joint disorders, fracture of upper limb, sprains and strains, open wounds of head, neck and trunk, open wounds
of extremities, superficial injury, burns, and poisoning by nonmedicinal substances.
   37
      Authors' calculations from HCUPnet; does not account for the age restriction on low-risk conditions.



                                                      17
margin and intensive margin effects. Panel B shows the impact of malpractice reports on the
probability of maintaining any ED practice after an allegation. There is no evidence that
physicians left practice in response to malpractice reports.
    We further study shifts in physician practice location, testing whether reported physicians
maintained practice in the same hospital or geographic region in which the initial injury
occurred. We model both location shifts conditional on maintaining ED practice in the state.
For reported physicians, these analyses are based on the actual location of the patient injury
in their claim; for matched controls, we define the injury hospital and region according to the
hospital where they had the plurality of their practice during the quarter of the simulated
patient injury. We find modest evidence that physicians moved to a new geographic market
(change = 3.1%; standard error = 1.8%). Further, reported physicians were more likely to
switch hospitals; the probability of practicing at the injury hospital fell by 5.2% percentage
points after a malpractice report overall, with larger changes by the end of the study period
(Panel A of Figure 3).
    In Panel C of Table 4, we model changes in physicians' labor supply on the intensive
margin, estimating changes in discharge volumes conditional on maintaining practice. Our
overall estimate of labor supply reductions is entirely driven by a sizable intensive margin re-
sponse to liability pressure. After malpractice allegations, reported physicians decreased their
labor supply by about 80 patients per quarter on the intensive margin. We also find large
decreases in discharge volumes at the injury hospital, conditional on maintaining practice in
that location. These intensive margin labor supply patterns are plotted non-parametrically
in Panel B of Figure 3.
    One question raised by our results is whether physicians chose to reduce their workloads
in response to increased malpractice risk, or if they faced reduced demand from hospitals
that would normally employ their services. We cannot address this issue directly but provide
two pieces of related evidence. First, we test whether physicians move away from relatively
demanding practice environments, specifically EDs with relatively high discharge volumes
per shift and EDs housed within teaching hospitals. Second, we test whether physicians move
away from EDs housed within safety net hospitals, where the perceived risk of malpractice
liability is high. The results of our analysis are in Panel D of Table 4. Our dependent
variables track the share of physicians' practice at high volume hospitals, safety net hospitals
and teaching hospitals. There is no evidence that physicians move systematically to different
practice environments after a report.
    A final issue is whether physicians decreased their labor supply because they were spend-
ing time defending themselves against the malpractice allegation. We cannot observe time
costs directly in our data, but the magnitude of our labor supply decrease would imply sub-


                                              18
stantially larger time costs than found in previous research, which estimates 2.7-5 days of
lost work time per claim (Mello et al., 2010). Nevertheless, as described below, we provide
indirect evidence that the decrease in labor supply is related to the resolution of the claim
and the associated reduction in both time and psychic costs.
    First, we test for differential effects of malpractice reports that vary in their time to
claim resolution. In Panel E of Table 4, we split the reported physicians into separate
treatment groups according to resolution time and model labor supply changes for each
group relative to the full control group. Early resolution claims include those that were
settled before or during the pre-suit period, as well as abandoned claims. We find that
malpractice reports led to statistically different changes in labor supply across physicians
facing early and late resolution claims; we estimate a 2% decrease in discharge volume
(standard error = 4.5%) among early resolution claims and an 11% (standard error = 2.6%)
decrease in labor supply among late resolution claims. In addition, we find that physicians
with shorter claim durations experienced a sharp decrease in discharge immediately after
the report, followed by a recovery in labor supply (Figure A13). Physicians with longer
claims, on the other hand, were slower to decrease discharge volumes after a report but had
no recovery in labor supply by the end of the study period. These results are consistent
with our finding that labor supply rebounds somewhat after the final disposition of the case
(Table 3 and Figure A11).
    Overall, our results are most consistent with physicians taking on fewer shifts or working
more slowly during any given shift. To put the size of this decrease in context, ED physicians
typically work 3-5 shifts per week and individual shifts cover approximately 15 patients
on average (Joseph et al., 2018; Silver, 2019).38 A decrease of 78 discharges per quarter,
therefore, equates to approximately 5 fewer shifts per quarter (out of about 48), or 1.5 fewer
patients per shift.39


6      Effect of Malpractice Reports on Treatment Inten-
       sity
In this section, we study the effect of malpractice reports on the intensity of treatment pro-
vided by physicians. Figure 4 estimates the impact of malpractice reports on average costs
per patient discharged, plotting unadjusted costs for reported physicians and controls over
  38
     EM physician workloads vary across settings, but physician surveys suggest that full-time work requires
approximately 30 clinical hours per week (Katz, 2014).
  39
     We are not able to observe or construct shifts using our data, which do not include time stamps beyond
year and quarter indicators. Working less has potential financial consequences for EM physicians, many of
whom have at least some productivity-based compensation (Kane, 2015).


                                                    19
event time (Panel A) and DD estimates from our event study model (Panel B). Prior to the
report, average costs and cost trends were similar between physicians with and without mal-
practice reports. After the report, average costs increased relatively more among physicians
with malpractice reports.
    Table 5 documents the overall effect of malpractice reports on costs in the two years after
malpractice allegations.40 Total costs increased by 4.3% among reported physicians after the
report, relative to unreported physicians. In column 2, we include controls for the timing of
the injury, suit filing and final disposition. We estimate an increase in costs of 3.2% after
the report and smaller, statistically insignificant changes after other claim events. Column
3 shows results including physician time trends; the magnitude of our estimate decreases to
2.0% under this specification and is significant at the 10% level. As discussed previously, unit-
specific time trends can over-control for time-varying treatment effects. If we use a two-step
strategy to partial out group-specific time trends based on only pre-report data, analogous to
the approach in Goodman-Bacon (2019), we estimate a treatment effect of 4.1%.41 Further
robustness checks are available in the Appendix (Figure A14); we estimate similar effects
of malpractice allegations on treatment intensity when we model charges instead of costs
(Panel A), add hospital fixed effects to the regression (Panel B), model linear costs rather
than the log transformation (Panel C) and model costs using a one-part generalized linear
model (GLM) with a log-link function (Panel D).
    One concern about our treatment intensity analyses is that they are affected by patient
selection by reported physicians, specifically that reported physicians avoid complicated
and potentially expensive patients following a malpractice report. Given that we find little
systematic change in discharge volumes across patient types (Panel A of Table 4), there is
limited scope for such selection. Moreover, to the extent that reported physicians seek out
straightforward, inexpensive cases after a report, our sample of remaining discharges will
tend to grow less complex after the report and our estimates of the increase in costs will be
attenuated.


6.1     Understanding the Increase in Treatment Intensity
A natural inquiry is to understand the types of care and patients for which physicians increase
spending after a malpractice report. Panel A of Table 6 estimates the effect of malpractice
reports on radiology costs and laboratory costs, as well as general ER costs, which vary across
  40
     The sample in Table 5 includes one fewer physician than in Table 3. This physician does not oversee any
discharges during the study period so they contribute to the labor supply estimates but not the treatment
intensity estimates.
  41
     This approach does not correct standard errors in the second stage.



                                                    20
discharges from screening services only to higher levels of care (AHCA, 2011). We estimate
relatively large changes in laboratory costs following allegations. Malpractice reports led to
a 0.8 percentage point, or 1.7%, increase in the probability of receiving laboratory treatment.
Conditional on having any laboratory services, laboratory costs increased by 4.2%. These
results are consistent with a larger role for defensive medicine in diagnostic care, where risks
associated with providing that care are low (Baicker, Fisher and Chandra, 2007; Frakes,
2015; Frakes and Gruber, 2019).
    Panels B and C examine the impacts of malpractice reports on treatment intensity by
two measures of clinical severity. The first, shown in Panel B, sorts presenting conditions
by the low risk, high risk, and uncertain risk categories discussed previously (Section 5.1).
There are statistically similar increases in costs across all three risk groups. Panel C considers
conditions divided according to the coefficient of variation in costs per discharge within a CCS
group-payer pair. The intuition behind this analysis is that the coefficient of variation may
serve as a proxy for the extent to which care is protocolized (when the coefficient of variation
may be low) versus subject to clinical uncertainty and varying treatment approaches (when
the coefficient of variation may be high). Responses to malpractice reports are statistically
similar across the coefficient of variation quartiles. One concern about this analysis is that
we are missing patients who are admitted to the hospital. To the extent that reported
physicians are differentially increasing admission rates among high-risk patients, relative to
low risk patients, our results will understate the relationship between clinical severity and
treatment intensity. Our results in Table 4, however, suggest the scope for such selection is
small.
    Lastly, in Panel D, we examine the impact of malpractice reports on rates of diagnostic
imaging, studying whether testing rates changed differentially across high- and low-value
services. There is little evidence that increases in treatment intensity were limited to high-
value care. We find no change in the use of high-value chest imaging after malpractice
reports. We estimate no change in the use of low-value lumbar imaging and a marginally
insignificant 1.9 percentage point (standard error = 1.0), or 4.5% increase, in the use of
low-value head imaging tests. Non-parametric event study results suggest that the increase
in low-value head imaging began prior to the malpractice reports (Figure A16, Panel A). We
draw a similar conclusion using an alternate sample restriction to account for the change in
CPT coding across data versions (Figure A16, Panel B).




                                               21
7      Heterogeneous Effects of Malpractice Reports
In this section, we examine heterogeneous responses to malpractice reports. Of particular
importance is whether physicians treat patients more intensively if they are clinically similar
to the patient who filed the report. To study these dynamics, we identify discharges that
are clinically similar and dissimilar to the claimant in each physician's case. For example,
if a physician was accused of malpractice for their treatment of a pregnant woman, we
compare their responses among subsequent pregnant patients versus all other patients. For
the reported physicians, the clinical category corresponds to the patient injury in their actual
claim. For the unreported physicians, the clinical category corresponds to the claim of their
matched, reported physician. Panel A of Figure 5 and Table A1 examine the impact of
malpractice reports across clinically similar and dissimilar patients. Treatment intensity
responses to malpractice reports are statistically similar across clinical similarity groups.
We likewise find that physicians decreased labor supply proportionately among patients
that resemble the patient in their case. There is no evidence that physicians "learned" to
avoid patients who are most like the one for which the claim was filed.
    We examine responses to malpractice reports by other measures of heterogeneity as well.
In Panels B-F of Figure 5, we split the reported physicians into separate treatment groups
according to the characteristic of interest and estimate changes relative to the full control
group. Panel B considers whether physician responses to malpractice reports were greater
when more money was paid, generally an indicator of greater negligent damage.42 There are
statistically similar decreases in labor supply among physicians facing claims that resolved in
their favor without a payment to the claimant, relative to physicians facing claims resulting
in large payments to the claimant. Treatment intensity responses are likewise large and
statistically significant even among physicians with $0 claims. Panel C sorts claims by the
severity of patient injury: permanent or temporary. We find no meaningful difference in
spending or labor supply responses of reported physicians across injury severity.
    In Panels D-F, we examine whether the impact of malpractice reports varies according
to physician characteristics, rather than claim characteristics. Panel D considers physicians
divided by tenure. Labor supply responses are statistically similar across tenure groups,
although the estimated change in discharge volume is relatively small for physicians with
less than 10 years of practice. Treatment intensity effects are likewise similar for physicians
with varying experience levels. In Panel E, we find no differential responses to malpractice
across female versus male physicians.
  42
    Studdert et al. (2006) find that 73% of meritorious claims result in compensation and 28% of frivolous
claims result in compensation.



                                                   22
    Lastly, in Panel F, we test for differential changes in behavior among potential poor
performers: physicians with multiple malpractice allegations made against them.43 There
are no meaningful differences in labor supply or spending among physicians with repeated
claims, relative to physicians with a single claim. Next, we use an alternative definition of
potential "bad apple" physicians: those with multiple paid claims (Studdert et al., 2016). In
Table A1, we find no change in labor supply among physicians with multiple paid claims, but
a large decrease among physicians without multiple payments; these labor supply changes
are different from each other (p = 0.037), suggesting that physicians' labor supply responses
to malpractice allegations may attenuate with repeated exposure. Treatment intensity re-
sponses are large and statistically similar across the subgroups.


8      Discussion and Conclusion
Our results show that malpractice allegations led physicians to decrease their labor supply
and to increase treatment intensity for patients discharged from the ED. Thus, we provide
evidence that malpractice pressure led simultaneously to positive and negative responses in
physician behavior. For the individual, reported physician, these two effects are offsetting. A
9.3% reduction in cases seen, coupled with a 4.3% increase in costs per case, leads to a net
decrease in resource use of approximately 5.5% (standard error = 2.8%) after allegations.44
    In an analysis of the aggregate spending change among all physicians, the reduction
in labor supply is not a reduction in costs per se, assuming the same number of patients
go to the ED.45 Reported physicians may see fewer patients, but the patients they do not
see will be treated by other physicians. For these cases, the change in aggregate spending
depends on the differential treatment patterns of reported versus unreported physicians.
Prior to the malpractice allegations, reported physicians treated patients more intensively
than their matched peers. The difference in spending was a statistically insignificant 1%
  43
      By definition, we estimate the effect of repeated claims among physicians who survive to have a second
report, who may be different from other physicians in unobservable ways. If the system weeds out poor
performers through the first claim, for example, then physicians with repeat claims in our sample could be
higher quality. Two facts from our analysis suggest the scope for such selection is small. First, we estimate
small, statistically insignificant extensive margin effects of malpractice allegations (Table 3). Second, we
find statistically similar decreases in labor supply across physicians with $0 claims and high payout claims
(Figure 5, Panel B). Nevertheless, we note this potential selection as a caveat to our analyses.
   44
      The percent decrease equals to 1 - [(1 +    ^labor )  (1 + ^costs )], where ^labor is our estimate of the labor
supply decline and    ^ costs
                              is our estimate of the treatment intensity increase.
   45
      We find little evidence that faster accumulation of reports within an ED was associated with decreases
in discharge volume (Table A2). EDs experienced an average of 3 malpractice reports against EM specialists
during our study period (Figure A17). As shown in Figure A10, hospitals with fewer reports tended to
be smaller, with similar report rates as larger hospitals. Approximately 60 out of 220 EDs had no reports
against EM specialists, although they had reports against physicians in other specialties.


                                                         23
greater intensity in the pre-report period, after controlling for hospital fixed effects, calendar
time fixed effects and patient characteristics (Table A3).46 Taking this point estimate into
account, the net effect of the malpractice reports on aggregate spending is the 4.3% increase
for patients who are seen by the reported physicians less the 1% decline for patients who are
seen by other physicians, for a net change of about 3.8% (standard error = 1.4%).
    Patients who were seen by the reported physicians in the pre-report period account for
approximately 30% of discharges (Table 1). Thus, the net effect of all malpractice claims
is a 1.1% increase in ED spending overall. Our results, therefore, suggest that malpractice
accusations can have an important influence on medical practice patterns, though the asso-
ciated dollar amount is relatively modest. These calculations are sensitive to the assumption
that patients are reallocated from reported physicians to unreported physicians with similar
spending patterns, as in our matched sample. Our estimates would be notably larger if
patients were reallocated to inpatient physicians, for example.47
    A natural question is how our estimates compare to the previous literature. Existing
research studying the impact of tort reforms on claim frequency is mixed. On the high
end, recent evidence from the CBO (2019) suggests that damage caps reduce malpractice
claims by about 20%. Our results imply that a 20% reduction in claims would lead to a
reduction in ED costs of 0.2%.48 Existing work on tort reforms and spending is likewise
mixed, with recent reviews cautioning against firm conclusions; Mello and Kachalia (2016)
and CBO (2019) both argue that existing evidence does not support any conclusion about the
impact of non-economic damage caps on overall health care spending. Earlier meta-analyses
estimated modest impacts of defensive medicine on spending at 2% (Mello et al., 2010) and
0.3% (CBO, 2009).49 Our results likewise suggest a modest change in overall spending, but
imply a larger role for malpractice liability in influencing physician behavior.
    Our results are suggestive of defensive medicine, but do not prove it. Defensive medicine
is generally defined as additional care where the value of the care is less than the cost. In
this case, it is hard to measure the value of all additional care provided. However, several
  46
     We model pre-report spending differences in the full pre-period and the quarter before the report,
estimating insignificant differences of 0.7% and 0.8%, respectively.
  47
     In 2005, spending on inpatient admissions that originated from the ED was about 10 times higher than
spending on ED discharges, controlling for hospital fixed effects, calendar time fixed effects and patient
characteristics. If 10% of the labor supply decrease could be explained by an increase in hospital admissions,
our estimated net change in spending would approximately triple.
  48
     With a 20% reduction in claims, our results imply that malpractice reports would affect approximately
24% of all discharges and lead to a 0.9% increase in ED spending (3.8%*0.24)
  49
     These analyses mainly relied on variation in spending from tort reforms. The seminal papers on this
topic (Kessler and McClellan, 1996, 2002) estimated decreases in spending on the order of 5%, while some
of the strongest recent evidence suggests that damage caps actually increase spending by about 2% (Paik,
Black and Hyman, 2017).



                                                     24
factors suggest that the added value is likely small. We find that physicians respond even to
frivolous allegations, implying that malpractice allegations have effects outside of deterring
low quality care. In addition, care increases for all patients, not just those similar to the case
for which the physician was sued. Finally, we find modest evidence of increases in low-value
care, specifically diagnostic radiology tests that have little benefit for patients.
    Our results suggest several areas for future work. First, we have not attempted to assess
spillover effects of malpractice allegations on other physicians. Even physicians who are not
accused of malpractice may change their behavior in response to an accusation of a peer, for
example if they learn about their colleague's legal issues. Second, we show that physicians
tend to leave the hospital where the patient injury occurred, but we cannot say whether
this was the physician's decision or the hospital's decision. It would be useful to study
how malpractice pressure influences the physician-hospital relationship and other hospital
management decisions. Third, we study the impact of malpractice allegations in a specific
clinical area and the results may not be applicable to other contexts.
    As malpractice reforms continue to stir debate, our results suggest that malpractice
allegations can have a meaningful impact on physician behavior, leading to fewer cases seen
and more intensive care for each patient. These results raise the possibility that more recent
proposals for malpractice reform, such as safe harbors for physicians that follow clinical
guidelines, may be more promising than damage caps if they change the claim process.




                                               25
References
Abaluck, Jason, Leila Agha, Chris Kabrhel, Ali Raja, and Arjun Venkatesh. 2016.
 "The Determinants of Productivity in Medical Testing: Intensity and Allocation of Care."
 American Economic Review, 106(12): 3730­3764.

AHCA. 2011. "Hospital Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook." Agency for Health
 Care Administration.

Baicker, Katherine, Elliot Fisher, and Amitabh Chandra. 2007. "Malpractice Lia-
 bility Costs And The Practice Of Medicine In The Medicare Program." Health Affairs,
 26(3): 841­852.

Burstin, Hellen, William Johnson, Stuart Lipsitz, and Troyen Brennan. 1993.
 "Do the Poor Sue More? A Case-Control Study of Malpractice Claims and Socioeconomic
 Status." Journal of the American Medical Association, 270(14): 1697­1701.

Carrier, Emily, James Reschovsky, Michelle Mello, Ralph Mayrell, and Michelle
 Katz. 2010. "Physicians' Fears Of Malpractice Lawsuits Are Not Assuaged By Tort Re-
 forms." Health Affairs, 29(9): 1585­1592.

CBO. 2009. "Letter to Senator Orrin G. Hatch." Congressional Budget Office. Accessed
 on Mar. 17, 2019 at https://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/111th-congress-2009-2010/
 reports/10-09-tort reform.pdf.

CBO. 2019. "How Do Changes in Medical Malpractice Liability Laws Affect Health Care
 Spending and the Federal Budget?" Congressional Budget Office Working Paper Series.

Chalfin, Aaron, and Justin McCrary. 2017. "Criminal Deterrence: A Review of the
 Literature." Journal of Economic Literature, 55(1): 5­48.

Chan, David. 2018. "The Efficiency of Slacking Off: Evidence from the Emergency De-
 partment." Econometrica, 86(3): 997­1030.

Chandra, Amitabh, and Douglas Staiger. 2007. "Productivity spillovers in health care:
 Evidence from the treatment of heart attacks." Journal of Political Economy, 115(1): 103­
 140.

Chandra, Amitabh, Anupam Jena, and Seth Seabury. 2013. "Defensive Medicine
 May Be Costlier Than It Seems." Wall Street Journal, A13, Feb. 7.


                                           26
Chang, Cindy, and Ziad Obermeyer. 2020. "Association of Clinical Characteristics
 With Variation in Emergency Physician Preferences for Patients." Journal of the American
 Medical Association: Network Open, 3(1).

Clemens, Jeffrey, and Joshua Gottlieb. 2014. "Do Physicians' Financial Incentives
  Affect Medical Treatment and Patient Health?" American Economic Review, 104(4).

Currie, Janet, and Bentley Macleod. 2017. "Diagnosing Expertise: Human Capital, De-
 cision Making, and Performance among Physicians." Journal of Labor Economics, 35(1): 1­
 43.

Cutler, David, Jonathan Skinner, Ariel Dora Stern, and David Wennberg. 2019.
 "Physician Beliefs and Patient Preferences: A New Look at Regional Variation in Health
 Care Spending." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 11(1): 192­221.

Cutler, David, Robert Huckman, and Mary Beth Landrum. 2004. "The Role of
 Information in Medical Markets: An Analysis of Publicly Reported Outcomes in Cardiac
 Surgery." American Economic Review, 94(2): 342­346.

Danzon, Patricia. 1991. "Liability for Medical Malpractice." Journal of Economic Per-
 spectives, 5(3): 51­69.

Daw, Jamie, and Laura Hatfield. 2018. "Matching and Regression to the Mean in
 Difference-in-Differences Analysis." Health Services Review, 53(6): 4138­4156.

Dranove, David, and Yasutora Watanabe. 2010. "Influence and Deterrence: How Ob-
 stetricians Respond to Litigation against Themselves and Their Colleagues." American
 Law and Economics Review, 82(1): 69­94.

Dranove, David, Dan Kessler, Mark McClellan, and Mark Satterthwaite. 2004.
 "Is More Information Better? The Effects of `Report Cards' On Health Care Providers."
 Journal of Political Economy, 111(3): 555­588.

Dranove, David, Subramaniam Ramanarayanan, and Yasutora Watanabe. 2012.
 "Delivering Bad News: Market Responses to Negligence." The Journal of Law and Eco-
 nomics, 55(1): 1­25.

Dubay, Lisa, Robert Kaestner, and Timothy Waidmann. 2001. "The impact of
 malpractice fears on cesarean section rates." Journal of Health Economics, 20(4): 591­
 611.


                                           27
Durrance, Christine Piette, and Scott Hankins. 2018. "Medical Malpractice Lia-
 bility Exposure and OB/GYN Physician Delivery Decisions." Health Services Research,
 53(4): 2633­2650.

Frakes, Michael. 2015. "The Surprising Relevance of Medical Malpractice Law." The Uni-
  versity of Chicago Law Review, 82: 317­392.

Frakes, Michael, and Jonathan Gruber. 2019. "Defensive Medicine: Evidence from
  Military Immunity." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 11(3): 197­231.

Gimm, Grant. 2010. "The Impact of Malpractice Liability Claims on Obstetrical Practice
 Patterns." Health Services Research, 45(1): 192­211.

Goodman-Bacon, Andrew. 2019. "Difference-in-Differences with Variation in Treatment
 Timing." Working Paper.

Grant, Darren, and Malayne McInnes. 2004. "Practice Experience and the Incidence
 of Cesarean Delivery: Physician-Level Longitudinal Analysis." Inquiry, 41: 170­88.

Hannan, Edward, Chuntao Wu, Thomas Ryan, Edward Bennett, Alfred T. Cul-
 liford, Alan Gold, Jeffrey P. Hartman, O. Wayne Isom, Robert Jones, Bar-
 bara McNeil, Eric Rose, and Valavanur Subramanian. 2003. "Do Hospitals and
 Surgeons with Higher Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery Volumes Still Have Lower
 Risk-Adjusted Mortality Rates?" Circulation, 108(7): 795­801.

Iacus, Stefano, Gary King, and Giuseppe Porro. 2012. "Causal Inference Without
  Balance Checking: Coarsened Exact Matching." Political Analysis, 20(1): 1­24.

IOM. 2006. "The Future of Emergency Care in the United States Health System." Institute
  of Medicine.

Jena, Anupam, Amitabh Chandra, Darius Lakdawalla, and Seth Seabury. 2012.
  "Outcomes of Medical Malpractice Litigation Against US Physicians." Archives of Internal
  Medicine, 172(11): 892­894.

Jena, Anupam, Lena Schoemaker, Jay Bhattacharya, and Seth Seabury. 2015.
  "Physician spending and subsequent risk of malpractice claims: observational study." The
  BMJ, 351(h5516).

Jena, Anupam, Seth Seabury, Darius Lakdawalla, and Amitabh Chandra. 2011.
  "Malpractice risk according to physician specialty." New England Journal of Medicine,
  365(7): 629­36.

                                           28
Joseph, Joshua, Samuel Davis, Elissa Wilker, Matthew Wong, Ori Litvak,
  Stephen Traub, Larry Nathanson, and Leon Sanchez. 2018. "Modelling attend-
  ing physician productivity in the emergency department: a multicentre study." Emerg
  Med J, 35: 317­322.

Kane, Carol. 2015. "How are Physicians Paid? A Detailed Look at the Methods Used to
 Compensate Physicians in Different Practice Types and Specialties." American Medical
 Association. Accessed on October 5, 2020 at https://www.ama-assn.org/sites/ama-assn.
 org/files/corp/media-browser/premium/health-policy/prp-payment2014 0.pdf.

Katz,   Barb. 2014. "How Much Do Emergency Physicians Make?                 A
 National Job Market Survey." American College of Emergency Physi-
 cians. Accessed on April 17,         2020 at https://www.acepnow.com/article/
 much-emergency-physicians-make-national-job-market-survey/.

Kessler, Daniel, and Mark McClellan. 1996. "Do Doctors Practice Defensive Medicine?"
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2): 353­390.

Kessler, Daniel, and Mark McClellan. 2002. "How Liability Law affects Medical Pro-
 ductivity." Journal of Health Economics, 21(6): 931­955.

Kolstad, Jonathan. 2013. "Information and Quality When Motivation is Intrinsic: Evi-
 dence from Surgeon Report Cards." American Economic Review, 103(7): 2875­2910.

Lakdawalla, Darius, and Seth Seabury. 2012. "The Welfare Effects of Medical Malprac-
  tice Liability." International Review of Law and Economics, 32(4): 356­369.

Localio, A. Russell, Ann Lawthers, Troyen Brennan, Nan Laird, Liesi Hebert,
  Lynn Peterson, Joseph Newhouse, Paul Weiler, and Howard Hiatt. 1991. "Re-
  lation between Malpractice Claims and Adverse Events Due to Negligence - Results of the
  Harvard Medical Practice Study III." New England Journal of Medicine, 325: 245­251.

McClellan, Frank, Augustus White, Ramona Jimenez, and Sherin Fahmy. 2012.
 "Do Poor People Sue Doctors More Frequently? Confronting Unconscious Bias and the
 Role of Cultural Competency." Clin Orthop Relat Res, 470(5): 1393­1397.

Mello, Michelle, Amitabh Chandra, Atul Gawande, and David Studdert. 2010.
 "National Costs Of The Medical Liability System." Health Affairs, 29(9): 1569­1577.

Mello, Michelle, and Allen Kachalia. 2016. "Medical Malpractice: Evidence on Reform
 Alternatives and Claims Involving Elderly Patients." Report to the Medicare Payment
 Advisory Commission (MedPAC).

                                           29
Molitor, David. 2018. "The Evolution of Physician Practice Styles: Evidence from Cardi-
 ologist Migration." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 10(1): 326­356.

Paik, Myungho, Bernard Black, and David Hyman. 2017. "Damage Caps and De-
 fensive Medicine, Revisited." Journal of Health Economics, 51: 84­97.

Sarsons, Heather. 2019. "Interpreting Signals in the Labor Market: Evidence from Medical
  Referrals." American Economic Review, R&R.

Schwartz, Aaron, Bruce Langon, Adam Elshaug, Michael Chernew, and
  J. Michael McWilliams. 2014. "Measuring Low-Value Care in Medicare." Journal of
  the American Medical Association, 174(7): 1067­1076.

Shapiro, Bradley. 2017. "Informational Shocks, Off-Label Prescribing, and the Effects of
  Physician Detailing." Management Science, 64(12): 5925­5945.

Shurtz, Ity. 2013. "The impact of medical errors on physician behavior: Evidence from
  malpractice litigation." Journal of Health Economics, 32(2): 331­340.

Silver, David. 2019. "Haste or Waste? Peer Pressure and Productivity in the Emergency
  Department." Working Paper.

Studdert, David, Marie Bismark, Michelle Mello, Harnam Singh, and Matthew
  Spittal. 2016. "Prevalence and Characteristics of Physicians Prone to Malpractice
  Claims." New England Journal of Medicine, 374: 354­362.

Studdert, David, Matthew Spittal, Yifan Zhang, Derek Wilkenson, Harnam
  Singh, and Michelle Mello. 2019. "Changes in Practice among Physicians with Mal-
  practice Claims." New England Journal of Medicine, 380: 1247­1255.

Studdert, David, Michelle Mello, Atul Gawande, Tejal Gandhi, Allen Kachalia,
  Catherine Yoon, Ann Louise Puopolo, and Troyen Brennan. 2006. "Claims, Er-
  rors, and Compensation Payments in Medical Malpractice Litigation." New England Jour-
  nal of Medicine, 354: 2024­2033.

Wolfers, Justin. 2006. "Did Unilateral Divorce Laws Raise Divorce Rates? A Reconcilia-
 tion and New Results." American Economic Review, 96(5): 1802­1820.

Zeiler, Kathryn, Charles Silver, Bernard Black, Davie Hyman, and William
  Sage. 2007. ""Physicians' Insurance Limits and Malpractice Payments: Evidence from
  Texas Closed Claims: 1990­2003." Journal of Legal Studies, 36(S2): S9­45.


                                          30
Tables and Figures




                     31
    Panel A. Time from Injury to Report                  Panel B. Time from Report to Disposition




    Figure 1: Time Between Patient Injury, Malpractice Report and Claim Disposition
Notes: These figures plot histograms of the time elapsed between key events in malpractice claim develop-
ment. Panel A shows the quarters elapsed between the patient injury and the malpractice report. Panel B
shows the quarters elapsed between the malpractice report and the final disposition of the claim. The sample
covers malpractice reports against Emergency Medicine specialists. For scaling purposes, the horizontal axis
is truncated at 25 quarters.




                                                    32
Table 1: Characteristics of Physicians With and Without Malpractice Reports, Before and
After Propensity Score Match

                                           All Physicians            Eligible for Match                 Matched Sample
                                      Reported    Unreported     Reported     Unreported     Reported     Unreported        
 Number of Physicians                   684           2039           297          1071          296           433
 (%)                                   (25%)         (75%)          (22%)        (78%)

 A. Dependent Variables
 Discharge Volume                       771.3        623.3          820.6        752.6         821.0         703.0       -118.9
 Costs/Discharge                        625.4        657.5          619.5        603.2         620.3         596.9         -23.4

 B. Physician Characteristics
 Tenure                                 18.1          15.6          18.6          16.9         18.5          19.2           0.6
 MD (%)                                 78.7          80.9          78.5          81.1         78.7          80.2          1.7
 Female (%)                             18.7          26.0          19.2          22.2         19.3          18.8          -0.5

 C. Hospital Referral Region (%)
 Northern                               19.4          28.6          19.5          28.4         19.6          19.6           0.0
 Central                                43.6          33.3          49.5          34.9         49.3          49.3          -0.1
 Southern                               37.0          38.1          31.0          36.7         31.1          31.1           0.1

 D. Hospital Characteristics (%)
 Teaching                               3.7           10.7           4.7          9.8          4.7           4.9            0.2
 Safety Net Hospital                    25.1          27.7          24.6          27.1         24.7          23.6          -1.0
 High-Volume Hospital                   39.6          49.4          44.4          51.3         44.6          49.0           4.3
 Notes: This table reports summary statistics for Emergency Medicine specialists who were reported for malpractice and their
unreported peers. The statistics are calculated using data from 2005 to 2013. The table reports means where the unit of observation
is a physician-quarter, using data from the quarter before the (real or placebo) report. In the pre-match samples, statistics for
unreported physicians are calculated using data from the chronological midpoint of their practice. Physicians are eligible for the
propensity score match if we can observe them for two years surrounding their (real or placebo) report, as described in Section
3.3. Costs are reported in 2009 dollars. Hospital characteristics correspond to traits of the facilities where physicians oversaw
the plurality of their discharges. Statistical significance of differences between reported and unreported physicians in the matched
sample indicated as follows: * p<.05; ** p<.01; *** p<0.001.




                                                               33
Table 2: Characteristics of Malpractice Claims, Before and After Propensity Score Match

                                                                Reported Physicians
                                             All Physicians     Eligible for Match    Matched Sample
 Number of Physicians                              684                  297                  296

 A. Physician Malpractice History
 Any Previous Report (%)                           26.0                26.6                  26.7
 Previous Report Count                             1.4                  1.4                  1.4
 Any Subsequent Report (%)                         29.1                26.3                  26.4
 Subsequent Report Count                            1.3                1.2                    1.2

 B. Report Characteristics
 Suit Filed (%)                                    69.6                 72.4                72.3
 Payment to Defendant (%)                          58.2                 62.0                61.8
 Non-zero Payment ($1000s)                        361.1                220.8                221.4
 Defense Costs ($1000s)                            61.4                54.0                 54.2

 C. Claim Duration (Quarters)
 Injury to Disposition                             14.1                14.5                  14.5
 Injury to Report                                   5.2                 5.3                   5.3
 Report to Suit                                    2.3                  2.3                   2.4
 Report to Disposition (without Suit)              4.3                  4.1                   4.1
 Report to Disposition (with Suit)                 10.9                11.2                  11.2

 D. Clinical Injury Category (%)
 Chest                                             17.7                20.2                  19.9
 Head                                              12.4                15.2                  15.2
 Trauma/Injury                                     6.6                 10.8                  10.8
 Abdomen                                            7.7                 9.4                   9.5
 Back                                               7.3                10.1                  10.1

 E. Severity of Injury (%)
 Temporary                                         22.5                20.9                  20.9
 Permanent                                         77.5                79.1                  79.1

 F. Injury Hospital Characteristics (%)
 Teaching Hospital                                 5.2                  6.7                  6.8
 Safety Net Hospital                               25.7                24.0                  24.4
 High Volume Hospital                              41.1                48.1                  48.8
 Notes: This table reports summary statistics for malpractice reports against Emergency Medicine spe-
cialists. The table reports means where the unit of observation is a physician-quarter. The statistics are
calculated using data from 2005 to 2013. Costs are reported in 2009 dollars.




                                                   34
              Figure 2: Discharge Volume Before and After Malpractice Reports
Notes: These figures plot event studies of discharge volume for reported and unreported physicians in the
two years before and after malpractice reports (real or placebo). Panel A shows average discharge volumes
for reported and unreported physicians in each quarter. Panel B plots our difference-in-differences estimates
(k from Equation 1), showing the effect of malpractice reports on discharge volume in the k quarters before
and after the report. Regression analysis includes physician fixed effects, physician tenure and calendar time
fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the physician level.


                                                     35
       Table 3: Effect of Malpractice Reports on Discharge Volume

                                                    Discharge Volume
                                            (1)              (2)               (3)
   Reported*Post                         -78.03           -68.06           -76.62
                                          (21.62)         (20.97)           (18.76)
   Injured*Post                                             14.80
                                                           (25.93)
   Sued*Post                                                -50.50
                                                           (26.16)
   Disposed*Post                                            45.26
                                                           (27.14)
   Observations                           15079             15079            15079
   Claim Timing Controls                                      X
   Physician*Time Trends                                                       X
   Physicians                               729              729              729
   Percent Change                           -9.3             -8.1             -9.2
   Mean Discharge Volume                    836              836              836
 Notes: This table presents difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of mal-
practice reports on physicians' discharge volumes per quarter. Each column reports
coefficients from a separate regression, with standard errors clustered by physician in
parentheses. All regressions include physician fixed effects, calendar time fixed effects,
and controls for physician tenure. * p<.05; ** p<.01; *** p<0.001.




                                           36
Table 4: Effect of Malpractice Reports on Physician Labor Supply: Decomposition by
Margin

                                                                                                     Dependent
                                                           Standard                                   Variable     Percent
                                         Coefficient         Error     Observations    Physicians      Mean        Change
 A. Discharge Volume by Risk Type
     High Risk                      -8.51**                  2.59          15,079          729           95           -8.9
     Low Risk                      -20.88**                  6.66          15,079          729           237          -8.8
     Uncertain Risk               -10.93***                  2.71          15,079          729           90          -12.2

 B. Probability of Any Practice
     In Any Location                        0.003            0.013         15,079          729           1.00        0.3
        In Injury Region                   -0.028            0.016         13,958          708           0.89        -3.1
        At Injury Hospital                -0.044*            0.022         13,958          708           0.86        -5.2
        At Non-Injury Hospital             0.029*            0.013         13,958          708           0.81        3.5

 C. Discharge Volume Given Practice
     Any Location                 -79.73***                  19.23         14,545          728           838          -9.5
       In Injury Hospital         -86.47***                  24.08         11,787          664           670         -12.9
       In Non-Injury Hospital       -4.04                    25.65         10,576          572           324          -1.2

 D. Hospital Characteristics
     Teaching Hospital                     -0.003            0.009         14,219          728           0.05        -6.5
     Safety Net Hospital                    0.009            0.017         14,219          728           0.24         3.6
     High Volume Hospital                   0.015            0.019         14,219          728           0.43         3.6

 E. Discharge Volume by Claim Resolution Time
     Late Resolution             -93.71***                   23.39         14,076          670           846         -11.1
     Early Resolution              -13.28                    36.16         11,050          492           795          -1.7
 Notes: This table presents difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of malpractice reports on physician labor
supply. Each row reports coefficients from a separate regression. Panel A estimates changes in discharge volume across
patients with varying clinical risk. Panels B and C decompose the labor supply change into extensive margin (Panel B)
and intensive margin (Panel C) effects. Panel D estimates the share of physicians' practice at different hospital types.
Panel E estimates changes in discharge volume separately for claims with early versus late resolutions. All regression
analyses control for physician fixed effects, physician tenure and calendar time fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered
at the physician level. * p<.05; ** p<.01; *** p<0.001




                                                            37
               Panel A: Probability of Any Practice (Extensive Margin)




           Panel B: Discharge Volume Given Practice (Intensive Margin)




Figure 3: Effect of Malpractice Reports on Physician Labor Supply: Decomposition by
Margin
Notes: These figures show the effects of malpractice reports on physicians' labor supply. Panel A plots
changes in labor supply on the extensive margin, estimating whether reported physicians are less likely to
continue practicing (1) in any location, (2) in the same hospital referral region where the patient injury
occurred or (3) in the same hospital where the patient injury occurred. Panel B shows changes in labor
supply on the intensive margin, estimating whether reported physicians reduce the volume of discharges
they oversee across locations, conditional on maintaining practice in that location. All regressions include
physician fixed effects, physician tenure and calendar time fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the
physician level.




                                                      38
             Figure 4: Costs per Discharge Before and After Malpractice Reports
Notes: These figures plot event studies of costs per discharge for reported and unreported physicians in the
two years before and after malpractice reports. Panel A shows average costs per discharge for reported and
unreported physicians in each quarter. Panel B plots our difference-in-differences estimates, showing the
effect of malpractice reports on costs per discharge in the 8 quarters before and after the report. Costs are
modeled in logs. Regression analysis includes physician fixed effects, physician tenure and calendar time fixed
effects, as well as controls for patient age, sex, race, presenting condition, visit day and insurance status.
Standard errors are clustered at the physician level. Costs are reported in 2009 dollars.

                                                      39
    Table 5: Effect of Malpractice Reports on Costs per Discharge

                                                     Ln(Costs)
                                         (1)             (2)              (3)
  Reported*Post                      0.0426           0.0324            0.0203
                                     (0.0155)         (0.0142)         (0.0121)
  Injured*Post                                         -0.0118
                                                      (0.0177)
  Sued*Post                                            0.0281
                                                      (0.0202)
  Disposed*Post                                       0.00213
                                                      (0.0238)
  Observations                       10954628         10954628        10954628
  Claim Timing Controls                                  X
  Physician*Time Trends                                                    X
  Physicians                            728              728              728
  Mean Costs                            560              560              560
 Notes: This table presents difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of mal-
practice reports on costs per discharge. Each column reports coefficients from a
separate regression, with standard errors clustered by physician in parentheses. All
regressions include controls for physician fixed effects, calendar time fixed effects
and physician tenure, as well as patient age, sex, race, presenting condition, visit
day and insurance status. Costs are reported in 2009 dollars. * p<.05; ** p<.01;
*** p<0.001.




                                         40
Table 6: Effect of Malpractice Reports on Treatment Intensity: Decomposition by Margin

                                                                                                  Dependent
                                                         Standard                                  Variable
                                          Coefficient      Error     Observations   Physicians      Mean
 A. Service Category
    Any Radiology Costs                     0.015**          0.005    10,954,628        728          0.46
      Ln(Radiology Costs)                    -0.024          0.017    5,112,233         728          422
    Any Laboratory Costs                     0.008*          0.003    10,954,628        728          0.46
      Ln(Laboratory Costs)                   0.042*          0.018     5,183,163        728          217
    Ln(Emergency Room Costs)                 0.039*          0.018    10,899,092        728          183

 B. Ln(Costs) by Discharge Complexity
    Low                           0.043*                     0.017    1,616,238         728           417
    High                          0.041*                     0.017     745,612          728           694
    Uncertain                    0.054***                    0.016    2,165,290         728           866

 C. Ln(Costs) by Protocol Uncertainty
    Bottom Quartile                 0.033*                   0.015    2,719,659         728           912
    Middle Quartiles               0.050**                   0.015    5,617,291         728           484
    Top Quartile                     0.039                   0.020    2,617,678         728           349

 D. Diagnostic Imaging Tests
    High-Value Chest Imaging Test           -0.017           0.017      38,262          558          0.69
    Low-Value Lumbar Imaging Test            0.011           0.008     264,292          579          0.31
    Low-Value Head Imaging Test              0.019           0.010     215,035          579          0.42
 Notes: This table presents difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of malpractice reports on physi-
cians' treatment intensity. Each row reports estimates from a separate regression. We study changes in
treatment intensity across service types (Panel A), discharge complexity (Panel B), the certainty of treat-
ment protocol (Panel C), and high-value versus low-value care (Panel D). All regression analyses include
controls for physician fixed effects, physician tenure and calendar time fixed effects, as well as patient age,
sex, race, presenting condition, visit day and insurance status. Standard errors are clustered at the physician
level. Costs are reported in 2009 dollars. * p<.05; ** p<.01; *** p<0.001.




                                                        41
                      Figure 5: Heterogeneous Effects of Malpractice Reports
Notes: This figure presents difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of malpractice reports across
different claim types (Panels A-C) and physician characteristics (Panels D-F). Each row reports estimates
from a separate regression. Panel A uses the subset of data where claimant similarity is well defined. Panels
B-F use data from the full analytic sample. All regression analyses include controls for physician fixed effects,
physician tenure and calendar time fixed effects; analyses of costs per discharge also control for patient age,
sex, race, presenting condition, visit day and insurance status. Costs are modeled in 2009 dollars. Standard
errors are clustered at the physician level.




                                                       42
Appendix

A1      Sample Construction
Our analysis uses Emergency Department (ED) discharge data between 2005 and the third
quarter of 2013. This data covers approximately 56 million discharges. We focus our atten-
tion on discharges that were overseen by physicians, rather than nurses or other provider
types. The overwhelming majority of discharges in our sample are overseen by physicians
and this inclusion criteria reduces our sample size by less than 2%.
    We merge the ED data with information on physician characteristics from two sources:
the Florida Department of Health (DOH) Practitioner Profile data and Doximity data. We
use four snapshots from the 2014 Florida DOH Practitioner data. First, the Licensee Profile
Master Table provides information on the year that each provider began practice. Sec-
ond, the Education History Supplement describes medical school graduation and attendance
dates. Third, the Certifications Supplemental File identifies physicians' specialty certifi-
cations. Fourth, we get additional information about specialty from the Professional &
Postgraduate Training Supplemental File, specifically whether each physician did a post-
graduate program in Emergency Medicine (EM). The Doximity data includes information
about physician specialty, tenure and gender. Doximity identifies physicians by National
Provider Identifier (NPI), which we link to Florida state license numbers using the NPI to
State License Crosswalk dataset available through the National Bureau of Economic Re-
search (NBER), as well as crosswalk information that is available in later years of discharge
data.
    We categorize physicians as EM specialists if they have an EM specialization listed in
the Certifications Supplemental File, the Training Supplemental File or in Doximity. We
define tenure as the number of years elapsed from the following dates, in sequence: (1)
final medical school attendance date in the DOH data, (2) medical school graduation date
from the DOH data and (3) medical school graduation date from Doximity. We categorize
physician gender using the Doximity data and the Florida DOH Practitioner Profile Master
Table, matching first names with gender frequency from the Social Security Administration.
When we cannot identify specialty, tenure or gender from the sources above, we hand code
physician characteristics based on online public profiles.
    We restrict our sample to EM specialists; these physicians oversee the vast majority of
care in the ED, accounting for approximately 80% of discharges in our sample (Figure A2).
Non-EM specialists oversee the highest share of patients at low-volume EDs.



                                             A1
A2        Malpractice Claims Data
We use closed malpractice claims from the Florida Office of Insurance Regulation (FLOIR).
We merge this data with the ED discharge data according to the reported physician's license
number and the date of the malpractice report. We take a number of steps to clean the
FLOIR data. First, a small minority of physicians in the malpractice data have multiple
reports listed on the same day. Such multiple claim records can occur, for example, if a
physician is covered by two insurance companies during their claim. For physicians with
multiple reports on the same day between 2005 and 2013, we clean the data using the
following steps. First, if the claim records match in all fields except for payments (N=30),
we sum payments together to create a single report.50 Second, if cases match except for
the payments and disposition date (N=5), we verify that the claims were filed by separate
insurers, then aggregate payments to most recent filing to create a single report. After
completing these steps, there were 6 remaining physicians with multiple reports on the same
day. These claims had a variety of differences across records and we hand coded information
to create a single report. For example, some claims were filed prematurely, then reopened
once a suit was filed, sometimes with a different insurer. In these cases, we create a single
report using the nonmissing suit date, the disposition date from the latest filing, summed
payments, and nonmissing data from either field where available.
    After cleaning records among physicians who have multiple reports listed on the same day,
we turn to physicians who have multiple reports on two days in the same quarter (N=11).
These records pose a challenge because our merge with the ED discharge data requires that
we have unique records at the physician-report quarter level. While the quarter of the report
is well-defined for these physicians, the two reports may vary in their payment levels and
other claim characteristics. For these physicians, we define the injury and suit dates to the
be the earlier across the two reports and we define the disposition date to be the later date.
We define the payment levels according to the maximum insurer payment and legal fee across
the two claims. In the event that the same-quarter reports have different injury hospitals or
clinical characteristics, we redefine the value to be null.
    We take two other minor steps to clean the data. First, we count missing values for
indemnity payments and defense costs as zeros. Defense costs include loss adjustment ex-
penses paid to the defense counsel and do not include standard contingency fees. Second,
there is one malpractice case that reports defense costs of over $20 million. This amount
  50
    Payment fields include legal fees as well as the indemnity payment made to the claimant. Other fields
include the injury, suit and disposition date, the injury location, the severity of the injury and the clinical
type of the injury.



                                                     A2
is over 20 times the next highest value among all malpractice claims in our sample and far
exceeds the indemnity payment in this case of approximately $600,000. As such, we recode
the defense costs to missing for this case.


A2.1     Categorization of Malpractice Claims into Clinical Groups
We categorize malpractice claims into clinical groups according to the description of the
patient injury. This categorization requires two steps (Figure A1). First, we categorize
claimant injuries into clinical groups using a key phrase search. Each clinical group broadly
corresponds to a system of the human body. For example, the Head clinical group includes
claims with the key phrases "headache" and "stroke." It also includes key phrases that point
to non-specific head conditions such as "neurological assessment." Some injury descriptions
contain only key phrases that point to non-specific symptoms such as "respiratory distress"
or "nausea." We generally do not assign these non-specific key phrases to clinical groups.
We make an exception for "slurred speech," which is strongly associated with stroke and
therefore included in the Head category. Overall, we are able to assign approximately 80%
of claimant injuries to clinical groups in our final analytic sample.
    Some malpractice claims correspond to multiple clinical groups, for example a claimant
presenting with both chest pain and headache. We assign such claims to clinical groups using
a step-wise hierarchy, creating a one-to-one matching from malpractice claims to clinical
groups. We assign claims to the following clinical groups in sequence: Pregnancy, Circulatory,
Respiratory, Head, Abdomen, Back, Infection, Injury, Psychiatric and Male reproductive
system. Injuries associated with the head and back are assigned to those clinical groups,
respectively. Injuries not associated with the Head or Back clinical groups (e.g. "hand
injury") are assigned to the Injury clinical category.
    The second step is to match each clinical injury group to related ED discharges. We link
claims to related discharges using Clinical Classification Software (CCS) from the Healthcare
Cost and Utilization Project (HCUP). Under the CCS, single level CCS codes group diag-
noses into approximately 300 mutually exclusive groups (e.g. acute myocardial infarction,
essential hypertension). Multi-level CCS codes assign each of the single-level CCS groups to
broader clinical categories (e.g. diseases of the heart).
    For each key phrase that points to a specific condition, we match to discharges in the
associated multi-level CCS group. For example, the key phrase "stroke" is matched to the
multi-level CCS category for cerebrovascular disease. Some key phrases point to a condition
in the multi-level CCS group for symptoms, signs, and ill-defined conditions. In these cases,
we match the key phrase to diagnoses under the single-level CCS, rather than all ill-defined


                                             A3
conditions. If the key phrase points to a non-specific condition ("neurological assessment"),
we do not link to a CCS code. For key phrases that point to a symptom ("slurred speech"),
we match to related codes from the International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision
(ICD-9).
    We match injury-related key phrases in a different manner. When a key phrase indicates
an injury, we link it to fractures, wounds and other injury types in the same clinical group
using both CCS codes and ICD-9 codes. For example, the key phrase "head inj" is matched
with CCS codes for skull and face fractures (228) and intracranial injury (233), as well as
ICD-9 codes for nonspecific head injuries (959.0x) and open wounds of the head (870.xx-
874.xx). For the Injury category, related diagnoses include trauma-related joint disorders
(225), fractures other than head and spine (226, 229, 230, 231 except spine), open wounds
of the extremities (236), superficial injuries (239), sprains and strains (232), crushing injury
(234) and nonspecific minor injuries (959.2x-959.7x).
    Importantly, we aggregate related discharges to the clinical group level. For example, the
Head clinical group contains key phrases that match the multi-level CCS groups for headache
and cerebrovascular disease. For a physician with the key phrase "migraine," their similar
discharges include diagnoses that fall into either multi-level CCS category, even though their
key phrase points to only one (headache).




                            Figure A1: Claim Categorization Example
Notes: This figure shows an example of how malpractice claims are assigned to clinical groups and matched
related discharges. This example is illustrative and not complete; the "Head" category contains more key
phrases and links to additional related diagnoses.




                                                  A4
A3        Appendix Figures




Figure A2: Percent of Discharges Overseen by Emergency Medicine Specialists, by Emer-
gency Department Size
Notes: This figure estimates the relationship between Emergency Department (ED) discharge volumes and
the share of discharges overseen by Emergency Medicine (EM) specialists. The graph is a non-parametric
binned scatter plot of the share of discharges in each specialty versus the underlying annual discharge volume
of the ED. The solid blue circles plot the EM specialty share. The red X's plot the non-EM share. We bin
specialty shares into 10 equal-sized bins and plot the mean shares within each bin.




                                                     A5
                            Figure A3: Malpractice Reports per Quarter
Notes: This figure plots a histogram of the number of malpractice reports filed per quarter. Red bars indicate
reports in time periods that are included in our final analytic sample: those with at least 8 quarters of data
before and after the report. Blue bars indicate reports in time periods that are not eligible for our final
sample.




                                                     A6
         Figure A4: Discharge Volume Among Reported and Unreported Physicians
Notes: This figure estimates the relationship between physicians' discharge volumes and experience with
malpractice reports. We plot a histogram of average discharge volumes per quarter separately for reported
and unreported physicians. Discharge volumes for reported physicians are plotted using blue bars; discharge
volumes for unreported physicians are marked using grey bars with black outlines. Discharge volumes are
calculated as two-year rolling averages. Discharge volumes for reported physicians are calculated using
data in the quarter before their report and the seven previous quarters. Discharge volumes for unreported
physicians are calculated using data from their eligible match period, as described in Section 3.3.




                                                   A7
                          Figure A5: Malpractice Reports per Discharge
Notes: This figure estimates the relationship between physician discharge volume per quarter and the prob-
ability of being reported for malpractice. The graph is a non-parametric binned scatter plot of the rate of
reports per 1,000 discharges versus the underlying quarterly discharge volume of each physician. We bin
discharge volumes into 5 equal-sized bins and plot the mean malpractice rate within each bin. We calculate
two malpractice rates depending on the location of the patient injury which precipitated the report. The
hollow, red squares plot the rate of malpractice reports that specifically list the Emergency Department as
the injury location. The blue circles plot the rate of any malpractice report against an Emergency Medicine
physician. For scaling purposes, we drop physician-quarters in the bottom 10 percent of discharge volumes.
We drop data from reported physicians in the post-report period.




                                                   A8
                           Figure A6: Malpractice Reports per Physician
Notes: This figure plots a histogram of the number of malpractice reports filed against Emergency Medicine
specialists in our sample, conditional on having at least one report. For scaling purposes, the horizontal axis
is truncated at six reports.




                                                     A9
Figure A7: Malpractice Report Characteristics among Physicians with a Single versus Mul-
tiple Reports
Notes: These figures plot the characteristics of physicians' first malpractice reports, stratified by whether or
not the physicians go on to have other reports filed against them. In each panel, the left column describes
physicians that experience only one report. The right column describes physicians who experience multiple
reports. The error bars indicate the difference in means across the two groups, controlling for differences in
underlying tenure. Panels A, B and C plot the share of reports that include a suit, a non-zero payment and
a permanent injury, respectively.




                                                     A10
        Figure A8: Development of Malpractice Claims Before and After the Report
Notes: This figure plots an event study of malpractice claim development relative to the timing of the initial
report. The opaque squares plot the percent of malpractice reports that have reached a final disposition.
The hollow circles plot the share of malpractice reports where a suit has been filed. The X's indicate the
share of reports where the precipitating injury has occurred.




                                                    A11
      Figure A9: Frequency of Malpractice Reports by Clinical Type
Notes: This figure estimates the frequency of malpractice reports relative to the fre-
quency of related discharges in the Emergency Department. The vertical axis describes
the share of malpractice reports that fall into each clinical category. The horizontal axis
shows the share of discharges that fall into the equivalent clinical category. Discharge
shares are based on data from reported physicians in the quarter in which the patient
injury occurred.




                                           A12
  Panel A. Emergency Department Volume                    Panel B. Percent Medicaid/Uninsured




                                 Panel C. Hospital Teaching Status




   Figure A10: Prevalence of Malpractice Reports Across Emergency Department Types
Notes: These figures plot the prevalence of malpractice reports across Emergency Departments (ED). Panel
A is a non-parametric binned scatter plot of the rate of malpractice reports per 1,000 discharges versus the
underlying quarterly discharge volume of the ED. Panel B is a non-parametric binned scatter plot of the
rate of malpractice reports per 1,000 discharges versus the share of Medicaid/uninsured discharges at the
ED. For each panel, we bin the horizontal axis into 20 equal-sized bins and plot the mean malpractice rate
within each bin. Panel C is a bar graph plotting the rate of malpractice reports per 1,000 discharges by the
teaching status of the hospital.




                                                   A13
           Panel A. Claimant Injury                                Panel B. Suit Filing




                                     Panel C. Final Disposition




Figure A11: Changes in Discharge Volume and the Development of the Malpractice Claim
Notes: This figure plots event studies of physician discharge volume before and after key events in the
development of the malpractice claim other than the malpractice report (Figure 2). Panels A, B and C plot
changes in discharge volume over time relative to the timing of the claimant injury, the suit filing where
relevant, and the final disposition of the claim, respectively.




                                                  A14
     Panel A. Stricter Volume Restriction                     Panel B. No Matching on Trend




                                  Panel C. Coarsened Exact Match




Figure A12: Effect of Malpractice Reports on Discharge Volume: Alternate Matching Ap-
proaches
Notes: These figures plot event studies of physician discharge volumes before and after malpractice reports,
relative to unreported physicians selected through alternative matching approaches. To facilitate comparison,
we plot all discharge volumes as absolute changes relative to the quarter prior to the report. In Panel A,
we select controls using a propensity score match that mirrors our main approach, except that we impose a
stricter volume restriction on the sample, dropping physicians with baseline volumes below the 25th percentile
volume among reported physicians (instead of the 10th percentile). In Panel B, we select controls using a
propensity score match as in our main model, except that we do not include baseline volume trends as a
predictor in the match. In Panel C, we select controls using a one-to-one coarsened exact match.




                                                    A15
      Panel A. Early Resolution Claims                        Panel B. Late Resolution Claims




    Figure A13: Effect of Malpractice Reports on Discharge Volume, by Claim Duration
Notes: These figures plot event studies of physician discharge volumes before and after malpractice reports.
The panels separate reported physicians into two groups according to the duration of the malpractice claim
and show changes relative to the full control group. Early resolution claims include those that were resolved
during the pre-suit period and claims that were abandoned.




                                                    A16
          Panel A. Ln(Total Charges)                        Panel B. With Hospital Fixed Effects




              Panel C. Linear Costs                                      Panel D: GLM




Figure A14: Effect of Malpractice Reports on Costs per Discharge: Alternate Specifications
Notes: These figures plot event studies of treatment intensity before and after malpractice reports using four
alternative specifications to our main model. Panel A estimates changes in charges rather than costs. Panel
B includes controls for hospital fixed effects. Panel C models linear costs rather than the log transformation.
Panel D models costs using a one-part GLM model with a log link function. Costs are modeled in 2009
dollars.




                                                     A17
 Figure A15: Rate of Radiology Coding Across Discharge Data Versions
Notes: This figure is a scatter plot of the rate of radiology coding in the older version
of the discharge data (2005-2009) versus the newer version (2010-2013). Each dot is
a hospital. The vertical axis describes the share of discharges in the newer data that
have any radiology CPT code. The horizontal axis describes the share of discharges
in the older data that have any radiology CPT code. The hollow circles indicate the
hospitals that are included in the main specification of our testing analysis. The solid
red circles show hospitals that are excluded. The solid black line is a 45 degree line.




                                          A18
                                                       Panel B: Alternate Specification with Stricter
          Panel A. Main Specification
                                                                 Data Inclusion Criteria




           Figure A16: Effect of Malpractice Reports on Low-Value Head Imaging
Notes: These figures plot event studies of low-value head imaging rates before and after malpractice reports.
Low-value head imaging includes head CT scans and MRIs among patients presenting with an uncomplicated
headache. The main specification excludes hospitals with (1) a 20 percentage point or more difference in
radiology coding between the new data version (2010-2013) and old data version (2005-2009) or (2) a radiology
coding rate of under 1 percent in the old data version. The alternate specification excludes hospitals with
(1) a 10 percentage point or more difference in radiology coding between the new and old data versions or
(2) a radiology coding rate of under 10 percent in the baseline period.




                                                    A19
Table A1: Effect of Malpractice Reports by Claim and Physician Characteristics
Panel A: Discharge Volume

                                                                                      Dependent
                                               Standard                                Variable   Percent
                                 Coefficient     Error    Observations   Physicians     Mean      Change
Discharge Volume
A. Similarity to Claimant
    Dissimilar                    -72.79**      22.24        12,070         595          773       -9.4
    Similar                        -4.19**      1.55         15,079         729          44        -9.5

B. Payment to Claimant
    $0                             -75.27*      30.77        11,968         546          846        -8.9
    $1-$149,999                   -89.18**      30.90        11,628         526          830       -10.8
    $150,000+                      -72.11*      34.17        11,577         523          829        -8.7

C. Severity of Claimant Injury
    Temporary                      -63.90       33.25        11,101         495          765       -8.3
    Permanent                    -81.29***      23.84        14,025         667          854       -9.5

D. Tenure
    Below 10 years                 -25.93       35.64        10,982         488          808        -3.2
    10-24 years                   -81.26**      27.19        12,665         587          858        -9.5
    25+ years                    -104.41**      36.71        11,526         520          815       -12.8

E. Gender
    Male                         -77.80***      22.55        14,110         672          853        -9.1
    Female                         -76.10       45.29        11,016         490          763       -10.0

F. Previous Report
    No                           -81.30***      24.48        13,736         650          847       -9.6
    Yes                           -71.15*       31.55        11,390         512          805       -8.8

G. Multiple Paid Claims
    No                           -88.33***      22.66        14,501         695          840       -10.5
    Yes                            -4.37        40.03        10,625         467          803        -0.5
Table continues on next page.




                                                  A20
Table A1: Effect of Malpractice Reports by Claim and Physician Characteristics
(continued)
Panel B: Costs per Discharge

                                                                                           Dependent
                                                  Standard                                  Variable    Percent
                                    Coefficient     Error    Observations    Physicians      Mean       Change
 Ln(Costs)
 A. Similarity to Claimant
     Dissimilar                       0.035*       0.017       8,293,443         595          560
     Similar                          0.041*       0.021        591,842          595          672

 B. Payment to Claimant
     $0                               0.044*       0.020       8,565,483         545          576
     $1-$149,999                      0.060*       0.024       8,256,488         525          547
     $150,000+                         0.022       0.024       8,227,713         522          553

 C. Severity of Claimant Injury
     Temporary                       0.065**       0.024       7,798,454         494          571
     Permanent                        0.036*       0.017       10,203,702        666          558

 D. Tenure
     Below 10 years                    0.045       0.030       7,778,196         487          602
     10-24 years                       0.036       0.019       9,140,806         586          543
     25+ years                        0.053*       0.024       8,130,682         519          567

 E. Gender
     Male                            0.048**       0.017       10,267,835        671          564
     Female                           0.019        0.029        7,734,321        489          544

 F. Previous Report
     No                               0.038*       0.017       9,949,298         649          550
     Yes                              0.055*       0.027       8,052,858         511          590

 G. Multiple Paid Claims
     No                               0.04*         0.02       10,501,108        694          560
     Yes                              0.06          0.03        7,501,048        466          564
 Notes: This table estimates the effect of malpractice reports across different claim types and physician char-
acteristics. Panel A models discharge volume and Panel B models costs per discharge. Each row represents
the result of a separate regression. All regression analyses control for physician fixed effects, physician tenure
and calendar time fixed effects. Analyses of costs per discharge additionally control for patient age, sex, race,
presenting condition, visit day and insurance status. Standard errors are clustered at the physician level. Costs
are reported in 2009 dollars. * p<.05; ** p<.01; *** p<0.001




                                                      A21
          Figure A17: Number of Malpractice Reports per Emergency Department
Notes: This figure plots a histogram of the number of reports per Emergency Department. The sample
covers malpractice reports against the Emergency Medicine specialists included in our final analytic sample,
as discussed in Section 3.4. For scaling purposes, the horizontal axis is truncated at 10 reports.




                                                   A22
Table A2: Association Between Malpractice Reports and Discharge Volume at the Emergency
Department Facility Level

                                                    Emergency Department Discharge Volume
                                                        (1)                    (2)
                                                    Ln(Volume)               Volume
 Cumulative Reports in Emergency Department          0.000350                 -36.34
                                                     (0.00540)               (59.28)
 Observations                                          6347                   6347
 Emergency Departments                                  212                   212
 Mean Emergency Department Volume                      7775                   7775
 Notes: This table estimates total Emergency Department discharge volume per quarter as a
function of the number of malpractice reports at the facility in the past year (not including the
contemporaneous quarter). The sample covers malpractice reports against Emergency Medicine
specialists included in our final analytic sample, as discussed in Section 3.4. Column 1 models
the log of discharge volume while column 2 models linear discharge volume. All models include
hospital fixed effects and calendar time fixed effects. * p<.05; ** p<.01; *** p<0.001.




                                            A23
Table A3: Cost Differential Between Reported and Unreported Physi-
cians in the Pre-Report Period

                           Full Pre-Report Period        Quarter Before Report
                                       (1)                           (2)
 Reported                           0.00734                       0.000810
                                    (0.0163)                      (0.0188)
 Observations                       5345808                        654128
 Mean of Dep. Var.                    560                            585
 Notes: This table estimates the pre-report cost differential between reported and
unreported physicians. Each column reports coefficients from a separate regression,
with standard errors clustered by physician in parentheses. The full pre-report period
includes the two years prior to the report. All regressions include hospital fixed
effects, physician tenure and calendar time fixed effects, as well as patient age, sex,
race, presenting condition, visit day and insurance status. Costs are reported in 2009
dollars. * p<.05; ** p<.01; *** p<0.001.




                                         A24
