                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            GLOBALIZATION AND GLOBAL CRISES:
                              REST OF THE WORLD VS. ISRAEL

                                               Assaf Razin

                                         Working Paper 28339
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w28339


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2021




I thank Yoni BenBassat and Michel Strawczynsky for assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2021 by Assaf Razin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Globalization and Global Crises: Rest of the World vs. Israel
Assaf Razin
NBER Working Paper No. 28339
January 2021
JEL No. F1,F3

                                         ABSTRACT

Post WWII globalization forces are facing headwinds in the form of global crises-the "The Great
Recession" and the "The Pandemic Recession". Israel's trade and financial globalization,
however, is steadily rising. The pandemic-induced slump in economic activity is deep, as
consumer spending, investment spending, and export demand tumble. Central banks, tied down
by the zero interest rate, resort to semi-fiscal expansionary policies. Indeed, the stabilization
burden falls on fiscal policy. The paper provides an overview of the new globalization trends in
the world and in Israel, with emphasis on the role of global crises, the Global Financial Crisis,
and the Pandemic Crisis in changing globalization long-term trends. When the coronavirus hit,
supply chains and production have been disrupted. However, the impact of the pandemic shock is
not on the supply side only. On the demand side, the desire to invest has plunged, while people
across the rich world are now saving much of their income. Would this short-term changes can
reinforce the re-trending of the globalization, which is observed since the Global Financial
Crisis? The paper focuses on globalization and provides comparative overview of experiences of
the advanced economies and Israel.


Assaf Razin
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv 69978
ISRAEL
and Cornell University and CEPR
and also NBER
razin@tauex.tau.ac.il
The pandemic-induced slump in economic activity is deep, as consumer spending, investment

spending, and export demand tumble. Central banks, tied down by the zero interest rate, resort to

semi-fiscal expansionary policies. Indeed, the stabilization burden falls on fiscal policy. The

paper provides an overview of the new globalization trends in the world and in Israel, with

emphasis on the role of global crises, the Global Financial Crisis, and the Pandemic Crisis in

changing globalization long-term trends. When the coronavirus hit, supply chains and production

have been disrupted. However, the impact of the pandemic shock is not on the supply side only.

On the demand side, the desire to invest has plunged, while people across the rich world are now

saving much of their income. Would this short-term changes can reinforce the re-trending of the

globalization, which is observed since the Global Financial Crisis? The paper focuses on the issue

and provides different observation in comparing the advanced economies and Israel.




Introduction

International trade in the world economy increased rapidly after 1990, fuelled by the growth of a

complex network of global value chains Trade globalization reversed course since the Global

Financial Crisis. The new trend is expected to endure after the Global Pandemic Crisis. There are

no indication of lessening trend of financial globalization, except for short term reversal during the

Global Financial Crisis. Israel uniquely exhibits no discerning trend for its trade with the rest of

world associated with the recent global crises.


Globalization benefits were long been recognized in economics. In his 1919 book, The Economic

Consequences of the Peace, John Maynard Keynes described the open borders of the then bygone
first age of globalization before WWI. He writes: "The inhabitant of London could order by

telephone, sipping his morning tea in bed, the various products of the whole earth, in such quantity

as he might see fit, and reasonably expect their early delivery on his doorstep, he could at the same

moment and by the same means adventure his wealth in the natural resources and new enterprises

of any quarter of the world, [and] he could secure forthwith, if he wished it, cheap and comfortable

means of transit to any country or climate without passport or other formality."


Globalization did reverse its course in the second period, from the outbreak of World War I in

1914 until the end of World War II in 1945. World War I produced prolonged economic

dislocation, which included the withdrawal of Russia from world trade after the communist

revolution in 1917, the Spanish flu pandemic in 1918 and 1919, monetary instability in the early

1920s, new immigration restrictions, the Great Depression starting in 1929, and a severe outbreak

of protectionism in the 1930s. Health concerns are providing new rationales for protectionism,

especially for international travel, medical gear and food, and a renewed emphasis on domestic

sourcing.


Global value supply chains are highly vulnerable to pandemics because they are geographically

vastly expanded. They are sensitive also politically caused trade conflicts. Even prior to the Corona

virus pandemic, trade globalization was challenged by a rising wave of populism spurred on by

economic discontent in Europe, the United States, Latin America and elsewhere and a trade war

between the US and China .


The paper is organized as follows. Section I addresses global crises, including the Global Pandemic Crisis. 

Section II addresses recent trends in financial globalization. Section III analyses the recent slowing 

growth trend of worldwide globalization, mostly trade globalization. Section IV analyses trends in 
financial globalization among advanced economies.  Section V describes Israel's new export markets. 

Section analyzes the rerouting of Israel towards the new markets.  Israel tradeglobalization trends are 

discussed in section VI. Israel financial ­globalization is discussed in section VII. Section VIII concludes.  




I. World-Wide Globalization Slowdown

The backlash against trade globalization is not restricted to the Global Pandemic Crisis..

International trade increased rapidly after 1990, fuelled by the growth of a complex network of

global value chains (GVCs). These chains represent the process of ever-finer specialization and

geographic fragmentation of production. Generally speaking, the higher the participation in intra-

regional value chains, the higher the degree of regional economic integration. Likewise, the higher

the degree of participation in inter-regional GVCs, the higher the degree of economic integration

into the global economy. In the wake of the 2008 Global Financial Crisis, uncertainty in the world

economy led many firms to reassess their business models. Rather than relying on global supply

chains, an increasing number of firms invested in robots, which prompted a renaissance of

manufacturing in industrialized countries. The global value chains could be reshuffled, or be

reduced. Whether they will be localized or regionalized, or whether the crisis will lead to the

continuation of globalization. A short period of economic recession seems unavoidable, but the

question is whether the increased frequency of pandemics in the 21st century crisis will structurally

transform globalization on the long-term. 2



                                                            
2
     Pol Antras (2020) evaluates the extent to which the world economy has entered a phase of de-

globalisation, and it offers some speculative thoughts on the future of global value chains in the
The pandemic-induced slump in economic activity is deep. Consumer spending, investment

spending, and export demand tumble. Central banks are tied down by zero interest rate are

losing its most effective stabilization- policy instrument. Consequently, the burden falls on fiscal

policy. When the coronavirus hit, supply chains and production have been disrupted. However,

the bigger impact of the pandemic has been on the demand side, the desire to invest has plunged,

while people across the rich world are now saving much of their income.

 Longer-term there is a risk that younger student from poorer backgrounds in the future will

struggle to catch up after an extensive period out of school due to lockdowns and other

disruptions. Education disruptions by the pandemic distorts the development trajectory of

children, social mobility declines, lowering productivity and raising inequality.


The pandemic-induced slump in economic activity is deep. Consumer spending, investment

spending, and export demand tumble. Central banks, tied down by the zero interest rate, are losing

its most effective stabilization-policy instrument. Consequently, the burden falls on fiscal

policy. When the coronavirus hit, supply chains and production have been disrupted. However, the

bigger impact of the pandemic has been on the demand side, the desire to invest has plunged, while

people across the rich world are now saving much of their income.


 Longer-term, there is a risk that younger students from poorer backgrounds will struggle to

catch up after an extensive period out of school due to lockdowns and other disruptions.


                                                            
post-COVID-19 age. Although the growth of international trade flows relative to that of GDP
has slowed down since the Great Recession, this paper finds little systematic evidence indicating
that the world economy has already entered an era of de-globalisation. Instead, the observed
slowdown in globalisation is a natural sequel to the unsustainable increase in globalisation
experienced in the late 1980s, 1990s and early 2000s.
Education disruptions by the pandemic, distorts the development trajectory of children, degrades

social mobility, diminishes productivity, and breeds inequality.




I.1 Global Crises

Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff (2014), surveying centuries-old crises, have discovered

startling qualitative and quantitative parallels across a number of standard financial crisis

indicators in 18 postwar banking crises. They found that banking crises were protracted (output

declining on average for two years); asset prices fell steeply, with housing plunging 35 percent

on average, and equity prices declining by 55 percent over 3.5 years. Unemployment rises by 7

percentage points over four years, while output falls by 9 percent.3



                                                   Figure 1: Global Growth Rates 1871-2020




Source: World Bank (2020), Global Economic Prospects.




                                                            
3
     See Razin (2014, 2021). 
Figure 1 indicates that since 1870, the global economy has experienced 14 global recessions. As

for the most recent, the Global Pandemic Crisis, current projections suggest that the COVID-19

global recession will be the fourth deepest, and the most severe since the end of World War II.



I.2 Global Crises
Guerrieri et al (2020) demonstrate that supply shock, such as Covid-19, can trigger changes in aggregate

demand larger than the shocks themselves, in a general equilibrium setting. This is possible when supply

shocks are concentrated in certain sectors, as they are during a shutdown in response to a pandemic. The

fact that some goods are no longer available makes it less attractive to spend overall. An interpretation is

that the shutdown increases the shadow price of the goods in the affected sectors, making total current

consumption more expensive and thus discouraging it. On the other hand, the unavailability of goods in

some sectors can shift spending towards the other sectors, through a substitution channel. Whether or not

full employment is maintained in the sectors not directly affected by the shutdown depends on the relative

strength of these two effects. A supply shock in sector 1 can spill over into a demand shortage in sector 2

that is amplified by incomplete markets. Guerrieri et al (2020) then turn to borrowing constrained

consumers and show that the condition for a contraction in employment in unaffected sectors becomes

less stringent. Intuitively, if workers in the affected sectors lose their jobs and income, their consumption

drops significantly if they are credit constrained and have high marginal propensity to consume (MPC).

To make up for this, workers in the unaffected sectors would have to increase their consumption of the

remaining goods sufficiently. This requires a higher degree of substitution across sectors. If goods are not

too close substitutes, aggregate demand contracts more than supply and employment in the unaffected

sectors falls. Regarding consumption spending, Kozlowski et al (2020) observe that although there

may be an initial "catch-up" surge of consumer spending in advanced economies with the

emergence of a vaccine, consumers are likely to save more, in the longer run. In addition to its
direct impact on investment and hiring, the pandemic will likely impose longer-term productivity

costs. By the time the pandemic is over, a generation of children, particularly those from lower-

income households, will in effect have lost significant period of their schooling. Young adults

who struggle to find their first job in the labor market can expect to earn less in the future than

they might otherwise have done. In these aspects, health triggered crises are different from

financially sourced crises.



Figure 2 displays the index of world industrial production during the months following the onset of three

crises (June 1929 for the Great Depression (GD), April 2008 for the Global Financial Crisis (GFC), and

March 2020 for the Global Pandemic Crisis (GPC).

    Figure 2: World industrial production, Great Depression vs. Global Financial Crisis




Source: Updated dataset of Eichengreen and O'Rourke (2010). Recent data for US and EU are taken from the
OECD (2020), the Chinese data taken from the National Bureau of Statistics of China (Press release, August 2020).
Indices are weighted by 2019 real GDP (in PPP terms) from the OECD.


The Global Financial Crisis has some similarities with the Great Depression. Eichengreen and

O'Rourke (2010) observe that the downturns following the two financial crises were initially

very similar. The first year of the 2008-2009 slump in industrial production was fully
comparable to the first year of the great global slump from 1929 to 1933. It appears that in both

cases the trigger is a credit crunch following a sudden burst of asset-price and credit bubbles.

However, differences in financial institutions and policy reactions (monetary, fiscal and

regulatory) may explain the divergence of tracks after the initial stages. Recovery of world

industrial production starts much earlier in the Great Recession than in the Great Depression.

Periods of depressed output are significantly shorter in the former than the latter, thanks to

different policy reactions and improved financial and budget institutions. The difference between

the two global crises occurred after about ten months. During the Great Recession, there was a

relatively quick recovery after ten months. Such a recovery did not occur during the Great

Depression. The downturn would continue for another 25 months before the recovery set in. As

indicated, the fundamental reason for the sharp contrast between these two crises, in terms of

recovery periods, was the different reactions of monetary and fiscal authorities.

The Global Pandemic crisis is not caused by failures of the financial system as was the case

regarding GD and GFC. It is caused by the pandemic shock that required lockdown of productive

sectors of the economy. Contributing to the macroeconomic theory of the health driven crises,

Guerrieri et al (2020) demonstrate in a general equilibrium setting, that supply shock, such as

Covid-19, can trigger changes in aggregate demand larger than the shocks themselves. This is

possible when supply shocks are concentrated in certain sectors, as they are during a shutdown in

response to a pandemic. The fact that some goods are no longer available makes it less attractive

to spend overall. An interpretation is that the shutdown increases the shadow price of the goods

in the affected sectors, making total current consumption more expensive and thus discouraging

it. On the other hand, the unavailability of goods in some sectors can shift spending towards the

other sectors, through a substitution channel. Whether or not full employment is maintained in
the sectors not directly affected by the shutdown depends on the relative strength of these two

effects. A supply shock in sector 1 can spill over into a demand shortage in sector 2 that is

amplified by incomplete markets. Guerrieri et al (2020) then turn to borrowing constrained

consumers and show that the condition for a contraction in employment in unaffected sectors

becomes less stringent. Intuitively, if workers in the affected sectors lose their jobs and income,

their consumption drops significantly if they are credit constrained and have high MPCs. To

make up for this, workers in the unaffected sectors would have to increase their consumption of

the remaining goods sufficiently. This requires a higher degree of substitution across sectors. If

goods are not too close substitutes, aggregate demand contracts more than supply and

employment in the unaffected sectors falls.

In comparing the 2008 Global Financial Crisis (GFC) to the 2020 Global Pandemic Crisis (GPC)

there are few key differences.

Origin of crisis. The shock that stated the GFC was an internal to the economy. The crisis

originated from the malfunctioning of the economy's financial system. In contrast, the shock,

which started and prolonged PC, was external to the economy. Epidemiology forces drive the

crisis.

Magnitude of the initial shock. Quantitatively, the first quarters decline since the inception of

the crisis, in employment and output, are greater in the PC case, compared to the GFC case.

Length of recovery. The recovery period from PC, once immunity from coronavirus is

discovered and covered large segments of the population, is expected to be quick. In contrast, the

recovery period in the GFC case was protracted.
I.3 Disaster Relief and Stimulus

Figure 3: US gross domestic product: Percentage change from previous
Quarter, 1950-2020 2nd quarter)




Source: US Bureau of Economic Analysis (2020)


Figure 3 shows that the magnitude of the initial shock is the most severe, compared to post

WWII downturn of US output.

Pandemic lockdowns brought the unemployment rate to an historical highest (see Figure 4).

Exiting from the lockdown, U.S. jobs grew by 4.8 million in June 2020. It was the second month

of strong job gain after the lockdown huge losses, when businesses laid off or furloughed tens of

millions of workers as the pandemic put a large swath of economic activity on ice.



                           Figure 4: US Unemployment rate since 1948
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics and the Federal Reserve Economic Data. Unemployment rates are seasonally

adjusted.




Disparities in the 2020 pandemic US unemployment across different demographic groups are

significant. The largest employment declines during the pandemic to date are among Hispanics,

younger workers and workers who have a high school degree or some college education but have

not completed a college degree.

Social distancing is more difficult for workers in the service sector and unemployment rates are

higher for some service sector occupations like food service and travel. Workers in jobs where

face-to-face interactions are difficult to avoid are significantly more likely to have been

unemployed.

The US employment rebound came in part thanks to more than $500 billion in federal aid to

small businesses offered on the condition that workers be retained, under the one-off Paycheck

Protection Program. The "keep-heads-above-water" policy response has been massive and quick

among advanced economies. The European style is trying to preserve firms and workers in their
current jobs and the U.S. version is to try to address it as a natural catastrophe and try to

subsidize people but allow higher unemployment. In the US, Cares Act legislation was aimed at

providing relief for individuals and businesses that have been negatively impacted by the

coronavirus outbreak. The CARES program4 included:

Direct payments: Americans who pay taxes will receive a one-time direct deposit of up to

$1,200, and married couples will receive $2,400, plus an additional $500 per child. The

payments will be available for incomes up to $75,000 for individuals and $150,000 for married

couples.

Unemployment: the program provides $250 billion for an extended unemployment insurance

program, expands eligibility, and offers workers an additional $600 per week for four months, on

top of what state programs pay. It also extends UI benefits through Dec. 31 for eligible workers.

The program applies to the self-employed, independent contractors and gig economy workers.

Payroll taxes: The measure allows employers to delay the payment of their portion of 2020

payroll taxes until 2021 and 2022.

Use of retirement funds: The bill waives the 10% early withdrawal penalty for distributions up to

$100,000 for coronavirus-related purposes, retroactive to Jan. 1, 2020. Withdrawals are still

taxed, but taxes are spread over three years, or the taxpayer has the three-year period to roll it

back over.




                                                            

4
      The beginning of 2021 witnesses the second-largest federal stimulus package, after the 2020
first package of CARES.

 
The Federal Reserve, that had cut interest rates to near zero, had rolled out a 2008-type menu of

emergency loan program, while teaming up with the Treasury Department with programs to

support lending to small and medium size businesses, and buy corporate debt. That is, the

Federal Reserve took a semi-fiscal expansionary policy.5

The Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) act offered small businesses loans that can be converted

into grants if they are used to maintain payroll. US Bureau of Labor Statistics (May 2020 report)

shows a partial bounce back of contact-intensive sectors like restaurants and dentists' offices that

were largely shut down by social distancing. Welfare states reacted with many job maintenance

and firm relief measures have been implemented during the Great Lockdown. In both the EU and

the US tax deadlines have been pushed back. Many US states waived the one-week `waiting

period' before receiving unemployment benefits and the job search requirement. They expanded

eligibility to include those who need to stay at home to take care of either a child (due to daycare

and school closures) or other dependent, who may be sick/quarantined, and those who are

themselves sick or quarantined due to suspicion of being sick.

The UK government is further putting in place government-backed, subsidized loans to help

small businesses weather the storm. The French government is extending its `chômage partiel'

(temporary unemployment) program, effectively covering 85% of wages. Germany's stimulus

package centerpiece includes a three percentage-point reduction in value added tax, valid from

June 2020 until the end of 2020. In addition, the coalition partners signed off on a 50bn "future

package" of investment, with a focus on the transition to a greener economy, and research in

                                                            
5
  On Bank of Israel policy crisis response (liquidity provision), and whether it helped maintain

financial integration see Rui, Esteves, and Nathan Sussman (2020).

 
areas such as artificial intelligence and quantum computing. Huge sums will be spent on

expanding Germany's charging infrastructure for electric cars. Since the VAT is equivalent to a

tax on wages, plus a tax on wealth, the cut in VAT boosts consumption spending and provides

incentive to work. It also has an intertemporal stimulating effect. The government changes VAT

rates to create a future path of increasing sales taxes and hence stimulate inflation expectations.


I.4 Real-Time Evidence

Chetty et Al (2020) use daily credit card data to provide real-time evidence on impacts of the

Covid-19 Pandemic.6 They find that in the first few months of the pandemic, spending fell much

more for the rich than the poor (top 25% vs. bottom 25%), and the bulk of the reduction resulted

from a drop in spending on in-person services. This indicates there was not necessarily a

reduction in purchasing power. The reduction was related to fears of the virus. Business revenue

dropped more severely in high-income areas. The authors' interpretation is that this is a supply

shock, not a lack of purchasing power.

CARES Act stimulus increased spending, but did not fill the hole created by the pandemic

shock. Stimulus checks did increase spending among low-income Americans, but the vast

majority of the increase in spending was on durable goods, not in-person services. For stimulus

to have an impact on employment in the short-run, people would have to switch jobs or move.

The PPP act had limited impact on employment. The authors suggest that businesses who took

the loans did not expect to lay off workers to begin with.



                                                            
6
   Economists often study the effects of shocks with household survey data, but these data--while 

important--have limitations. First, they have time lags and low frequencies. Second, they cannot be 
disaggregated. 
Effects of this shock on employment and inequality may be long lasting and require policy

interventions. 70% of low-income workers who had jobs in wealthy parts of Manhattan lost their

jobs. Chetty cites evidence, from past studies of the Great Recession that people do not often

move in search of new jobs; suggesting policy intervention may be required. Further, there are

potentially big implications for inequality. One example: Low-income students are doing far

fewer math exercises on commonly used app than their higher-income peers are.


II. Financial Globalization

Full international financial integration requires that in the long run (when prices adjust to various

shocks and markets clear), the following arbitrage equation holds:


                                                                                                    /              ,
                                                               1                     1                                     ,
                                                                                                    /                  ,



Where  stands for Israel, Canada, Germany and the United Kingdom; and q stands for the real

exchange rate Vis a Vis the US dollar96F7:


                                                                                                    ,
                                                                            /   ,       /      ,      ,
                                                                                                    ,


In addition,  stands for the nominal exchange rate, Vis a Vis the US dollar; and  stands for the

price level.




                                                            
7
     Recall that by the Fisher equation: 
                                                                       ,                           /       ,                              ,   /       ,
                       1          1                                         , That is,  1                                      1                               . 
                                                                   ,                                   /       ,                      ,           /       ,
This measure of financial integration is how close is the country's real interest rate, adjusted for

the real exchange rate evolution from the present into the next period, is equal across countries,

which use different currencies and have different domestic inflation), under perfect international

arbitrage,




       The next Figure plots the graphs of the real-interest-rate, adjusted for real exchange rate

changes, the yields on three-month government bonds for Israel, Canada, Germany and the

United Kingdom, and the yields on three-month US government bonds. International financial

integration generates more synchronized country-specific yields. Time series are filtered to wash

out short-run idiosyncratic fluctuations. This figure demonstrates strikingly that in the 1990s

Israel integrated sufficiently into the world capital market, while convergence occurred at the

beginning of the 2000s.


     Figure 5: Gross Real Interest Rate Adjusted for Real Exchange Rate Changes (US
                                        benchmark)
Note: Series are HP-filtered. Monthly data are shown in the background. Source: Stats Bureau, FRED, World Bank, Real-

exchange-rate adjusted, yields on three-month government bonds for Israel, Canada, Germany and the United Kingdom, and the

yields on three-month US government bonds.


The cross-country dispersion measure, shown in Figure 6, describes a downward trend, except
for a short-term blip during the Great Financial Crisis.



  Figure 6: Cross-country standard Deviation of real interest rates adjusted for exchange
                                     rate changes




Source: Stats Bureau, FRED, World Bank, Real-exchange-rate adjusted, yields on three-month government bonds for Israel,

Canada, Germany and the United Kingdom, and the yields on three-month US government bonds.


In sum, Figure 6 brings out a strong evidence for financial integration among advanced

economies.8




                                                            
8
   See also the analysis of  the Corona crisis shortterm effects on financial globalization  in Mohsin et al

(2020).    In the Appendix  we depict the cross country trend of standard deviation of Israel's real interest 

rates adjusted for exchange rate changes and the US real interest rate.
III. Trade Globalization

 Antras (2020) provides systematic evidence indicating that the world economy has already entered

an era of de-globalization in the first decade of the 2000s. He argues that the recent slowdown in

globalization is a natural sequel to the unsustainable increase in globalization experienced in the late

1980s, 1990s and early 2000s.9 The ICT revolution has made a great unbundling of production

chains possible, and large wage differentials, globally, have made doing so ­ profitable. This

generated vast new quantity of `supply chain trade'. Greater international economic

interconnectedness over recent decades has been changing inflation dynamics.10 The expansion

of global value chains (GVCs), i.e., cross-border trade in intermediate goods and services, is an

important channel through which global economic slack influences domestic inflation.11As

GVCs expand, direct and indirect competition among economies increases, making domestic

inflation more sensitive to the global output gap. This can affect the trade-offs that central banks

face when managing inflation. The slope of the Phillips Curve may have changed.12 There is

evidence that global inflationary cycles that correspond with an intensifying globalization

propagates common shocks via commodity, trade and financial channels. Correlations of CPI are

as elevated today as during the first oil shock and on the surface we appear to be in the midst of a

highly synchronized global rates cycle.


Global value chains will likely undergo a drastic transformation in the decade ahead. The change

will be driven by a push for greater supply chain resilience due to the pandemic.




                                                            
9
  See also  Baldwin and Tomiura (2020). 
10
    See Carney (2017). 
11
    See Auer et al (2017). 
12
    See Razin (2018). 
One aspect of a lack of resilience in the last decades of globalization to pandemic is that GVCs

were highly vulnerable. They have not been not sufficiently diversified. Consequently, they are

sensitive to interruptions caused by either a pandemic like this one or trade conflicts. Even prior

to the Corona virus pandemic, trade globalization was challenged by a rising wave of populism

spurred on by economic discontent in Europe, the United States, Latin America and elsewhere

and a trade war between the US and China. The recent backlash against trade globalization is not

a new phenomenon, either. International trade increased rapidly after 1990, fueled by the growth

of a complex network of GVCs. These chains represent the process of ever-finer specialization

and geographic fragmentation of production. Kilic and Marin (2020) distinguish between local

value chain participation, regional value chain (RVC) participation and global participation

(GVC). Generally speaking, the higher the participation in intra-regional RVCs, the higher the

degree of regional economic integration. Likewise, the higher the degree of participation in inter-

regional GVCs, the higher the degree of economic integration into the global economy. In the

wake of the 2008 Global Financial Crisis, uncertainty in the world economy led many firms to

reassess their business models. Rather than relying on global supply chains, an increasing

number of firms invested in robots, which prompted a renaissance of manufacturing in

industrialized countries. As indicated previously, the global value chains could be reshuffled, or

be reduced. Whether they will be localized or regionalized, or whether the crisis will lead to the

continuation of globalization. A short period of economic recession seems unavoidable, but the

question is whether COVID-19 crisis will structurally transform globalization on the long-term.

Unemployment patterns differ markedly from the experience of the Great Recession that began

in 2008.
Global trade, measured by the ratio of world exports to world GDP, is a proxy for economic

integration. Figure 7 reveals five periods of modern globalization (see Irwin (2013)).


                      Figure 7: Ratio of world exports to world GDP: 1870-2007




Source: Our World in Data, "Globalization over 5 centuries, World".


The pandemic is expected to add further momentum to the de-globalization trend. The forecasted

diminished world trade in goods is shown in Figure 8a and 8b.

                             Figure 8a: Volume of world merchandise trade
Source: WTO, Merchandise export volume indices.


                                                   Figure 8b: World Exports (% of GDP)




                                              32
   Exports of goods and services (% of GDP)




                                              30

                                              28

                                              26

                                              24

                                              22

                                              20

                                              18

                                              16

                                              14

                                              12


                                                                                          
Source: World Bank national accounts data, and OECD National Accounts data files. 
World Investment Report has monitored FDI and the activities of multinational enterprises for 30

years, during which time international production saw two decades of rapid growth followed by

a decade of stagnation. Flows of cross-border investment in physical productive assets stopped

growing in the 2010s, the growth of trade slowed down and global value chain (GVC) trade

declined (figure 9)13.

                                                               Figure 9: Global Value Chain




Source: The Eora Global Supply Chain Database, UNCTAD (2020) and the World Bank (2020). Trade is global exports of goods

and services. GVC share of trade is proxied by the share of foreign value added in exports, based on the UNCTAD-Eora GVC

database (Casella et al., 2019).



IV. Israel Globalization

              Israel has registered remarkable economic achievements over its relatively short lifetime.

It emerged in 1948 as a rather weak and impoverished agricultural economy. Over the past seven

decades, though, Israel transformed itself into a strong and wealthy industrial economy, one that


                                                            
13
    See UNCTAD (2020). 
has become a world leader in many areas of high technology, ranging from computers to

medicine, as attested to by its membership in the Organization for Economic Co-operation and

Development (OECD). Thanks in large part to its steadily advancing integration into the global

economy; Israel

        Has moved firmly out of the developing world and into the developed world. At all

stages of its development globalization played a key role.




       IV.1 New Export Markets



       The global economy was jolted in the mid-1980s by China's and Vietnam's decision to

abandon autarky in favor of export-led growth and to embrace "market communism." Socialist

India and Muslim Indonesia liberalized and emulated their neighbors' trade participation strategy

soon thereafter.i Suddenly, and with little warning, more than a third of the world's population

joined the postwar globalization parade, powerfully effecting global demand everywhere,

including Israel.



       IV.1.1 China Transforms



       Liberalization, globalization, outsourcing, and technology transfer were the key drivers,

not domestic rates of economic growth. China claimed double-digit GDP growth from 1950 to

1976 during the Maoist epoch, but its trade participation, outsourcing, and inflowing foreign
direct investment were negligible, as was its contribution to global economic vitality.



          Beijing began distancing itself from autarky in the1980s when Deng Xiaoping introduced

special economic zones (SEZ) in Shenzhen, Zhuhai, Shantou, and Xiamen, and designated the

entire province of Hainan as a special economic zone. In 1984, China further opened fourteen

coastal cities to overseas investment: Dalian, Qinhuangdao, Tianjin, Yantai, Qingdao,

Lianyungang, Nantong, Shanghai, Ningbo, Wenzhou, Fuzhou, Guangzhou, Zhanjiang, and

Beihai.

          China leveraged the opportunities for outsourcing and technology transfer afforded by

SEZs by liberalizing its domestic economy. This involved a rapid sequence of market-oriented

reforms that circumvented communist ideological prohibitions against private ownership by

allowing entrepreneurs and state companies to lease assets while preserving the party's

monopoly on freehold property. The first reform, called Gaige Kaifang (literally, reforms and

openness), lasted more than a decade, from 1976 until shortly after the Tiananmen Square

massacre, June 5, 1989. The idea at its core was the gradual reversal of the three ideological

pillars of command economy: criminalization of private property, criminalization of private

business, and criminalization of entrepreneurship.

          The centerpiece of the post-Mao system was the "household-responsibility system"

(allowing peasant family households to operate their plots independently of team and communal

influences), which made it possible for them to prosper by increasing productivity and selling

above quota output in collective farm markets and household (cottage) industries in 1980. The

principle soon thereafter was applied nationwide. The household-responsibility system was

coupled with the "town village enterprise" (TVE) movement, an effort to transform the separate
profit-seeking activities of individual households into a coordinated agro-industrial communal

business. TVEs were flexible, and enjoyed considerable discretion in choosing and implementing

agro-industrial activities. As time passed, many TVEs began operating as private enterprises,

despite their cooperative form,ii and prospered in part due to the absence of freehold property-

owning competitorsiii and to the newly decentralized state finance.

The second phase of Deng Xiaoping's march to partial consumer sovereign markets (as distinct from 

marketassisted command) can be conveniently dated at 1rapid sequence of market-oriented reforms

that circumvented communist ideological prohibitions against private ownership by allowing

entrepreneurs and state companies to lease assets while preserving the party's monopoly on

freehold property. The idea at its core was the gradual reversal of the three ideological pillars of

command economy: criminalization of private property, criminalization of private business, and

criminalization of entrepreneurship.


       The centerpiece of the post-Mao system was the "household-responsibility system"

(allowing peasant family households to operate their plots independently of team and communal

influences), which made it possible for them to prosper by increasing productivity and selling

above quota output in collective farm markets and household (cottage) industries in 1980. The

principle soon thereafter was applied nationwide. The household-responsibility system was

coupled with the "town village enterprise" (TVE) movement, an effort to transform the separate

profit-seeking activities of individual households into a coordinated agro-industrial communal

business. TVEs were flexible, and enjoyed considerable discretion in choosing and implementing

agro-industrial activities. As time passed, many TVEs began operating as private enterprises,

despite their cooperative form,iv and prospered in part due to the absence of freehold property-

owning competitorsv and to the newly decentralized state finance.
       The second phase of Deng Xiaoping's march to partial consumer sovereign markets (as

distinct from market-assisted command) can be conveniently dated at 1992, when he undertook

his famous southern tour to Shenzhen. During the trip, Deng characterized China's emerging

productive order as a "socialist market economy," and asserted that "if China does not practice

socialism, does not carry on with `reform and opening' and economic development, does not

improve the people's standard of living, then no matter what direction we go, it will be a dead

end." This clarion call to reinvigorate the marketization process in the aftermath of the

Communist Party's post-Tiananmen Square retrenchment was successful.

       Deng's team promptly transformed red directors into managers of market-competitive

state-owned enterprises (SOEs), and then ultimately into managers of private companies, by

expanding and codifying their powers in "The Regulations on Transforming the Management

Mechanism of State-Owned Industrial Enterprises," issued July 1992. The document granted

managers fourteen control rights over (1) production, (2) pricing, (3) sales, (4) procurement, (5)

foreign trade, (6) investment, (7) use of retained funds, (8) disposal of assets, (9) mergers and

acquisitions, (10) labor, (11) personnel management, (12) wages, (13) bonuses, and (14) internal

organization, and refusal to pay unauthorized charges by the government.

       These developments have been accompanied by parallel stock market and banking

reforms, allowing SOEs to increase equity (shares) sales to outsiders, and banks to tighten credit

discipline over profligate SOEs. They also facilitated market-driven reshuffles of corporate

structure through mergers and acquisitions. China joined the WTO in 2002. Vietnam followed a

nearly identical path to liberalization and globalization under the banner of doi moi (renewal) and

joined the WTO in 2007.
       IV.1. 2 India Transforms

       India and Indonesia were never communist nations and did not have to undo the trammels

of command economies, but both markets were severely over-controlled. While details of their

liberalization and globalization differed, the thrust to laissez-faire was the same.

       The reform process in India sought to accelerate economic growth and the eradication of

poverty. The process of economic liberalization began in the late 1970s and picked up

momentum in July 1991, with a systemic shift to a more open economy, greater reliance upon

market forces, and a larger role for the private sector, including foreign investment. Subsequent

reforms have gone a long way in decontrolling the domestic economy, emphasizing, like China,

gradual transition rather than shock therapy.

       The changes initiated in 1991 eliminated the dominance of the public sector in the

industrial activity, discretionary controls over private industrial investment, trade and exchange

controls, tight restrictions on direct foreign investment, and the overregulation of the financial

sector. The reforms unleashed powerful entrepreneurial forces. Since 1991, successive

governments across political parties have successfully carried forward the country's economic

reform agenda. Most of the central government industrial controls were dismantled. Massive

deregulation of the industrial sector was done in order to bring in the element of competition and

increase efficiency. The list of industries reserved solely for the public sector--which used to

cover eighteen industries, including iron and steel, heavy plant and machinery,

telecommunications and telecom equipment, minerals, oil, mining, air transport services, and

electricity generation and distribution--was drastically reduced to three: Israel went through

major trade liberalization, entering important FTAs in the 1970s and 1980s (with the EEC and

United States, respectively), and a substantial cut of tariffs and removal of non-tariff barriers
(NTBs) in the 1990s. These had important effects on income redistribution and probably

contributed to Israel's orientation toward exports. More than two-thirds of Israel's trade was in

the early period with the EU and the United States. 

              V. Export Rerouting
              Israel's exports to Asia grew substantially throughout the years, relative to all other

export destinations. Figure 10 shows Israel's exports shares by destination region.



              [Figure 10 here]



              Financial reforms that emphasized liberalization, including the interest rate and reserve

requirements, have made India's financial industry globally competitive. The financial system

has been deregulated and opened to international financial markets, and it employs derivatives

and other modern innovations.

              Recently, Israeli exports to Asia have surged, and they have stayed stable with the United

States, but exports to most of Europe sharply declined. The "gravity" model helps explain these

trends.14

              As the force between two objects in physics depends on the product of their masses and

the distance between them, so trade between two countries is thought to depend on their

economic mass (GDP) and all frictions affecting trade, including transport costs and policy

variables. The theoretical and empirical foundations of the gravity model have been solidified in


                                                            
14
   Germany also benefitted from China's integration into the global economic system, (especially in exports of cars 
and machineries). By 2008 SinoGerman trade volume had reached 200 billion Euros, and China was Germany's 
largest trading partner. German goods exports to China, as a percentage of total German exports, rose from 2% in 
1995 to almost 8 percent in 2019. 
recent years by Eaton and Kortum (2002), Anderson and Van Wincoop (2003), and Helpman,

Melitz and Rubinstein (2008). The shifts in trade between Israel and East Asia are likely to be a

direct consequence of the policy transformations in China and India that can be captured via the

gravity effect: the increasing economic "mass" (GDP) in southern East Asia coupled with the

tearing down of the border restrictions (as indicated above).

       Mohar (2009) studied the share of Israel's goods exports in the total imports of the

destination country, by using a nonstructural gravity model. The main explanatory variables in

the destination country are GDP (representing the market size), GDP per capita (representing the

buying power of the average individual), distance, and a dummy variable representing whether

or not there are trade agreements between Israel and the destination country. The sample period

is 2001­2008.

       Figure 10 describes the excessive/deficient shares, above or below what is predicted by

the gravity model. Exports to China are under-predicted, while exports to the United States are

over-predicted. The gaps predominantly reflect missing variables such as lagged exports (the

gravity model is static), measurement errors associated the date and scope of bilateral trade

agreements, and the heterogeneity of the good composition of the destination-country imports.



       [Figure 11 here]

       Summing up, the global economy has been changed since China decided to abandon

autarky in favor of export-led growth, India liberalized its trade, and both lifted the Arab League

boycott on trade with Israel. Israel, like other export nations, is pivoting toward emerging
markets in East Asia.15

        The gravity models (pioneered by Tinbergen (1962)) have been a workhorse in analyzing

the determinants of bilateral trade. A nonstructural model applied to the trade between Israel,

Europe, and the United States (Israel's traditional trading partners), as well as East Asia (Israel's

emerging trading partner), indicates the importance of East Asia to the export-led growth of the

Israeli economy. Furthermore, it guarantees a more sustainable growth in the decades to come.




                                                            
15
    An insightful toy model to think about trade barriers is as follows: Assume two symmetric

countries. Each country specializes in production. Goods enter symmetrically into utility, with

elasticity of substitution  (>1) between the goods. There is only one factor of production--

labor. It takes  units of labor to produce one unit of either country's good; it takes  units of

labor to transport that good to the other country. Both countries impose ad valorem tariffs at rate

t. Then the ratio of imports to consumption of home good exports as a share of GDP is / (1+),

where



  (1   /  )1 (1  t )  .

The shutting down of trade (or the imposition of a [partial] trade embargo) is equivalent to a rise

in tariff, or an increase of transportation cost. In either case trade shrinks. Then, reversing the

autarkic policies by the opening up of trade would boost trade. The increase in productivity 1 / 

weakens trade. See Krugman (2016). The model, however, does not capture the forces that led to

the rise of Israel's trade with China over time.

 
Figure 10: Israel's Export Shares by Regional Destination


    60%
                            Europe
    50%

    40%     North
           America
    30%

    20%                                                      Asia

    10%
                                  Others
    0%




Source: The Observatory of Economic Complexity, MIT




Figure 11: Differences between the Gravity Model Predictions and the Actual Share of

Israel Exports in Trading Partners' Imports*, percentages 


 
2.5


2.0


1.5


1.0


0.5


0.0


-0.5


-1.0


-1.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                  Belgium




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Argentina
                                                                                                                        Portugal




                                                                                                                                                      Switzerland




                                                                                                                                                                                          Italy




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Finland
                   Hungary




                                                           Canada




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Bulgaria
         Austria




                                                                             Czech Republic
                                                                                              China




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Australia
                                                                                                                                                                                Britain




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Netherlands
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Russia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            India
                                         Poland
                             Luxemburg




                                                                                                                                   Germany
                                                  Mexico




                                                                                                                                                                                                            Japan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Spain




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Iceland


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Norway


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Turkey




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       United States
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Jordan
                                                                    France




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Greece




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Romania
                                                                                                      Egypt
                                                                                                              Denmark




                                                                                                                                             Sweden


                                                                                                                                                                    Hong Kong




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Brazil




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       New Zealand




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cyprus
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
*
    Countries without a trade agreement with Israel are emphasized.

Source: Mohar, BOI, 2009 

Countries without a trade agreement with Israel are emphasized.


VI. Trade Globalization and High Tech Surge

Foreign direct investment (FDI) has been crucial for the emergence of Israel high tech sector into 

occupying an elite position in the world economy. Recall that, FDI refers to investments in companies 

and production outside the realm of the stock market. Whenever a foreign company buys an Israeli 

startup, it is counted as FDI. Israel pulled in the fourth highest level of foreign direct investment in 

relation to the size of its economy in the 2010s. Israel brought in about 4 percent of GDP in FDI. The 

OECD average was just 1.4 percent. It fell however short of the Ireland at 16.1 percent and Chile at 7.4 

percent. For Israel, the OECD accounted for the lion's share of FDI inflows, more than a quarter, of late. 
The lion's shares, came from the United States and the EU. Recently, China became an important source 

for FDI inflows.  


Israel's inward FDI flows accelerated in the 1990s and the 2000s (see Figure 12). Israel's venture

capital development (data covers only the 2000s) exhibits a remarkable increase as a proportion of

total inward FDI, demonstrating the sharp increase in funding to high-tech startups.


But the venture capital picture in Israel goes back to the early 1990s, with capital raising ebbing and flowing and with

trends changing.  


 Figure 12: Israeli HighTech Venture Capital Fund Raising (right axis, Million, current US dollars) and 
 Inward Foreign Direct Investments (left axis, Million, current US dollars) 

 16000                                                                                                              5000

 14000                                                                                                              4500
                                                                                                                    4000
 12000
                                                                                                                    3500
 10000                                                                                                              3000
   8000                                                                                                             2500

   6000                                                                                                             2000
                                                                                                                    1500
   4000
                                                                                                                    1000
   2000                                                                                                             500
        0                                                                                                           0
             1990
             1991
             1992
             1993
             1994
             1995
             1996
             1997
             1998
             1999
             2000
             2001
             2002
             2003
             2004
             2005
             2006
             2007
             2008
             2009
             2010
             2011
             2012
             2013
             2014
             2015




                                                                     Foreign VC's
                                                                                                                            
 Source: IVC Research Center.


The dot-com bubble was a brief period of surging equity prices in the internet sector and related

businesses 1997-2000. Firms discovered that they could increase share prices merely by adding
the prefix e (e-Bay) or suffix com (Amazon.com) to their corporate names. Purchasers of dot-com

equities and derivatively hard assets gulled themselves into believing that normal standards of

valuation could be set aside because dot-com ventures had unbounded profit horizons. The mania

had a direct impact on all countries with significant high-tech sectors, including Israel. The dot-

com bubble not only the present discounted value of their capital stocks, it triggered large volumes

of foreign direct investment (FDI) to other economies, including the emerging high-tech sector in

Israel; which had beneficial effect on national income both during the bubble and after it burst.

This started a steady rise in inward FDI into Israel.


The relatively high R&D spending has not fully manifested itself in productivity. However, as

Figure 13 shows, Israel labor productivity picked up moderately in the 2000s.


 Figure 13 2000-2015 GDP per hour work (constant 2010 prices)




                                                                                            

 Source: OECD Library.
Israel recently pulled in the fourth highest level of foreign direct investment in relation to the size of its 

economy, (OECD library); figures for in 2013. Foreign direct investment refers to investments in 

companies and production outside the realm of the stock market. Whenever a foreign company buys an 

Israeli startup, it is counted as FDI. Israel brought in about 4 percent of GDP in FDI. The OECD average 

was just 1.4%. 16The United States was the source of roughly 30% of global FDI outflows, followed by 

Japan, China and Russia. For Israel, the OECD accounted for the lion's share of FDI inflows, primarily the 

US and the EU, but China`s share rises fast.




Figure 14 shows that exports of services, which is based on Israel comparative advantage in

high-tech industries is steadily rising. As for the short run pandemic effects, the graph shows that

excluding tourism that the high-tech exports are unaffected.


Figure 14: Israel Exports and imports of Services (million dollars, seasonally adjusted)




                                                            
16
      Israel fell short only of the three countries that came ahead of it: tiny Luxembourg, in first 

place, brought in 39.5% of its GDP in FDI, followed by low tax Ireland at 16.1%, and Chile at 
7.4%.  
 
 5,000
 4,500
 4,000
 3,500
 3,000
 2,500
 2,000
          VII




          VII




          VII
            V




          VII
             I
           III


          IX




            V




          VII
          XI
             I
           III


          IX
          XI


            V
             I
           III


          IX
          XI


            V
             I
           III


          IX
          XI


            V
             I
           III


          IX
                 2016              2017             2018              2019            2020
           Export of services - Total (excl. start-up companies, teavel servieces)
           Export of services - Total (excl. start-up companies)


Source: Bank of Israel data set.

Israel is a significant trade-open economy. Israel total exports in percentage share of GDP has

been around 30 to 40 percent of gdp; similarly imports. See Figure 15.


Figure 15: Israel Total Exports and Imports, % of GDP, quarterly
     % OF                        Israel Total Exports and Imports (% of GDP, quaterly)
      50
      45
      40
      35
      30
      25
      20
      15
      10
        5
        0



                   Import as part of the GDP (quaterly,original)     Export as part of the GDP (quaterly,original)


Source: Bank of Israel data set.




VII. Israel Financial Globalization17

              International financial integration generates more synchronized country-specific yields.

As before, a measure of financial integration into the world markets is deviations from equality



                                                            
17
      The globalization process that Israel has been involved with is covered in detail in Razin (2018). 
of the real-interest-rate, adjusted for real exchange rate intertemporal changes, across economies

using their own currency and having their special inflation processes. The real interest is

measured by the yields on three-month government bonds. Here we examine the dispersion

between Israel and the US in the real interest rate (adjusted by the real exchange rate

intertemporal changes).




 Figure 12: Cross country standard deviation of the real interest rate (adjusted by the real
                exchange rate intertemporal changes): Israel and the US




Source: Stats Bureau, FRED, World Bank, Real-exchange-rate adjusted, yields on three-month government bonds for Israel, and

the yields on three-month US government bonds.


Figure 12 shows that, except the Global Financial Crisis, the Israel-US dispersion is trending

down. The downward trend indicates the steady integration of the Israel's financial market into the

world financial market; primarily that of the US.
VIII. Conclusion

The paper addresses strains posed by the Covid-19 pandemic: there is at least a temporary

setback to globalization, and the cost of fighting the pandemic will strain the ability of

governments to provide the welfare state in a style to which many of their citizens have become

accustomed.


Global Pandemic Crisis: global: globalization, Migration, and Welfare State




The corona virus pandemic has altered the interactions among globalization, migration and

redistribution policies will take. While the pandemic could strengthen nationalism and isolationism

and accelerate the retreat from globalization, the outbreak also could spur a new wave of

international cooperation in health, environment, exchange of information, of the sort that emerged

after World War II. The pandemic is driving the world economy to retreat from global economic

integration. National security and public health concerns are providing new rationales for

protectionism. The Great Financial Recession of 2008­10 marked a historic turning point in the

degree of global economic integration. In the 2020 post-pandemic era, policymakers appear poised

to take deliberate steps to reinforce the movement toward de-globalization18.


Global Pandemic Crisis: implications for mobility


More broadly, the Corona crisis changed migration patterns. Border closures, suspended asylum

programs, interruptions in global transportation and stay-at-home lockdowns have drastically curbed

migration around the world, particularly from poorer nations to rich ones. Once exit strategies begun to

                                                            
18
      See Razin (2021). 
be implemented, the pent-up demand drove impatient people to start surging across borders, as Central

Americans have done recently in migrant caravans headed to the US, and Syrians and others did in 2015

during the European migration crisis. However, social distancing and border restrictions in wealthy

countries will remain long after the first Corona infection wave subsides. The pandemic is likely to

change the migration skill composition patterns as low skill workers typically present more social-

distancing problems than high-skilled workers do. Autor (2020) points to key factors for the projected

decline in demand for low-skill workers in the post-Corona-virus era: the health risk in personal services,

the acceleration of automation, the reallocation of sales towards large firms, and the likely change in

demand away from retail services. The impact on migrant-skill-composition of social distancing, the matching

technology, the expected arrival time of a vaccine, and testing with or without contact tracing are yet to be

rigorously explored. In the post-corona era, firms have strong incentives to revise course and

substitute GVCs with adopting robots. This shift could lowers the demand for unskilled workers

while increase demand for high-skilled workers, thereby raising wage gaps.




Global Pandemic Crisis: Long term effects


The Global Pandemic crisis is not caused by failures of the financial system as was the case

regarding GD and GFC. It is caused by the pandemic shock that required lockdown of productive

sectors of the economy. Although there may be an initial "catch-up" surge of consumer spending

in advanced economies with the vaccine emergence, in the longer run, consumers are likely to

save more. Thus, the world-wide saving-glut trend is reinforced. In addition to its direct impact

on investment and hiring, the Pandemic Crisis like the Great Recession impose longer-term

productivity costs.
  The literature points to several reasons for a long term effects of the pandemic (Ilzetzki (2021).

  First, supply chain disruptions can cause a decline in the economy's productive capacity, but

  how persistent these are is still uncertain. First, it may take time for new entrants to replace firms

  that failed due to the pandemic. Second, unemployment tends to be persistent as workers' skills

  deteriorate and their attachment to the labor force may weaken. Fatás and Summers (2017) give

  evidence of hysteresis effects of this sort. Third, corporate debt overhang may create `zombie

  firms', which have lesser incentives to invest in productive capital. However, Jordá et al. (2020)

  find no historical support for post-crisis growth depending on corporate debt levels.




  TBW: ISRAEL GLOBALIZATION CONCLUSION




References 

  Antràs, Pol (2020) "De-Globalisation? Global Value Chains in the Post-COVID-19 Age". ECB Forum 2020.

  Auer, R., C. Borio, and A. Filardo (2017). The globalization of inflation: the growing importance
  of global value chains. BIS Working Papers.

  Baldwin, Richard, and Eiichi Tomiura. (2020), "Thinking ahead about the trade impact of COVID-19."

  Economics in the Time of COVID-19 59.
Bodnár, K, J Le Roux, P Lopez-Garcia and B Szörfi (2020), "The impact of COVID-19 on
potential output in the euro area", ECB Economic Bulletin.



Bureau of Economic Analysis (2020). US Gross domestic product. https://apps.
bea.gov/iTable/iTable.cfm?reqid=19&step=2.

Carney, M. (2015, August). How is inflation affected by globalisation? WEF .

Casella, B., R. Bolwijn, D. Moran, and K. Kanemoto (2019). Improving the analy- sis of global
value chains: the UNCTAD-Eora Database. UNCTAD Transnational Corporations Journal.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, N. Hendren, M. Stepner, and T. O. I. Team (2020, June). How did
covid-19 and stabilization policies affect spending and employment? a new real-time economic
tracker based on private sector data. Working Paper 27431, National Bureau of Economic
Research.

De-Grauwe, P. and Y. Ji (2020, September), "A tale of three depressions," VoxEU & CEPR.



Eichengreen, B. and K. O'Rourke (2010, March). A tale of two depressions: What do the new
data tell us? february 2010 update. VoxEU & CEPR.

Fatás, A and L H Summers (2017), "The Permanent Effects of Fiscal Consolidations," Journal of
International Economics 112: 238-250.



Guerrieri, V., G. Lorenzoni, L. Straub, and I. Werning (2020, April). "Macroeco- nomic
implications of covid-19: Can negative supply shocks cause demand shortages?" Working Paper
26 Irwin, D A (1998), "The Smoot-Hawley Tari: A Quantitative Assessment," The Review of
Economics and Statistics 80: 326­334.

Ilzetzki, Ethan (2021), "Post-Covid-19 potential output in the euro area

Cepr-Vox, 02 January 2021



Irwin, D A (2013), "The Nixon Shock After Forty Years: the Import Surcharge
Revisited," World Trade Review 12: 29­56.

Jordà, O, M Kornejew, M Schularick and A M. Taylor (2020), "Zombies at Large: Corporate
Debt Overhang and the Macroeconomy," CEPR Discussion Paper 15518.
Keynes, John Maynard (1919). The Economic Consequences of the Peace (1st edition). London:
Macmillan & Co., Limited.

Kilic, K. and D. Marin (2020, May). "How covid-19 is transforming the world economy."
VoxEU & CEPR.

Kozlowski, Julian, Laura Veldkamp, and Venky Venkateswaran (2020), "Scarring Body and
Mind: The Long-Term Belief-Scarring Effects of COVID-19," Forthcoming in the 2020 Jackson
Hole Economic Policy Symposium Proceedings.

Krugman, Paul (2016), The interwar trade decline (princeton.edu), mimeo.

Mohsin, Ali, Nafis Alam, and Syed Aun R. Rizvi (2020) "Coronavirus (COVID-19)­An
epidemic or pandemic for financial markets." Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Finance.

National Bureau of Statistics fo China (2020). Industrial production opera- tion in august 2020.
http://www.stats.gov.cn/english/PressRelease/202009/ t20200916_1789764.html.

OECD (2020). Oecd.stat. https://stats.oecd.org/.

Razin, Assaf (2014), Understanding Global Crises: An Emerging Paradigm, MIT Press.

Razin, Assaf. (2018). Israel and the World Eonomy: Power of Globalisation. Cambridge,

MA: The MIT Press.

Razin, Assaf (2021), Globalization, Migration, and Welfare State: Macroeconomic Trifecta,
Palgrave Macmillan.

Reinhart, C. M. and K. S. Rogoff (2014, January). "Recovery from financial crises: Evidence
from 100 episodes." Working Paper 19823, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Rui, Esteves, and Nathan Sussman. "The COVID-19 and bond spreads." The

Economists' Voice, no1.

UNCTAD (2020). World Investment Report 2020: International Production Beyond the
Pandemic. New York and Geneva: United Nations: UNCTAD.

World Bank (2020). Global Economic Prospects. https://www.worldbank.org/en/
publication/global-economic-prospects.

Zhan, J., R. Bolwijn, B. Casella, and A. U. Santos-Paulino (2020, August). Global value chain
transformation to 2030: Overall direction and policy implications. VoxEU & CEPR.
     




     




 




 


                                                                
