                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       AFRICA'S MANUFACTURING PUZZLE:
                 EVIDENCE FROM TANZANIAN AND ETHIOPIAN FIRMS

                                         Xinshen Diao
                                           Mia Ellis
                                      Margaret S. McMillan
                                          Dani Rodrik

                                       Working Paper 28344
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28344


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                          January 2021, Revised February 2021




We thank the National Bureau of Statistics in Tanzania and the Central Statistical Agency in
Ethiopia for providing access to the data as well as invaluable support in creating and cleaning
the panels, Inigo Verduzco for his work creating the Ethiopia panel identifiers for 1996-2013,
Andualem Telaye Mengistu and his team at the Ethiopian Development Research Institute and
Oxford University for providing access to their matching process for the Ethiopia panel for
2013-2017, Brian McCaig for information about Vietnam, Gaaitzen de Vries and Emmanuel
Mensah for their feedback on total manufacturing employment estimates, and Marco Sanfilippo
for helpful discussions. Feiruz Mohammed provided excellent research assistance. We are
grateful to PEDL and the FCDO for financial assistance and to the CGIAR's research program
Policies, Institutions, and Markets (PIM) led by the International Food Policy Research Institute
for its support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Xinshen Diao, Mia Ellis, Margaret S. McMillan, and Dani Rodrik. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Africa's Manufacturing Puzzle: Evidence from Tanzanian and Ethiopian Firms
Xinshen Diao, Mia Ellis, Margaret S. McMillan, and Dani Rodrik
NBER Working Paper No. 28344
January 2021, Revised February 2021
JEL No. O1,O14

                                         ABSTRACT

Recent growth accelerations in Africa are characterized by increasing productivity in agriculture,
a declining share of the labor force employed in agriculture and declining productivity in modern
sectors such as manufacturing. To shed light on this puzzle, we disaggregate firms in the
manufacturing sector by size using two newly created panels of manufacturing firms, one for
Tanzania covering 2008-2016 and one for Ethiopia covering 1996-2017. Our analysis reveals a
dichotomy between larger firms that exhibit superior productivity performance but do not expand
employment much, and small firms that absorb employment but do not experience any
productivity growth. We suggest the poor employment performance of large firms is related to
use of capital-intensive techniques associated with global trends in technology.


Xinshen Diao                                    Margaret S. McMillan
Development Strategy and                        Tufts University
Governance Division                             Department of Economics
International Food Policy                       114a Braker Hall
Research Institute                              Medford, MA 02155
2033 K Street NW                                and International Food Policy Research Institute
Washington, DC 20006                            and also NBER
x.diao@cgiar.org                                margaret.mcmillan@tufts.edu

Mia Ellis                                       Dani Rodrik
IFPRI                                           John F. Kennedy School of Government
1201 Eye Street                                 Harvard University
Washington, DC 20005                            79 J.F. Kennedy Street
m.ellis@cgiar.org                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                and NBER
                                                dani_rodrik@harvard.edu
1. Introduction

         Before Covid-19 struck, many economies in Sub-Saharan Africa were expanding rapidly -- faster
than at any time since independence. While some of the larger and resource-dependent economies had
slowed down due to the softening of commodity prices, others such as Ethiopia, Rwanda, and Cote
d'Ivoire were still registering annual growth rates in excess of 7 percent. Superficially, these rapidly
growing economies were going through the classic structural change scenario: workers were leaving
agriculture, and urban populations and occupations were expanding. Moreover, the productivity gains
generated by this process of structural change accounted for a significant proportion of overall growth
(as we showed in Diao et al., 2019).

         Yet African growth accelerations were anomalous when viewed from the perspective of
comparative development patterns. Aggregate labor productivity growth within manufacturing and
other modern sectors has been disappointing. In fact, those countries where growth-promoting
structural change was significant (Ethiopia, Malawi, Senegal, and Tanzania, especially) experienced
negative to zero labor productivity growth within their non-agricultural sectors (Diao et al., 2019). This is
especially puzzling in the case of manufacturing, the canonical modern sector. And it is the case not just
for resource-dependent countries, but also for others such as Ethiopia that have made significant
progress in attracting foreign investment in manufacturing from China and elsewhere (Abebe et al.,
2018).

         These facts are not consistent with a process of growth driven by productive improvements in
manufacturing and other modern sectors (a supply-side model of growth). We argued in Diao et al.
(2019) that a demand-side story presents a more plausible account. An increase in demand for urban
products ­ whether due to transfers from abroad, public expenditures, or income gains in agriculture ­
could explain the observed structural-change patterns. It would also explain why productivity in the
more modern parts of the economy lagged or declined: increased demand for modern-sector output
could be met only through an expansion of less productive firms and activities at the margin. This
perspective therefore made us skeptical about the sustainability of these growth accelerations.

         We begin this paper by confirming the negative correlation between growth-promoting
economy-wide structural change, on the one hand, and labor productivity growth within non-
agricultural sectors, on the other, for an expanded set of African countries. This analysis is based on the
GGDC 10 Sector Database updated with the Expanded Africa Sector Database (EASD), such that it now

                                                      3
includes 18 African countries through 2015 (compared to 11 previously through 2010) (Mensah et al.,
2018). Zeroing in on the manufacturing sector, we next compare employment trajectories in Taiwan and
Vietnam to those in Tanzania and Ethiopia. In all four cases we split manufacturing employment into
firms with 10 or more employees (formal) and the remainder (small and/or informal) by combining
UNIDO's Indstat2 data with the GGDC data. The contrast is stark. The share of formal sector
manufacturing employment took off during the growth accelerations in Taiwan and Vietnam. In
Tanzania and Ethiopia, it is the share of employment in small and informal firms that has expanded
during the period of growth acceleration. 1

           Why isn't the share of formal manufacturing employment expanding more rapidly in Tanzania
and Ethiopia? To better understand this, we take a closer look at the manufacturing sectors in each of
these countries. The core of our analysis rests on two newly created panels of manufacturing firms, one
for Tanzania covering 2008-2016 and one for Ethiopia covering 1996-2017. In both cases, the panel
covers firms with 10 employees or more. But in the case of Ethiopia, we are able to supplement our
analysis with nationally representative surveys of small-scale manufacturing firms employing fewer than
10 workers, which are available for 2002, 2006, 2008, 2011, and 2014. With these data, we are able to
take a finer-grained look at employment and productivity patterns within manufacturing firms and sub-
sectors.

           Our findings shed light on the nature and sources of manufacturing under-performance. In both
countries, there is a sharp dichotomy between larger firms that exhibit superior productivity
performance but do not expand employment much, and small firms that absorb employment but do not
experience any productivity growth. The problem lies not in the productivity performance of the larger
firms, which is more than adequate, but in their inability to generate employment opportunities. The
labor absorbing firms, by contrast, are the smaller ones on significantly worse productive trajectories.

           We argue that standard explanations for the lack of employment growth in the most productive
manufacturing firms are inadequate. First, the size distribution of firms in both countries combined with
the fact that smaller firms are considerably less productive than large firms casts doubt on the idea that



1
  See also Oqubay (2018) on Ethiopia's manufacturing sector. Oqubay notes that Ethiopian manufacturing (until
2016-17) had played a marginal role in employment creation, exports, and output, and fell short in stimulating
domestic linkages. While Oqubay expresses more optimism about the future of the manufacturing sector, he
acknowledges that its' disappointing employment performance is likely to be due to a combination of high capital
intensity of firms, intense pressure to increase productivity and the shrinking of public sector enterprises.

                                                        4
financing and other constraints prevent small firms from growing into large firms that would employ
more workers (Hsieh and Olken, 2014). Second, high labor costs in Africa are sometimes cited as a
constraint on industrialization in Africa (Gelb et al., 2020). But we find that the payroll share in total
value added in both Tanzania and Ethiopia is exceedingly low overall (11-12%) and also in garments and
textiles (20-24%). And third, explanations based on the poor business environment in Africa are at odds
with the dynamism in both countries manufacturing sectors captured in our analysis of entry and exit. In
fact, entry and exit patterns in Tanzania and Ethiopia are not too dissimilar from those in Vietnam.

         Instead, we suggest the problem might lie with the nature of technologies available to African
firms. We show that the relatively large firms in the manufacturing sectors of Tanzania and Ethiopia are
significantly more capital-intensive than what would be expected on the basis of the countries' income
levels or relative factor endowments. This is especially true of the larger, most productive firms, where
capital intensity approaches (or exceeds) levels observed in the Czech Republic, a country that is around
twenty times richer. High levels of capital intensity (and possibly of skill intensity as well, though we do
not measure that) are an important reason behind the poor employment performance of productive
firms.

         Why do firms in Tanzania and Ethiopia use production techniques that may not be particularly
appropriate to the local economy? It is possible that they do not have much choice. Two things have
happened in recent decades that push firms in that direction. First, manufacturing has experienced
significant technological change in advanced economies. Naturally, innovation has taken a direction that
responds to relative factor prices in the settings where it has taken place. So, it has been markedly labor-
saving. Secondly, globalization and the spread of global value chains has had a homogenizing effect on
technology adoption around the world. This means that the range of substitution between capital and
low-skill labor has likely shrunk. The imperative of competing with production in much richer countries
at similar quality levels makes it difficult to undertake large shifts in technique.

         Unlike earlier waves of developing nations, Tanzania and Ethiopia joined the world economy at a
point where these two trends were already well established. Meanwhile they are still poor and have
very low relative capital endowments. This creates a conundrum: competing with established producers
on world markets is only possible by adopting technologies that make it virtually impossible for
significant amounts of employment to be generated.




                                                       5
        The outline of the paper is as follows. We begin in section 2 by providing a macro overview of
structural transformation in Africa. Using updated data, we confirm the trends we discussed in Diao et
al. (2019). We compare Tanzania and Ethiopia to two East Asian cases, Taiwan and Vietnam, to highlight
the anomalous expansion of small and informal manufacturing employment in the former cases. In
section 3, we describe our data, newly constructed firm-level panels for Tanzania and Ethiopia, and their
construction. In section 4, we present the results of firm-level regressions where we relate productivity
and employment levels and growth rates to firm characteristics such as size, ownership, and export
orientation. We present a number of robustness checks and also present comparable results at the
industry level. This section documents the dichotomy between the large and small firms we have noted
above. Section 5 takes a closer look at productivity dynamics. We ask in particular whether less
productive firms catch up to the more productive firms, and if so, whether this produces lower
dispersion in productivity performance across firms over time. The answers are yes and no, respectively.
In section 6 we document the capital-intensity of Tanzanian and Ethiopian manufacturing firms, across
different firm categories, taking the Czech Republic as our main comparative benchmark. We also
present and discuss our interpretation of this result. Section 7 offers concluding remarks.

2. Macroeconomic Evidence

        In previous work we documented a puzzling pattern of growth in African countries using data
from the Groningen Growth and Development Centers' (GGDC) 10 Sector Database (Diao et al., 2019).
We found that rapid aggregate labor productivity growth in Africa had been accompanied by weak to
negative labor productivity growth in these countries' non-agricultural sectors. In this section, we
update those results with updated GGDC-EASD data (Mensah et al., 2018), which confirms our earlier
results. An advantage of the updated GGDC data is that it covers an additional 7 African countries
bringing the total to 18. We then present aggregate evidence from the manufacturing sectors in
Ethiopia, Tanzania, Taiwan, and Vietnam consistent with the idea that the growth patterns in Africa are
demand driven while those in Asia are supply driven. Finally, we show that increases in agricultural
productivity in Ethiopia and Tanzania coincide with an expansion of the share of small and informal firm
manufacturing employment in these two countries.

2.1     Recent Patterns of Growth

        As in our previous work, we decompose economywide labor productivity growth into its'
between (structural change) and within components; an extensive discussion of the decomposition is

                                                     6
provided in Diao et al. (2019). To home in on Africa's modern sectors, within sector labor productivity
growth is further decomposed into agriculture and an employment-weighted average of the
manufacturing, trade services, business services, construction, and transport sectors. Figure 2.1
replicates the patterns shown in Diao et al. (2019) using the updated GGDC-EASD numbers. The bars in
Figure 2.1 are coded according to how much of labor productivity growth comes from structural change
(in grid) and how much comes from within-sector labor productivity growth in agriculture (in diagonal
lines) and in non-agriculture (in black). The main difference between Figure 2.1 and our previous results
is that including the additional African countries shrinks the contribution of within nonagricultural sector
productivity growth to close to zero.

        Figure 2.1 shows that in Africa, prior to the growth acceleration average annual labor
productivity growth is minimal at around a half a percentage point; the within-sector non-agricultural
component of labor productivity growth is negative. After the growth acceleration, structural change
contributes significantly to growth in Africa. This is not surprising since we expect the payoff to
structural change to be greatest in poor countries. However, the contribution of within-sector labor
productivity growth in the non-agricultural sector is close to zero. This is troubling in the sense that were
this pattern to continue, labor productivity growth outside agriculture would eventually peter out.

        Figure 2.2a is a scatter plot of the relationship between within-sector productivity growth (in the
nonagricultural sector only, horizontal axis) and the labor productivity growth that arises as a result of
structural change (vertical axis) for African countries. The pattern revealed by Figure 2.2a is a negative
correlation between these two components of overall growth. The five non-agricultural sectors are
denoted by the different shapes in the legend; manufacturing is represented by a shaded circle. Turning
to the manufacturing sector in Tanzania, Figure 2.2a shows that the contribution of the manufacturing
sector to within-sector labor productivity growth is close to zero while its contribution to growth from
structural change is about 0.5 percentage points. In Ethiopia, the contribution of the manufacturing
sector to within-sector labor productivity growth is -0.18 percentage points while its contribution to
growth from structural change is almost 0.6 percentage points.

        For comparative purposes, Figure 2.2b shows the same correlation for seven Asian countries
during the first 10 years of their initial growth accelerations. In contrast to the African countries, the
Asian countries exhibit a positive correlation between the within and structural change components of
labor productivity growth for each specific nonagricultural sector. In all seven countries, the
manufacturing sector contributed positively to within-sector labor productivity growth and the growth

                                                      7
that comes from structural change. For example, the manufacturing sector in Thailand contributed
around 0.55 percentage points to growth from structural change; this is very similar to the numbers for
Ethiopia and Tanzania. But unlike Ethiopia and Tanzania, within sector labor productivity growth in
Thailand's manufacturing sector was about 1 percentage point.

        Summarizing, in Asia well-performing nonagricultural sectors have contributed to economywide
productivity growth both by drawing labor from lower-productivity sectors and by experiencing rapid
productivity improvements. In Africa sectors outside of agriculture have not performed well and have
only contributed to economywide labor productivity growth through structural change. To gain a better
understand for the underlying causes of these patterns, we turn to data from the manufacturing sector.

2.2     Explaining Patterns of Growth: Manufacturing Employment Trends

        The patterns described in Africa relative to Asia are especially puzzling when it comes to
manufacturing, the canonical "modern" sector. In our previous work we hypothesized that these
patterns might be explained by differences in the sources of structural change. We developed a simple
model to highlight the differences between demand- and supply-driven structural change. Supply-driven
structural change in our model was captured by a positive productivity shock to the modern sector (in
this case manufacturing) allowing it to draw labor from other, less productive sectors of the economy.
By contrast, in our model demand-driven structural change was a result of positive aggregate demand
shocks possibly as a result of public investment, external transfers, or increases in rural incomes. In
practice, the aggregate demand shock is likely the result of a combination of all three.

        One symptom of these underlying differences in the roots of structural change relates to
differential growth rates in formal and informal sector manufacturing sector employment trends across
the two continents. To the extent that structural change is supply driven we would expect to see an
expansion of modern sector (or formal) activity in the manufacturing sector. Demand driven structural
change on the other hand is likely to be accompanied by the entry of less productive or informal
manufacturing firms at the margin.

        To explore this hypothesis, we use sector level employment data for manufacturing from the
GGDC-EASD database combined with manufacturing employment data from the United Nations
Industrial Organization (UNIDO) INDSTAT2 2019 database. The GGDC manufacturing employment data is
largely based on population census data and so covers manufacturing in both the formal and informal
sectors (Timmer, de Vries and de Vries, 2015). By contrast, INDSTAT2 records manufacturing

                                                     8
employment data for formal sector firms in the manufacturing sector (UNIDO, 2020). Although country
statistics sometimes vary in terms of the size of establishments covered, typically INDSTAT2 covers firms
with 10 or more employees. For each of Tanzania, Ethiopia, Taiwan, and Vietnam, we compute small
and informal sector employment in the manufacturing sector as the difference between total
employment (GGDC) and formal sector employment (INDSTAT2). We then plot total, small and informal
and formal sector manufacturing employment for each of these four countries.

        We gauge the accuracy of the recent total manufacturing employment numbers reported in the
EASD using estimates of manufacturing employment based on firm level datasets and living standards
measurement surveys (LSMS). This exercise lead to a reduction in total employment in manufacturing in
recent years but no change in the aggregate patterns. A summary of these results can be found in Table
A.1 in the appendix.

        Figure 2.3a shows the results of this exercise for Ethiopia and Tanzania. The most striking trends
common to both countries are the upward sloping curves for employment in small and informal
manufacturing employment and the relatively flat lines for formal sector manufacturing employment. 2
The vertical lines in each graph mark the start of the growth acceleration; growth accelerates in 1998 in
Tanzania and in 2000 in Ethiopia. The beginning of the rise in small/informal sector employment
coincides with the beginning of the growth acceleration in both Tanzania and Ethiopia. Alongside the
INDSTAT2 employment data, we also plot formal sector employment data in each country using their
respective manufacturing censuses (these data are described extensively in Section 3 and in Appendix
1). The INDSTAT2 series and the series of formal sector employment data coincide almost perfectly. This
is not surprising since UNIDO obtains its' manufacturing employment data from national statistical
agencies; still it is reassuring since we do not have firm level census data for the Asian countries.

        Figure 2.3b shows starkly different patterns for Taiwan and Vietnam. As with the graphs for
Africa, the vertical lines represent the beginning of each countries' growth acceleration, 1960 for Taiwan


2
 One positive recent development in Ethiopia, cited by Oqubay (2018), is the increase in manufacturing FDI
between 2012 and 2016: manufacturing FDI increased from around 1 billion USD to 3.5 billion USD. A related
development is the expansion of employment in industrial parks from around 14 thousand employees in 2013 to
around 55 thousand employees in 2017 (EIC, 2019). The number of employees in industrial parks at the end of
2019 - prior to the onset of Covid 19 - was around 68 thousand (EIC). Yet total employment growth in large and
medium scale enterprises remains low at between 1.5 and 4 percent per year depending on the definition of
employment. This is in stark contrast to the growth of employment in small scale enterprises of around 17 percent
per annum.


                                                        9
and 1993 for Vietnam. Unlike the African cases, formal sector manufacturing employment in Taiwan and
Vietnam grows rapidly for several decades following the growth acceleration. Over these same periods,
employment in small/informal firms remains relatively flat and even starts to decline slightly in Vietnam
after 2005. Both Taiwan and Vietnam were largely agrarian societies before the start of their growth
accelerations (Huang, 1993; McCaig and Pavcnik, 2017). Although not shown, increases in formal
manufacturing sector employment in these two countries coincided with gradual declines in agricultural
employment shares. These stylized facts are consistent with the idea that structural change in these two
countries was a result of positive supply shocks to the manufacturing sector.

        One final piece of evidence supports the idea that expansion of "modern" sectors in Tanzania
and Ethiopia has been demand driven. In Figure 2.4, we plot the relationship between labor productivity
in agriculture, and employment in small/informal sector manufacturing employment and formal sector
manufacturing employment as a share of total employment based on the GGDC-EASD employment
numbers. Labor productivity in agriculture is calculated using GGDC data on value added and
employment in agriculture and indexed to 1970. Both graphs show that the reversal in labor productivity
growth in agriculture coincides with the beginning of the rise in the small/informal share of employment
in manufacturing. Thereafter, the two series are strongly positively correlated. Equally striking is the
relatively flat line corresponding to the employment share in formal sector manufacturing. Presumably
increases in labor productivity in agriculture are associated with rising rural incomes providing further
support for the hypothesis that structural change has been driven by demand shocks in these two
countries.

        Finally, our estimates of labor productivity growth in agriculture using the GGDC data are
corroborated by other researchers. Using data from FAOSTAT, Badiane et al. (forthcoming), find rising
agricultural output per worker in many African countries, including Tanzania and Ethiopia. And the
World Development Indicators show that real agricultural output per worker in SSA grew 50 percent
from 2000 to 2014; total cumulative growth from 2000-2014 was 29 percent in Tanzania and 68 percent
in Ethiopia.

2.3     Summary

        The evidence presented so far seems to indicate that formal sector manufacturing firms in
Tanzania and Ethiopia have not absorbed large numbers of workers. The opposite is true for Taiwan and
Vietnam. This evidence is consistent with previous work where we hypothesized that structural change

                                                     10
in African countries -- expansion of manufacturing and other urban "modern" sectors -- has been
demand driven. In addition, the results for the formal manufacturing sectors in Ethiopia and Tanzania
are somewhat surprising. Tanzania and Ethiopia have both made industrialization cornerstones of their
growth plans. And Ethiopia has been heralded as the China of Africa in numerous news outlets. Its low
wages and generous incentives for foreign investors have been viewed as omens of successful
industrialization.

        Yet we know little about the progress of industrialization in these two countries. Why is formal
manufacturing sector employment lagging? Are formal manufacturing firms in Tanzania and Ethiopia
performing poorly? To answer these questions, we turn to firm level analyses of the manufacturing
sector in each of these two countries using newly constructed longitudinal data for the period 2008-16
for Tanzania and 1996-2017 for Ethiopia.

3. The firm-level data

        Analyses of manufacturing trends in low-income Africa have been hampered by data limitations.
This paper makes use of two newly created panels of manufacturing firms, one in Tanzania covering
2008-2016 and one in Ethiopia covering 1996-2017. 3 In this section we describe these datasets, their
construction, cleaning, and shortcomings; we also present summary statistics.

        We created the Tanzanian panel dataset for the period 2008-2016 from repeated years of the
Annual Survey of Industrial Production (ASIP), conducted by the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) of
Tanzania. The Tanzanian government has conducted the Annual Survey of Industrial Production (ASIP)
since the early 2000s and published the ASIP analytical and statistical reports routinely since 2008 (NBS,
2010a, 2010b, 2012, 2016a, 2016b, 2018a, 2018b). ASIP is meant to cover all industrial establishments
in the country that employ ten persons or more. This includes mining, manufacturing, and utilities sector
firms. We limit our work and analysis to the sample of manufacturing sector firms.

        We created the Ethiopian panel dataset for the period 1996-2017 from repeated years of the
Large and Medium Scale Manufacturing Industries Survey, conducted by the Central Statistical Agency
(CSA) of Ethiopia (CSA 2001, 2004, 2008, 2011a, 2011b, 2011c). This survey is meant to cover all
manufacturing establishments in the country that employ ten persons or more and that use power-


3
 The ASIP and LMSM surveys are not currently available publicly, though researchers can request access to the
data from NBS and CSA, respectively. Additionally, both the NBS and CSA have granted us permission to make the
panel datasets publicly available in the future.

                                                      11
driven machinery. While the LMSM survey does not cover mining, it does include some utilities firms. As
such, we limit our analysis to the sample of manufacturing firms.

3.1     Panel Creation and Cleaning

        The Tanzania panel was created from annual ASIP data obtained from the NBS for the period
2008-2016; there was no survey in 2014. NBS assigned consistent firm identifiers across the years 2008-
2016, which were a combination of the firm's location information and a sheet and batch number. Using
these identifiers, we were able to match firms over multiple years of the ASIP and create a firm-level
panel. There were some changes to the questionnaire over time, but key variables are consistently
reported.

        The Ethiopia panel creation process was more complicated, due to a lack of consistent panel
identifiers after 2011. We obtained datasets from CSA for each year of the LMSM from 1996-2017, apart
from 1997, which was never made available. In each year, an establishment is identified by the
combination of its ISIC code and an establishment number. The establishment number is unique within
each ISIC group and LMSM round but not necessarily consistent across LMSM rounds after 2011. This is
the crux of the problem we faced when creating the LMSM panel.

        To merge the different rounds of LMSM establishment-level datasets into a single panel, this
required cross-verification of establishment's identities across different data sources and across years.
The work to merge the 1996-2013 panel was done before the data for the years 2014-2017 were fully
available. As a result, there are two distinct merging processes, one that created a panel from 1996-
2013 and one that created a panel from 2013-2017. Both relied on manual, case-by-case matching
processes but were conducted by different teams.

        The panel identifiers for 1996-2013 were created through work by Abebe et al. (2018), and we
use their panel identifiers and correspondence file to merge the individual datasets from 1996-2013.
That team tried several ways to match establishments across LMSM rounds and there was no single type
of matching algorithm (automatic, e.g., fuzzy matching) that resulted in satisfactory results.
Consequently, they relied on assessing matches on a case-by-case basis using all available information,
including the establishment census framework lists CSA used for different LMSM rounds and hard copies
of LMSM questionnaires CSA had in storage.




                                                    12
        For the years 2013-2017, which were merged through a separate process by a team of
researchers based at the Ethiopian Development Research Institute and Oxford University, largely relied
on firm ISIC code, establishment number, taxpayer identification number, phone number, and
establishment name. The final panel spans the period 1996-2017 and was created by merging the early
and later panels using the CSA unique firm identifiers (ISIC code and establishment number) in 2013. In
the final Ethiopia panel, about 16 percent of the sample is only observed once, accounting for about 10
percent of both total employment and total value added. This compares to 12 percent of the panel in
Tanzania, which accounts for 9 percent of total employment and 12 percent of total value added.

        After creating the merged ASIP and LMSM panels, we then went through a cleaning process to
check the quality of the data and flag any problematic observations. We focused on several key variables
needed for our analyses, including employment, the components of output and intermediate costs,
wages, and capital stock. This included correcting obvious inputting errors such as employment in the
hundreds of thousands, and interpolating missing values for employment, sales, and raw materials costs
where possible.

        More details on the panel creation and cleaning process can be found in the online appendix. In
all analyses using the firm-level data, we focus on results from Winsorized samples. In addition, for our
analyses of employment and labor productivity growth we present both firm-level results and sector-
level results as checks on the reliability of the matching process and as an informal way of accounting for
firm entry and exit.

3.2     Coverage of the Census Data

        Both censuses are meant to cover all firms operating with 10 or more employees. However,
since we are among the first researchers to use the firm level data in Tanzania, we use other sources of
information to verify aggregate employment estimates.

        Tanzania maintains a Central Registry of Establishments (CRE), which records data on
establishments in all sectors and of all sizes. With assistance from NBS we compared estimates of the
number of manufacturing firms in the CRE in the years for which this information had been formally
tabulated--2008, 2009, 2010, and, 2014--broken up by employment size class. When comparing the
ASIP to the CRE, we find that the coverage of large firms (those with 50 or more workers) is consistently
high. The coverage of small firms is seemingly low in earlier years (2008-2010), but this may be


                                                    13
explained by the fact that CRE records all registered establishments while ASIP requires that the firm
was operational in the reference year.

        We also compare the estimates of employment in manufacturing from the ASIP panel to
estimates from the Tanzania National Panel Survey (NPS), which covers the years 2009, 2011, 2013 and
2015 (NBS 2009, 2011, 2013, 2015). These data are publicly available from the World Bank Living
Standards Measurement Study (LSMS) project, which supported NBS in its design and implementation of
the NPS. From those data, we compute weighted estimates of employment in manufacturing firms with
10 or more workers that is similar in magnitude to the estimates produced by ASIP. There are also
specific concerns about the 2013 ASIP data, which we find has low coverage of small firms (with 10-49
workers). This is likely explained by the fact that the 2013 data come from the 2013 Census of Industrial
Production (CIP). The CIP aimed to cover industrial firms of all employment sizes; the enumeration
process included a full census of firms with 10 or more workers (identical to the ASIP) and a sample of
firms with fewer than 10 workers. The sheer size of the operation involving firms of all sizes leads to
smaller sample sizes even for small firms with 10 or more employees. Therefore, we apply sampling
weights to the 2013 data although in practice weighted and unweighted results are almost identical.

        We also have some minor concerns about the coverage of the Ethiopia LMSM data in the later
years because it is unclear whether the LMSM covers firms in industrial parks. To check this, we
obtained a complete list of industrial parks and their initial year of operation and of the firms operating
in these parks and their employment status produced by the Ethiopian Investment Commission in 2019.
Between 2013-2016 two industrial parks were established; one in 2013 and one in 2016. Using firm
names, we match firms in the industrial parks to firms in our panel. In the largest industrial park, Eastern
IP, which had been operational since 2013, we were able to match 23 out of 91 firms on the list,
accounting for about 40 percent of employment in the park in 2019 or approximately 5,946 workers. In
Bole Lemi IP, which opened in 2016, we are able to match 7 out of 11 firms, again accounting for about
40 percent of employees in the park or approximately 6,260 workers.

        Given that Bole Lemi opened in 2016 and establishments take time to ramp up production, our
growth estimates using the panel data should not be biased by missing employment there. In 2019, we
are therefore only concerned about missing a maximum of 8,998 employees in the Eastern IP park; this
means that the actual total number of employees missing in the years covered by our panel is likely
minimal, as many firms accounting for the missing employment in 2019 will have either opened since
2017 and not be covered in our panel, and other firms will have taken time to grow employment to 2019

                                                     14
levels. Thus, the missing number of workers from industrial parks operating during the period of our
analysis is small enough that it is very unlikely to influence our results.

3.3     Manufacturing firms with less than 10 employees

        The LMSM and ASIP surveys do not cover firms with fewer than 10 workers. In the case of
Tanzania, the only nationally representative data that covers small-scale manufacturers is the 2013
Census of Industrial Production (NBS, 2016b). We use these data to explore the firm size distribution in
Tanzania but are unable to analyze employment and productivity growth in these smaller firms. Basic
summary statistics are presented in Table 3.1. There are 3 permanent workers on average per firm in
the CIP, and the average value added of these firms is USD 2,067. 4

        The CSA In Ethiopia conducts periodic nationally representative surveys of Small-Scale
Manufacturing Industries (SSI). The raw data from these surveys is available for 2002, 2006, 2008, 2011,
and 2014 (CSA 2003, 2006, 2010a, 2010b, 2014) and covers manufacturing establishments that use
power-driven machinery and engage fewer than 10 workers; each of these datasets includes sampling
weights. 5 Although these data are repeated cross sections making it impossible to conduct within-firm
analyses, we are able to conduct sector-level analyses of employment and value-added growth.

        We present basic summary statistics from the SSI data in Table 3.1. The measures are weighted
using the sampling weights provided in the data, and we list both the unweighted and weighted number
of observations covered. The data come from 30,647 observations representing 292,202 firms. The
average number of permanent workers is low at 3 workers per establishment. However, about one third
of these firms also hire an average of 9 seasonal workers per year, and it is common for there to be
multiple owners. The average value added of these firms is USD 4,499.

3.4     Summary Statistics

        We first present maps showing the distribution of firms in our ASIP and LMSM panels as well as
the SSI data, in Figure 3.1 for Tanzania and Figure 3.2 for Ethiopia. In both countries the number of large
firms has not increased very much, while the number of small firms has expanded considerably. In


4
  All USD amounts are reported in 2016 dollars. We convert nominal values in LCU to real 2016 LCU using
manufacturing-specific deflators calculated from the WDI data on manufacturing value added in constant and
current LCU (World Bank 2020a). We then convert real 2016 LCU to real 2016 USD using the exchange rate
between LCU and USD from WDI for both Tanzania and Ethiopia.
5
  The SSI data was made available by Marco Sanfilippo.

                                                      15
Tanzania, shown in Figure 3.1, the number of small firms with 10-49 workers has increased significantly
between 2008-2016, and there is new activity in many districts. We see a similar story in Figure 3.2 for
Ethiopia, which shows significantly increased numbers of firms with <10 workers as well as firms with
10-49 workers across zones in the country.

         We next present summary statistics in Table 3.2 corresponding to the sample used in our main
analyses in section 4. All currency amounts reported are in real 2016 USD and real 2016 LCU; we took
exchange rates from WDI and used WDI manufacturing value-added series to calculate manufacturing-
specific deflators (World Bank 2020a). Our ASIP sample covers 3,526 unique firms in Tanzania over 2008-
2016, and firms are observed in the panel on average 2.4 years. Firms in Tanzania have 83 workers on
average, average value added is USD 1.7 million (TZS 3.8 billion), and the average value of the capital
stock is USD 1.1 million (TZS 2.5 billion). Meanwhile, 25 percent of firms are large (with 50 or more
workers), 17 percent are foreign, 10 percent are exporters, and 4 percent are public. 6

         The LMSM sample covers 8,793 unique firms in Ethiopia over 1996-2017, and firms are observed
in the data on average 3 years. The average number of workers is 92, while average value added is USD
1.4 million (birr 30.4 million) and the average value of capital stock is USD 738,000 (birr 16 million). 27
percent of firms in the sample are large, 6 percent are foreign-owned, 5 percent are exporting, and 7
percent are public.

4. Employment and Labor Productivity in Manufacturing

         In this section we use the datasets described in section 3 to analyze employment and labor
productivity in Tanzania and Ethiopia's manufacturing sectors. For much of our analysis, we split firms
into small and large groups. Small firms are defined as those with 10-49 workers, while large firms are
defined as having 50+ workers. Firms are assigned to the same size class in every year according to their
average employment in the first two years observed. To select these size groups, we first split firms into
the size groups 10-19, 20-49, 50-99, 100-499, and 500+ workers and tested growth rates in employment,
value added, sales, and raw materials (plus each measure in per worker terms). We found that patterns
were most consistent between the 10-19 and 20-49 groups and the 50-99, 100-499, and 500+ groups,



6
  A firm is large if it has 50 workers or more on average in its first two years observed; this is time-invariant. The
variables for exporter, foreign, and public are all time-variant and depend on the firm's reporting in the current
year. A firm is defined as an exporter if it exports any of its production, defined as foreign if it reports foreign or
joint venture ownership, and similarly public if it reports public ownership.

                                                            16
leading us to define a cutoff for small and large firms at 50 workers. A summary of this analysis is
provided in Appendix Figures 5.1 and 5.2. 7

        Since our paper is the first to use the ASIP data in panel format and the first to use the LMSM
extended panel, we begin with a comparison of employment and labor productivity in levels by firm
type. We then present within firm estimates of employment and labor productivity growth by firm type.
Next, to account for the impact of entry and exit on aggregate or net employment and labor productivity
growth, we estimate labor productivity and employment growth at the industry level. This is followed by
a section which addresses concerns in the literature about biases associated with estimating the
relationship between firm size and growth without accounting for firm age (Haltiwanger et al., 2013;
Martin et al., 2017).

        The penultimate section estimates labor productivity and employment growth among small-
scale industries in Ethiopia, before concluding with a summary of the results from this section.

4.1     Employment and Labor Productivity Levels Estimates

        This paper is the first to use the ASIP data in panel format and the first to use the LMSM
extended panel. As a result, it is useful to check that we get reasonable outcomes when we compare
small firms to large, exporting, foreign owned and public firms using these data. We test this through a
set of pooled cross-sectional regressions looking at differences in levels of value added per worker and
employment across the years in the panel according to firm characteristics. Our estimating equation is:

          ln( ) = 1 (  ) + 2 ( ) + 3 ( ) + 4 ( ) +  + (1)
                                                       + 

where  references firm,  industry,  region, and  year;  is the firm's value added per worker or
employment. 8 We examine the relationship between levels of  and firm size, exporter, foreign, and


7
  Note that there are almost no mergers and acquisitions in the Ethiopian and Tanzanian manufacturing sectors so
estimates of employment and productivity growth reflect real changes and not compositional changes.
8
  Value added is defined as the difference between total sales and total raw materials costs; in Ethiopia, we
calculate it as the difference between total sales and total raw materials and utilities costs. Employment in
Tanzania is defined as all persons engaged on a regular basis, which includes the number of employees on the
permanent payroll, together with any temporary or seasonal workers who have been employed on a weekly or
monthly basis for more than one month. In Ethiopia, employment is split into permanent and temporary/seasonal
workers. We are missing seasonal/temporary workers for one year of the panel, 2009, so we limit our analysis to
permanent workers. However, we do conduct additional robustness checks (available upon request) that show the
Ethiopia firm-level growth results are not significantly affected by the inclusion of seasonal/temporary workers in

                                                        17
public status. We also include dummies for each year covered by the panel (reference year 2008 for
Tanzania and 1996 for Ethiopia) and include industry and region dummies  and  .

        We interpret the log-transformed coefficients in Table 4.1 in level terms. After controlling for
industry, region, and year, in both countries, large, exporting, and foreign firms all have significantly
higher levels of labor productivity and employment. These results confirm our expectations.

        The results in column 1 show that in Tanzania, average labor productivity is 95 percent higher in
large firms than in small firms (USD 20,861 per worker vs. USD 10,678 per worker) 9. Labor productivity
is 70 percent higher in exporters (USD 25,286) vs. non-exporters (USD 12,571) and 1.1 times higher in
foreign firms (USD 20,837) compared to domestic firms (USD 12,245). In Ethiopia, labor productivity is
1.7 times higher in large firms compared to small (USD 114,639 vs. USD 7,080), 56 percent higher in
exporters compared to non-exporters (USD 13,028 vs. USD 9,366), and 39 percent higher in foreign firms
compared to domestic firms (USD 14,301 vs. USD 9,197).

        Employment in Tanzanian large firms is 5.11 times higher than in small firms, with 141 workers
on average in large firms compared to 23 in small. Exporters have employment 27 percent higher than
non-exporters (87 vs. 55 workers) and foreign firms have employment 57 percent higher than domestic
firms (72 vs. 57 workers). In Ethiopia, large firms have 5.3 times more workers than small firms (166 vs.
28 workers), exporters have employment 32 percent greater than non-exporters (103 vs. 78 workers),
and foreign firms have employment 86 percent greater than domestic firms (135 vs. 72 workers).

        The results are remarkably similar between the two countries. The only differences arise in
public firms, which in Ethiopia are similar to the other groups but in Tanzania are quite distinct. In
Ethiopia, public firms' labor productivity is 34 percent higher than private firms (USD 12,465 per worker
vs. USD 9,313 per worker), and their employment is 1.2 times higher (145 vs. 67 workers per firm). In



our employment and labor productivity measures. In these robustness checks, we estimate a full-time equivalent
of seasonal/temporary workers by estimating the ratio of production worker wages to seasonal worker wages at
the firm-level and applying that ratio to the number of seasonal/temporary workers. On average, we find that 5
seasonal/temporary workers are equivalent to 1 production worker in terms of wages.
9
  All USD amounts are reported in 2016 dollars. We convert nominal values in LCU to real 2016 LCU using
manufacturing-specific deflators calculated from the WDI data on manufacturing value added in constant and
current LCU (World Bank 2020a). We then convert real 2016 LCU to real 2016 USD using the exchange rate
between LCU and USD from WDI for both Tanzania and Ethiopia. We use the margins command in Stata to
estimate the predicted value of employment and value added per worker.



                                                      18
Tanzania, labor productivity is 31 percent lower in publicly owned firms compared to privately owned
(USD 10,232 in public vs. USD 14,844 in private), and public firms have just 8 percent higher
employment than private firms on average (67 vs. 62 workers). This may reflect the fact that public firms
are still a large part of the landscape in Ethiopia while in Tanzania most public firms have been
privatized. This is supported by the fact that just 4 percent of our sample are public firms in Tanzania,
while 7 percent are public in Ethiopia (Table 3.2).

4.2     Employment and Labor Productivity Growth: Within Firm Estimates

        To describe employment and labor productivity growth and how they vary depending on firm
attributes such as size and ownership, we begin by estimating a set of regressions with firm fixed effects
in which growth rates are regressed on a linear time trend. Again, we measure firm size based on
average employment in the first two years in which the firm appears. Estimating growth in this way
gives us an estimate of long run within firm growth by size class which incorporates transitory shocks.
(An important issue we do not tackle in this paper is the extent to which small firms transition to large
firms and the conditions under which this happens.) In subsequent sections, we explore the extent to
which these results are robust to entry, exit and firm age. Thus, the estimating equation is:

               ln( ) =  ( ) + 1 (    ) + 2 (   )                                                           (2)
                          + 3 (   ) + 4 (   ) +  + 

where  references firm,  year, and  are firm fixed effects;  is the firm's value added per worker or
employment. The coefficients in this regression may be interpreted as the annual average growth in
value added per worker and employment.

        Table 4.2 shows the results for labor productivity and employment growth in Tanzania and
includes interactions with dummy variables for large firms (cols. 2 & 6), exporting firms (cols. 3 & 6),
foreign firms (cols. 4 & 6), and public firms (cols. 5 & 6) in order to check the extent to which growth
varies according to firm type.

        The top panel of Table 4.2 shows the results for labor productivity growth in Tanzania. We find
that labor productivity growth is significantly positive only in large (>50 employees) and exporting firms.
Columns 2 and 6 of Table 4.2 show that large firms' labor productivity grows on average at 7-9 percent
per year and columns 3 and 6 show that exporting firms grow at 5-6 percent on average per year.
Though column 4 shows foreign firms having positive labor productivity growth, column 6--which


                                                      19
includes interactions for each type of firm--shows that this effect disappears once we control for the
effect of large and exporting firms. This is not surprising given that most foreign firms are either large or
exporters or both. The bottom panel of Table 4.2 shows the results for employment growth and reveals
that at the firm-level in Tanzania, employment growth in small firms (<50 employees) averages around
1.2-1.3 percent per year. Large firms, on the other hand, have negative employment growth averaging
around 2 percent per year. The absence of employment growth in the larger firms that experience
positive productivity growth is especially striking.

        Table 4.3 shows that in Ethiopia, labor productivity is growing on average across the entire
spectrum of firms with more than 10 employees; the upper panel shows that labor productivity grows
on average at 2.9-3.2 percent per year. The bottom panel shows that employment within small firms
grows from 1-3 percent per year. As in Tanzania, there is evidence that larger firms (>50 employees)
have negative employment growth averaging around -1 percent per year; this effect persists even after
we control for the positive effects of exporting, foreign, and public firms (which have significant overlap
with the large firm group). Average employment growth in exporting firms is around 2.6 percent, in
foreign firms is around 2 percent, and in public firms it is around 2.5 percent per year.

4.3     Entry and Exit: Within Industry Estimates

        In Table 4.4 we report entry and exit over the full sample period for Tanzania and Ethiopia. For
comparative purposes, we also include entry and exit in the Vietnamese manufacturing sector, which is
reported in McCaig et al. (2020). Following McCaig et al. (2020), we use the initial and final years of the
panels to define entry and exit. We call the share of firms in the initial year which do not appear in the
final year of the panel exiters; and we call the share of firms that appear in the final year of the panel
but not in the initial year entrants. Survivors include two versions of the same group of firms, depending
on the reference year: (i) those in the data in the initial year which did not exit (i.e. survived to the final
year) and; (ii) those in the final year which were also in the data in the initial year. The relative sizes of
the three groups -- entrants, exiters and survivors ­ is computed as the share of sales or employment
relative to the total across all firms in the respective year. For example, in Tanzania between 2008 and
2016, 82 percent of firms exit; these firms account for 78 percent of employment and 73 percent of
sales. Thus, survivors are on average larger than exiters.

        One concern with the Ethiopian numbers is that errors in our procedure for matching firm
identifiers post-2011 could artificially inflate rates of entry and exit. To determine whether the matching

                                                       20
procedure inflated entry and exit, we also report entry and exit for the period over which the CSA did
not change firm identifiers: 2000-2011. The fourth set of results in Table 4.4 indicates slightly lower (to
be expected over the shorter timeframe) but still very high rates of entry and exit. This gives us
confidence that our entry and exit rates reflect real activity.

         Table 4.4 makes it clear that all three countries experience similarly high rates of entry and exit.
We will come back to this point in section 5. For now, a possible concern is that our within-firm
estimates of employment and productivity growth may not reflect economywide trends in the presence
of such high rates of entry and exit. The issue is especially relevant for the small firms in the sample that
often appear in the data only one time.

         To account for this, we construct sector aggregates of employment and value-added per worker
using the firm-level data and regress these on time. 10 We do this at the 2, 3, and 4-digit ISIC levels
alternatively. We then estimate the following equation (where s denotes sector and t year, and y
denotes value added per worker and employment, respectively, and we control for industry fixed effects
 ):

                                            ln( ) = ( ) +  +                                                        (3)

         Table 4.5 shows that at the sector level in Tanzania labor productivity growth s positive only
among large firms at 7 percent per year. The bottom panel of Table 4.5 shows that employment growth
is predominantly taking place among small firms (10-49 employees), with growth of about 10-13 percent
per year among sectors aggregated from small firms. It is possible that these small firms are new
establishments, but it is also possible that these were existing enterprises that grew to have 10 or more
workers and be included in the ASIP.

         At the sector-level in Ethiopia, Table 4.6 shows that we find positive net growth in both
employment and labor productivity that is consistent across firm size groupings and different ISIC-level
aggregations. Labor productivity grows at 4-5 percent and is similar between the aggregations of small
and large firms, though slightly higher in the sectors aggregated from small firms. Employment growth is




10
  We estimate sector aggregates by taking the sum of value added and employment across all firms at the sector
level. We do this at the 2, 3, and 4-digit ISIC levels alternately. In each case, we then calculate the total value added
per worker from total sector value added and employment.

                                                           21
higher in the sectors aggregated from small firms, at about 6-7 percent per year on average, while
employment growth ranges from 3-6 percent in the sectors aggregated from large firms.

4.4     Employment Growth, Firm Size and Firm Age

        Haltiwanger et al. (2013) find that once one controls for firm age, the negative relationship
between firm size and employment growth disappears and may even reverse sign. This is important
since the within firm estimates presented in Section 4.2 give higher weights to older firms. In this
section, we explore the relationship between firm age and employment growth following the
methodology proposed by Haltiwanger et al. (2013).

        First, we compute employment growth using average employment between t and t-1 in the
denominator instead of employment at the beginning or end of the period as follows:

                                                       - -1                                             (4)
                                              +1 =
                                                       

Our estimating equation for employment growth by size and age is as follows:

                               (+1 ) =  +   +   +  +  +  +                                              (5)

where  is a categorical variable representing the employment size of firm i in industry j, and  is the
categorical variable for firm age. We assign a firm to a size category--10-19, 20-49, 50-99, 100-249, 250-
499, and 500+ workers--based on its average employment in the first two periods observed, and
similarly assign it to an age category--1-2, 3-4, 5-6, 7-8, 9-10, 11-13, 13-16, and 16+ years--based on its
average age between the first two periods observed. We include a vector of firm controls  , which
include dummies for exporting, foreign, and public status. We also include year dummies  and control
for industry at the 2-digit ISIC level.

        The estimates from this equation are presented graphically in Figures 4.1 and 4.2. The figure
shows projected employment growth rates for each size and age category. Each pyramid represents
projected growth by size and age category, controlling for the other variables in the estimation. Overall,
the results shown in Figures 4.1 and 4.2 corroborate our main results; large firms have lower
employment growth than small firms irrespective of firm age.




                                                    22
        4.5     Small Scale Industries

        As we have just discussed, the overall picture looks more favorable for Ethiopia than Tanzania
when we focus on the sample of >10 firms. Since we have data for <10 firms in Ethiopia (SSI firms), we
can do a more complete analysis for Ethiopia, but only at the sector level since the SSI is not a panel.
Following the estimating equation in section 4.2, we estimate growth in labor productivity and
employment among small-scale sectors. For SSI firms, the results in Table 4.7 indicate no statistically
significant productivity growth, but strong employment growth (consistent with macro data). These
results are consistent throughout alternative definitions of employment. With this, the evidence from
Ethiopia evidence becomes more similar to the evidence from Tanzania; employment growth is around
17% per year but there is little evidence of productivity growth.

        4.6     Summary In both Tanzania and Ethiopia large firms, exporters and foreign firms all have
significantly higher levels of labor productivity. These results are consistent with a very large theoretical
and empirical literature on manufacturing firm performance.

        Turning to employment and labor productivity growth, the firm and sector-level results for
Tanzania suggest that the best performing firms are not the ones that are absorbing employment. Labor
productivity growth in large firms is on the order of 8 percent per year and 13 percent per year for large
exporters. By contrast, labor productivity growth in firms with less than 50 employees ranges between
negative 3 percent and zero. By contrast employment growth in these small firms is as high as 13
percent.

        In Ethiopia, the story is similar although labor productivity growth is not as high as it is in
Tanzania. Average within firm employment growth in Ethiopia's large firms is around negative 3 percent
per year while it is 3 percent year for firms with between 10 and 49 employees. When we use the
industry aggregates, the dichotomy in employment growth between small and large firms persists such
that employment growth is 3 percent per year in large firms and 7 percent per year in small firms. To
complete the analysis of Ethiopia, we examined a group of mechanized firms with less than 10
employees using the Small-Scale industries survey. Average annual employment growth among these
firms is around 17 percent while labor productivity growth is an imprecisely estimated zero.




                                                      23
5. Productivity dynamics: convergence and dispersion

        In view of the tremendous heterogeneity among firms ­ by size, formality, ownership, trade
orientation etc. ­ we take a closer look in this section at patterns of productivity change among our
firms. In particular, we ask whether less productive firms tend to catch up to the more productive firms,
and if so, whether this produces lower dispersion in productivity performance across firms over time.
We first check for productivity convergence at both the firm and industry level (so-called -
convergence). Then we look for evidence of reduction in productivity dispersion (-convergence).

        The bottom line is that in both Tanzania and Ethiopia there is strong evidence of rapid labor
productivity convergence. The evidence is weaker for the smallest firms (<10 employees), for which we
have data only in Ethiopia. However, there is no evidence that labor productivity dispersion has come
down over time across firms; if anything, the trend is in the opposite direction. The results on dispersion
notwithstanding, these findings reinforce the story that the problem with manufacturing in our
countries does not lie with productivity performance per se. What stands out is the inability of firms that
are either productive or experiencing rapid productivity growth to generate commensurate levels of
employment.

        At the firm level, we estimate the relationship between growth of labor productivity and its
initial level. We are forced to use short time horizons ­ four years -- because otherwise sample sizes
would shrink too much. The basic model we estimate is given by:

                                (4 ) - (2 )                                                                   (6)
                                            = 1 (1 ) + 
                                 4 - 2

where VAPW stands for value added per worker, 11 t4 is the firm's fourth year in the panel, t2 is the
firm's second year in the panel, and t1 is the firm's first year in the panel. Note that the initial year t1 is



11
   To measure valued added, we add sales and raw materials for Tanzania; sales, raw materials, and utilities for
Ethiopia LMSM. Data are winsorized at the bottom and top 1 percentiles (percentiles measured at the firm size and
year level for ASIP and LMSM and measured at the industry-year level for SSI). For the Ethiopia SSI results, we
calculate an alternate version of value added which is equal to the total gross value of production minus total
industrial costs. We use this alternate method because many firms in the SSI data are missing values for either
sales or raw materials. However, they do report other types of revenues and costs. In order to include as many SSI
firms as possible we therefore adjust our VA equation accordingly.



                                                       24
not used in calculating the labor productivity growth rate to eliminate the bias that arises from 1
entering on both sides of the equation. We run this regression on the sample of firms that have been in
the data for at least four years, controlling for sector (at the 2-digit ISIC code level). We also ran a set of
regressions where firms are weighted by their share in total value added; they are not shown here, but
we will mention any differences in the discussion below. We also create and introduce dummy variables
indicating whether a firm is large (with 50+ employees), an exporter, foreign owned, or public. For each
of these categories, we set the dummy value equal to one if the firm meets the criteria in either year.

        The results are shown in Table 5.1 and 5.2 for Tanzania and Ethiopia, respectively. In both cases,
-convergence coefficients are statistically significant, regardless of specification, and quite large. The
coefficients are estimated to lie in the 6-8% for both countries (weighted convergence regressions
produce even larger estimated coefficients). For comparison, this coefficient tends to be around 2% in
cross-country (conditional) convergence regressions and around 3% in (unconditional) convergence
regressions for formal manufacturing (Rodrik 2013). Interestingly, we find that the rates of convergence
for exporting firms, foreign firms, or larger firms are not statistically distinguishable from that for other
firms in either country (cols. 3-5). Convergence holds within each of these groups separately (not
shown), but the rates are similar to the average for all firms.

        To analyze productivity convergence over a somewhat longer horizon, we next look at
convergence across sectors. We create sector-level measures of labor productivity by aggregating value
added and employment across sectors and years. We include all firms with non-missing employment
and value added (meaning that we do not require firms to be in the data for four years, as we do in the
firm-level regressions). We then follow a similar procedure as before but instead estimate convergence
across the duration of the panel. For Tanzania, this means that we estimate sector-level growth in labor
productivity from 2009 to 2016 and regress growth on the initial 2008 value (Table 5.3). For Ethiopia, we
estimate growth between 1998 and 2017, with initial year 1996 (Table 5.4). We show results at different
levels of sectoral aggregation, and for both unweighted and weighted regressions. In weighted
regressions, sectors are weighted by their share in total value added.

        Sector-level convergence regressions yield generally similar results to the firm-level ones, even
though the firm coverage and time span are quite different. For Tanzania, the estimated convergence
regressions are very much in the same ballpark as in the previous set of results. For Ethiopia, the
coefficients are generally smaller, and in some cases (of levels of aggregation) statistically not significant


                                                      25
at conventional levels. Nevertheless, taken together the results tend to confirm a strong tendency
towards labor productivity convergence.

        Remember that our baseline sample of firms exclude the smallest firms, with <10 employees.
For Ethiopia, we can also run these convergence regressions with SSI data, which covers firms with
fewer than 10 employees. Because it is not a panel, we can only test convergence at the sector-level.
And because we only have five years of SSI data, we estimate growth between 2002 and 2014, with the
initial year being 2002. For the SSI sample, we use two alternative definitions of employment: 1)
permanent workers, and 2) permanent workers + seasonal & temporary workers. 12 We test sector-level
convergence for SSI sectors on their own, as well as combining SSI and LMSM sectors together.

        The results, shown in Table 5.5, provide much weaker support for productivity convergence
among the small firms (<10 employees). When estimated separately (cols. 1-2), the coefficients for
LMSM and SSI firms are similar in magnitude, although the latter is not statistically significant. In the
pooled regression, (col. 5) we can reject the hypothesis that productivity convergence is as rapid among
the small firms as it is among the LMSM firms.

        We now turn to -convergence, or dispersion in labor productivity. Here, the evidence is less
clear-cut than with -convergence. We find no evidence of -convergence. The evidence in fact points
in the opposite direction, showing an increase in dispersion in labor productivity in recent years.

        We consider four alternate measures of productivity dispersion: coefficient of variation,
standard deviation, ratio of 10th to 90th percentile, and ratio of 25th to 75th percentile. The results are
shown in Figures 5.1-5.2. In Tanzania, a rough interpretation suggests that productivity dispersion was
reducing from 2008 until 2012/2013, before increasing again through 2016. In Ethiopia, we see a general
increase in the dispersion indicated by each each measure over the period 1996-2017, though there are
ups and down during some sub-periods. When we look at trends within firm groups in Ethiopia (large vs.
small, exporter vs. non-exporter, foreign vs. domestic, and public vs. private), we see that dispersion is
similarly increasing over the period 1996-2017 for all groups (not shown). In general, small firms have
greater productivity dispersion than large firms, non-exporters have greater dispersion than exporters,




12
  A third definition of employment, which included "owners," did not yield results that are different, so these are
not shown here.

                                                        26
domestic firms have greater dispersion than foreign firms, and public firms have greater dispersion than
private firms. All these group-level results accord with our intuition.

        The fact that our two measures of convergence go in different directions is not necessarily
surprising, as -convergence and -convergence measure different things (see e.g., Sala-i-Martin, 1996).
-convergence is a necessary but not sufficient condition for -convergence. To see this, let's write the
growth process (following Sala-i-Martin, 1996) as:

                                                                                                             (7)
                                      ln         =  -  ln,-1  + 
                                            ,-1

        Then, if  is identical across firms, Sala-i-Martin shows that the evolution of the variance of  (-
convergence) is given by:

                                            2           2                                                    (8)
                                               (1 -  )2 -1 + 2
                                                               .

        When there is -convergence ( is between 0 and 1), the first term tends to reduce dispersion
over time. But whether  goes down overall depends on the second term (the variance of the error term
                                                            2
in the growth equation.) It is possible for  to increase if   is large enough. That happens when firm-
level idiosyncratic shocks (equivalently, idiosyncratic and non-persistent differences in firm
performance) are large enough to outweigh the -convergence effect.

        Since -convergence measures actual dispersion in firm performance, it is arguably a better
indicator of the health of the manufacturing sector. Nevertheless, the evidence on -convergence is
interesting in its own right. What the results are telling us is that idiosyncratic shocks to productivity
dominate the tendency of lower productivity firms to catch up.

6. An interpretation: inappropriate technologies

        The low employment-generation capacity of modern, productive African firms presents a puzzle.
It is not clear that we can resolve the puzzle by appealing to conventional culprits. First, note that we
find small firms to be less productive than large firms. Consistent with the arguments of Hsieh and Olken
(2014), this suggests it is unlikely that credit or other constraints prevent small firms from expanding and
growing into larger firms that employ more workers. In particular, we follow Hsieh and Olken (2014) in
analyzing the size distribution of firms and reach very similar conclusions. We find no evidence of a
"missing middle" in the size distribution of firms in Tanzania and Ethiopia. The distribution of firm size is


                                                      27
heavily right skewed, with a predominance of small firms and generally a smooth decline in frequency
over the firm size distribution. There are no indications of a bimodal distribution. 13

        Second, high labor costs (relative to productivity) are often cited as constraints on employment
growth in Africa (e.g. Gelb et al., 2020). But as we will show below, payroll shares in total value added in
both Tanzania and Ethiopia are exceedingly low, even in the more labor-intensive sectors. 14 Third,
explanations that posit a "poor business environment" are belied by the high dynamism in Tanzania's
and Ethiopia's manufacturing sectors, as captured by our analysis of entry and exit rates. As Table 4.4
shows, entry rates during the two countries' high-growth periods have been as high, if not higher, than
the levels observed for Vietnam.

        Fourth, institutional aspects of government business relationships are likely to play a role in the
evolution of the manufacturing sectors in both Ethiopia and Tanzania; but it is unclear why these
relationships would impact the employment growth and not the productivity growth of large firms.
Moreover, as pointed out by Bourguignon and Wangwe (2018), corruption is not unique to Tanzania. Of
course, corruption is also not unique to Ethiopia. For an extensive discussion of these issues in the
Tanzanian context see Bourguignon and Wangwe (2018) and Wangwe and Gray (2018) and in the
Ethiopian context see Oqubay (2015) 15.

        In this section, we present an alternative explanation. We argue that the broad patterns we
have observed with respect to productivity and employment can be explained by excessively capital-
intensive modes of production in manufacturing in our two African economies. We first document the
capital intensities of firms in Tanzania and Ethiopia, comparing them to a much richer economy (the
Czech Republic). Then we link this technology choice to global innovation patterns in manufacturing in
recent decades. In short, the manufacturing technologies on offer on world markets have moved
steadily away from the factor proportions of labor-abundant countries. This has made it difficult for
African firms to simultaneously enhance productivity and increase employment. Adopting new
technologies has meant adopting mostly capital- and skill-intensive technologies and has resulted in less

13
  These results are available upon request.
14
  In addition, as in Hsieh and Olken (2014), the distributions of the average product of capital and labor are
unimodal and do not show any discontinuity, as would be the case if labor costs (or access to finance/capital) were
binding constraints on firm growth.

15
  For additional analyses of manufacturing in Africa including Ethiopia and Tanzania, see Newman et al. Made in
Africa: Learning to compete in industry, 2016.


                                                        28
price-responsive supply curves. As a result, only the less productive firms retain the ability to absorb
significant amounts of labor.

6.1     Capital-labor ratios in Tanzania and Ethiopia in comparative context

        We choose the Czech Republic as our comparator, a rich country and a successful manufactures
exporter. We obtain capital stock values in manufacturing for this economy from the KLEMS database
(Stehrer et al., 2019). For Ethiopia and Tanzania, we use our firm-level data to compute capital-labor
ratios in manufacturing. We restrict our analysis to firms in the sample for at least two years which
allows us to check for coding errors and outliers. We define the capital stock as machinery and
equipment (M&E, excluding transport and ICT equipment) and buildings and structures (B&S, excluding
dwellings) at constant prices. We compute capital stock for M&E and B&S separately so that we can
apply the appropriate PPP deflators for comparison with the Czech Republic, and then combine them for
an aggregate measure of capital. The details of the calculations are explained in Appendix 1.

        Some basic comparisons are provided in Table 6.1. Per-capita GDP in our African countries are a
small fraction of the Czech level: between 3.5 and 6.6 percent. Aggregate economy-wide capital-labor
ratios are similarly tiny: Ethiopia's K/L endowment is 3.4 percent of the Czech level, and Tanzania's 9.9
percent. But when we look at manufacturing specifically, the gaps become much smaller. Ethiopia is
nearly at a fifth of the Czech economy and Tanzania at close to a half. In other words, compared to the
Czech economy, K/L ratios in Africa are 3-4.5 times larger in manufacturing than they are for the entire
economy.

        Since we have firm-level data for our African economies, we can undertake a finer-grained
comparison for specific firm types (Table 6.2). We note in particular that the 10% most capital-intensive
large firms, producing around a quarter of manufacturing value added (but employing less than 10
percent of the manufacturing workforce), have particularly high K/L ratios. In Ethiopia these large firms
are at 75 percent of the K/L ratio for Czech manufacturing. Tanzania's large firms actually have K/L ratios
that significantly exceed those for Czech manufacturing. Moreover, exporting firms are not more labor-
intensive than the manufacturing average. 16 This may seem surprising, since we would expect exporting
firms to compete on international markets in more labor-intensive segments of manufacturing. But it is

16
  Exporting and foreign firms are defined to be time-invariant in order to track the same group of firms over time
and produce consistent aggregate estimates. Under the new definitions, foreign firms are defined as those with
foreign ownership for the majority of years or at least one year with data available only for two years. Exporters
are firms reporting exports in every year.

                                                        29
consistent with the interpretation we shall develop below having to do with the adoption of more
capital-intensive global technologies as a precondition for competitiveness. Note also that among large
firms, new ones are considerably more capital-intensive than old ones. 17 This too is consistent with the
increased pressure over time to adopt more capital-intensive technologies.

         Columns 2-4 of Table 6.2 provide some sectoral detail. We focus on three sectors: food
products, beverages, & tobacco, and, rubber, plastics, & non-metallic minerals, which are the largest
manufacturing sectors in both countries, and garments & textiles as the main "labor-intensive" sectors.
Once again, the surprise is that garments & textiles does not stand out as a particularly labor-intensive
sector. Ethiopian firms are at about 20 percent of the Czech economy, and Tanzanian firms at around 40
percent. We add that comparisons with other OECD economies, much richer than both of our African
economies, yield similar ratios (see Appendix Table A2).

         It is also instructive to look at trends in manufacturing K/L ratios. We can see from Figure 6.1
that the increase in capital-intensity in large manufacturing firms in both Tanzania and Ethiopia has far
outstripped economy-wide capital deepening. By contrast, in the Czech Republic not only is capital
intensity lower in manufacturing than in the economy as a whole, the two measures have moved more
or less in parallel in recent years.

         Another striking indicator of low levels of labor-intensity in African manufacturing is the payroll
share in total value added. In the Czech economy, the payroll share in aggregate manufacturing is
slightly below 50 percent and rises to 57 percent for garments & textiles (Table 6.3). In Tanzania and
Ethiopia, by contrast, the payroll share is in the range of 11-13 percent and rises merely to 20-24
percent in garments & textiles. It is generally known that labor shares in value added are overstated in
developing countries because of the predominance of owner-operated firms. Even accounting for that
downward bias, the low payroll share in Tanzania and Ethiopia is striking.

         This evidence on payroll shares also suggests that high labor costs ­ in relation to per capita
incomes or level of productivity ­ cannot account for the capital intensity of our African firms. The
extent to which labor costs discourage African industrialization has been an area of debate. Gelb et al.
(2020) find that labor costs are in general higher in Africa than would be expected on the basis of
income levels. But they also note that there is considerable heterogeneity across the continent. They


17
  Firms that enter the sample in 2010 or later are defined as new firms relative to old firms that are in the sample
prior to 2010.

                                                         30
point to Ethiopia specifically as an example of low-cost labor, with significant industrialization potential.
Blattman and Dercon (2018) also find manufacturing wages to be low in Ethiopia.

        In sum, we draw four conclusions from this evidence. First, while K/L ratios in African
manufacturing are lower than in much richer comparator nations, these ratios are still much higher than
would be expected based on their relative labor abundance and low per-capita income levels. Second, if
we focus on the largest firms, K/L ratios in Tanzania and Ethiopia are actually comparable to those in
much richer OECD countries. Third, exporting firms or the traditionally labor-intensive textiles and
clothing firms do not exhibit lower K/L ratios than other manufacturing firms on average. Finally, K/L
ratios have increased much more rapidly in Tanzanian and Ethiopian manufacturing than in the
economy as a whole.

6.2     Biased technological change and premature de-industrialization

        Traditionally, manufacturing has been viewed as a labor-absorbing sector during the process of
economic development. As manufacturing industries with higher productivity emerge, labor moves from
farming to manufacturing jobs (and associated services) in urban areas. This is the story of the Industrial
Revolution, which started the era of modern economic growth, as well as the story of virtually every
country that subsequently developed and caught up with the frontrunners. In the post-war period, there
was an additional twist with the rapid rise of international trade in manufactured products. This allowed
latecomers such as Japan, the East Asian Tigers, and eventually China, to specialize (at least initially) in a
narrow range of labor-intensive manufacturing goods for exports. For those countries that were able to
engineer it, export-oriented industrialization enabled especially fast growth: producers of simple
manufactures ­ toys, garments, electronics assembly ­ could expand almost without limit by absorbing
technology from the advanced countries and cheap labor from the countryside. Export-oriented
manufacturing served as a powerful growth escalator as long as production techniques were intensive in
the most abundant factor of production in low-income countries: unskilled labor.

        Manufacturing has experienced rapid technological progress in recent decades. Crucially, the
improvement in technology has taken a particular form: it has been skill- and capital-biased. The share
of low-skill labor in manufacturing value added has steadily fallen. Figures 6.2 and 6.3 (taken from
Rodrik, 2016) portray the consequences globally. First, employment in manufacturing as a share of
employment has come down steeply since the 1960s, once one controls for other determinants of
industrialization levels such as income levels and demography. This is true both for countries with strong

                                                      31
comparative advantage in manufacturing and for others, though the decline is smaller in the former. By
the 2000s, the employment shortfall in manufacturing, taking the 1950s as the baseline, amounted to 9
percent of total employment in the first group of countries, and a whopping 12 percent in the second
(Figure 6.2). Rodrik (2016) has called this "premature de-industrialization."

        For a smaller sample of countries (and for a shorter period time), it is possible to decompose the
"missing" manufacturing employment into three skill categories: high-skilled labor, medium-skilled
labor, and low-skilled labor. As Figure 6.3 shows, the decline in employment is concentrated entirely in
the low-skilled category. Kunst (2019) has also shown that premature de-industrialization has taken
place mostly in low-skilled occupations.

        Not surprisingly, in light of these trends, there has been a correspondingly sharp drop in the
labor content of exports globally. A World Bank study reports that both the direct and indirect
employment magnitudes created per dollar of exports have halved between 1997 and 2011 in a sample
of 30+ countries (Cali et al., 2016, Table 3). While these results cover all exports, they are consistent with
the implications of labor-saving technological change in manufacturing.

        Since the bulk of technological innovation takes place in the advanced countries where factor
proportions favor automation and skills, the direction that technological change has taken is not
surprising. Producers in developed countries have tried to save on labor costs, especially as competition
from low-wage exporters became more intense. But for developing countries, who are technology
importers, the consequences are hardly salutary. Even if the new technologies disseminate rapidly and
poor nations can easily acquire them, the declining low-skill intensity of manufacturing implies a
reduction in comparative advantage in simple manufactures, less labor absorption by manufacturing,
and lower growth possibilities. In the next subsection we illustrate this with a simple model.

6.3     The simple analytics of technology choice

        To analyze the implications of biased technological innovation on employment in labor-
abundant countries, we consider a representative African firm with access initially to two kinds of
technologies, a labor-intensive technology and a capital-intensive technology. The firm operates in an
open economy, where the price of output, p0, is exogenous and determined on world markets. In Figure
6.4, we show the unit costs of the two technologies and how they change with scale of production. As
drawn, production with the labor-intensive technology results in lower unit costs (than production with
the capital-intensive technology) over the relevant range of output. This is a natural consequence of

                                                     32
lower labor costs in the African country. Firms in the country would choose to employ the labor-
intensive technology, and facing price p0, produce an output q0.

        Note that the shapes of the two cost curves imply costs rise more rapidly under the capital-
intensive technology. This is also a likely consequence of economic conditions in African countries. Labor
can be drawn from the countryside or from informal activities without a steep rise in wages. Capital, on
the one hand is scarce. Equally important, we can interpret capital more broadly here, as including other
production inputs that are likely to be strong complements to capital in manufacturing ­ skilled labor
and infrastructure in particular. 18 Those are also likely to be comparatively scarce in a low-income
country, which would contribute to the steepness of the cost curve for the capital-intensive technology.

        We now consider the implications of a significant improvement in technology that affects only
the capital-intensive mode of production. This is an extreme form of biased technological change that
will simplify the exposition and help us make the argument. We assume this innovation takes form in
the advanced countries, but the resulting technological advance is also available to the African country.

        The innovation affects the diagram in two ways. First, the price on world markets falls as rich
countries ­ using the capital-intensive technology ­ experience a reduction in costs, which is in turn
passed on to world prices. This is shown in the figure by a reduction from p0 to p1.

        Second, the relevant cost curve for the capital-intensive technology shifts down. As drawn, the
vertical shift of the cost curve is less than the fall in prices. The rationale is the following. First, we
assume all the cost savings in rich countries are passed on (at least on impact) to prices. Second, we
assume (realistically) that capital costs are higher in the African country so that the cost benefits of the
new technology are lower than on the rich countries. These imply that the reduction in African costs
(with the new technology) is less than the drop in world prices.

        Note that at the new level of prices, the labor-intensive technology is no longer cost-effective.
The African firm will now shift to the capital-intensive technology. But the result is a fall in its level of

18
  Workers even in low-skill intensive manufacturing in Ethiopia tend to be more educated than the national
average: "Despite low skilled manufacturing workers requiring only very limited training to be able to begin
working, the workers in our sample are relatively educated, with 52.8% having completed at least year 10 and
another 17.4% having additionally completed a technical and vocational training (TVET) course. Only 16.2% have
not completed primary school. This is in contrast with average national statistics, which show that (primary) grade-
8 completion rate was 54% in 2015/16 and gross enrolment rate in secondary education barely reached 30%"
(Schaefer and Oya, 2019, p.23). And even in the textiles and garments sector, Ethiopian firms report that "skill
shortages" are a key constraint (Abebe et al., 2019).

                                                        33
production from q0 to q1. Even with full and costless access to the new technology, the African firm is
disadvantaged. Moreover, the adverse employment impact is even larger than the output effect, since
production now takes place using a more capital-intensive technology.

        The framework highlights the double whammy of technological change that is biased towards
capital. First, the African economy loses comparative advantage in manufacturing (or its comparative
disadvantage becomes worse). Second, because of the induced shift to more capital-intensive
technologies, there is a magnified adverse effect on employment.

        Moreover, once firms have adopted the capital-intensive technology, the ability of the economy
to increase manufacturing output (and generate employment) in response to new opportunities is
reduced. That is because the cost curve of the new technology is steeper: due to scarcity of capital and
complementary inputs (skills, infrastructure) any potential expansion of employment and output is
choked off by rising costs. Not only is the comparative advantage of the economy in manufactures
undermined, its supply curve is less responsive to higher prices (or lower costs). This helps explain the
inability of African manufacturing to scale up.

6.4     Appropriate and inappropriate technologies

        Our interpretation of the evidence harks back to an earlier debate in the development literature
on appropriate technology for low-income nations. As popularized by E.F. Schumacher's (1973) book
"Small is Beautiful," one important strand of argument held that the technologies developed in
advanced countries were not suitable to low-income countries because they were excessively capital
intensive and needed to be operated at large scale. Transfer of existing technologies would not foster
development; it may even hamper it. An even earlier argument along similar lines was set out by Eckaus
(1955) using a neoclassical framework, based on limited substitutability between labor and capital in the
production function (our discussion above is in line with the Eckaus model). These arguments have
largely gone out of fashion, with some exceptions (e.g. Basu and Weil, 1998). Even non-neoclassical
economists have tended to underplay the importance of the Eckaus-Schumacher argument. In a recent
paper, for example, Kaplinsky (2011) suggests the dissemination of innovation capacity among
developing nations can foster intermediate technologies more appropriate to low-income settings.

        Nevertheless, it is clear that economizing on labor has been the main thrust behind
technological innovation in manufacturing. Production methods have become increasingly capital- and
skill-intensive. Moreover, the spread of global value chains (GVCs) and increased openness to trade have

                                                    34
had the effect of homogenizing technology around the world (Rodrik 2018). Plugging into GVCs requires
producing to rich-country firms' standards, and that typically means using their technology. 19

         A similar process has been taking place in production for the home market as well. Not so long
ago, a combination of natural and man-made protection ­ transport costs and import restrictions ­ left
space for domestically oriented firms to serve home consumers with lower quality products produced
with labor-intensive techniques. As international competition has intensified, such market segmentation
has become more difficult, reinforcing the globally homogenizing trend in manufacturing technologies.
Sen (2019) reports that trade integration reduces the employment intensity of manufacturing
production in developing countries. Pahl (2020) finds that participation in GVCs tend to increase labor
productivity but not employment.

7. Concluding remarks

         Covid-19 has unsettled the world economy in many ways, creating a significant setback for the
development prospects of low-income countries. Even after the immediate crisis dissipates, slower
expansion of world trade and a general trend towards reshoring of supply chains may make it difficult
for these countries to fully reap the gains from the global division of labor. Our results provide cause for
concern of a different sort.

         Our analysis of the manufacturing sectors in Ethiopia and Tanzania reveals a dichotomy between
larger firms that exhibit superior productivity performance but do not expand employment much, and
small firms that absorb employment but do not experience much productivity growth. Typically,
economic development happens when the productively dynamic parts of the economy absorb resources
from the rest. By contrast, the choice that African manufacturers seem to face is either to increase
productivity or to increase employment.




19
  A World Bank report (Farole, 2016) divided exports into two types of goods, called "GVC products" and "non-
GVC products" and regressed an export performance index for each group on a number of country characteristics,
including proximity to major markets, natural resources, human and physical capital, institutional quality,
logistics/connectivity, and wage competitiveness. For non-GVC products, wage competitiveness was the only item
on the list that significantly correlated with export performance. For GVC products, by contrast, all of the factors
strongly correlated with export performance ­ with the glaring exception of wage competitiveness (Farole, 2016,
p. 34). It appears GVCs demand skills and capabilities that are in short supply in developing countries, and
undercut their traditional comparative advantage in unskilled labor.


                                                         35
        We doubt that this pattern can be explained (only) by factor-price distortions or other
institutional shortcomings specific to the African setting. Our interpretation is that the technologies
available on world markets restrict the range of production techniques that can be used by firms. As the
capital- (and skill-) intensity of global technology has increased, the gap with low-income countries'
factor endowments has opened very wide. Becoming more productive requires adopting technologies
with factor input combinations that are increasingly at variance with African countries' factor
abundance.

        From the standpoint of trade theory, our interpretation amounts to an argument that Ethiopia
and Tanzania have been losing comparative advantage in traditionally labor-intensive manufactures due
to a trend reduction in their labor intensity. This implies a loss in the gains from trade. It also lowers the
ceiling on industrialization and constrains the capacity of manufacturing to absorb labor productively.

        This is not to say that manufacturing cannot play an important role in in the development of
these countries. After all, productivity growth in the large manufacturing firms in Tanzania and Ethiopia
has been impressive and could create jobs indirectly. For example, while the manufacturing of food
products is capital intensive, smallholder farming is labor intensive. Worker training programs
associated with industrialization strategies like Ethiopia's Technical and Vocational Education and
Training School (TVET) could also enhance the capabilities of smaller firms. And the managerial and
logistical capabilities of large manufacturing firms could be transferred to other activities through
worker turnover or informal networks (Abebe et al, 2018). But tempering expectations is important
especially in politically fragile countries like Ethiopia.




                                                        36
Appendix 1: Calculation of capital-labor ratios

        We use firm level data for Ethiopia and Tanzania, restricting our analysis to firms in the sample
for at least two years which allows us to check for coding errors and outliers. We define the capital stock
as machinery and equipment (excluding transport and ICT equipment) and buildings and structures
(excluding dwellings) in constant value; we compute each of these measures separately and then
combine them so that we can apply the appropriate deflators.

        We begin by converting end of year values from current local currency units to constant 2010
local currency units. We use a deflator of one for machinery and equipment and each country's GDP
deflator for buildings. 20 The capital stocks in constant 2010 local currency units are then converted to
constant 2010 US dollar using 2010 official market exchange rates. Finally, capital stocks are converted
to 2010 Purchasing Power Parities (PPPs) using ICP price deflators available at
https://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/icp (International Comparison Program) (World Bank 2020b).

        The PPP exchange rates for "Machinery and Equipment" and "Construction" are used in the
conversion for each of the two types of capital. The 2010 PPP exchange rates are derived from the
annual growth rate in the PPP exchange rates between 2011 and 2017, which are available in ICP
database. The PPP exchange rates for machinery and equipment are consistently higher than the PPP
exchange rates for construction in most countries; the difference is particularly large for low-income
countries. In the cases of Ethiopia and Tanzania, the ratio of the PPP value of machinery and equipment
to construction is 7.99 for Ethiopia and for Tanzania it is 8.23. Moreover, the 2011 PPP exchange rates
for machinery and equipment are 30% and 20% higher than the market exchange rates in Ethiopia and
Tanzania respectively. By contrast, the PPP exchange rates for construction are only 17% and 14% of
market exchange rates in these two countries respectively.

        For employment, we use the number of permanent persons employed. However, data in
Tanzania's ASIP does not separate permanent and temporary employment, thus we use total persons



20
   We use a deflator of one for machinery and equipment based on the price indices for the comparable EU
countries in the KLEMS database. Values of price indices for other machinery and equipment stock (i.e., machinery
and equipment excluding transport and ICT equipment) are very close to 100, the value for the base year 2010, for
all years for most countries in the database. Taking Czech Republic as an example. In the 23 years between 1995
and 2017, there are only seven years (1999-2001 prior 2010 and 2014-2017 post 2010) where the index value is
higher than 110 but the highest value is only 114 in 2016, while it is close to 100 for the remaining 16 years. As a
robustness test, we also use index value of gross capital formation as a deflator for both machinery and equipment
and buildings and structures. The results are similar; see Figure A.3.

                                                        37
employed, which could cause us to underestimate capital intensity in Tanzania compared with Ethiopia
and the comparable EU countries. 21

        We divide the total capital stock - equal to the sum of the capital stock in machinery and
equipment plus buildings ­ by the number of employees to get the capital-labor ratio for each year and
then take the average over different periods. For the most recent period, it is 2010-2017 for Ethiopia
and 2010-2016 for Tanzania since 2017 data are not available for Tanzania.

        As in our other analyses, we define firm size in the following way: firms with 10-49 employees
are classified as small firms while firms with 50 or more employees are classified as large firms.
However, we create new, time-invariant definitions for foreign and exporting firms in order to create
aggregates from a consistent sample of firms. Foreign firms are defined as those with foreign ownership
for the majority of years or at least one year with data available only for two years. Exporters are firms
reporting exports in every year.

        Among the large firms, we further classify firms by capital intensity in the following way. First,
we rank firms by capital ­ labor ratio (K/L) and then choose the top 10% firms according to K/L for the
initial year of each panel (1996 for Ethiopia and 2008 for Tanzania). In the next year, we add to these
new firms according to their K/L ratio in the same way. Thus, once a firm is classified as in the top 10%
according to capital intensity, it remains in that group for every year it is observed. We follow the same
procedure to classify the bottom 10% of firms, and the middle 80% is defined as the residual. Among the
large firms, we further classify firms that enter the sample in 2010 or later as new entrants relative to
firms that are in the sample prior to 2010.

        In addition to reporting K/L ratios for the full sample, we also report K/L ratios for the following
sector groups: (a) food products, beverages and tobacco; (b) rubber and plastics and non-metallic
minerals, and; (c) textiles, wearing apparel, leather and related products. These groups are comparable
to the sector grouping in the EU-KLEMS database.

        We chose these sectors because of their relative importance to Ethiopia and Tanzania.
Measured by value-added, food products, beverages and tobacco is the largest sector in both countries
­ 41% of total manufacturing value-added in Ethiopia and 56% in Tanzania. Rubber and plastics


21
  The KLEMS database also includes persons employed in hours. The ratios between persons employed in hours
and persons employed indicate that the KLEMS data is reporting permanent persons employed (or the full time
equivalent of persons employed.)

                                                     38
products, and other non-metallic mineral products sector is also relatively large in both countries - 17%
of total manufacturing value-added in Ethiopia and 16% in Tanzania. Textiles, wearing apparel, leather
and related products, a less capital-intensive sector, accounts for 10% of total manufacturing value-
added in Ethiopia and 4% in Tanzania.

        Finally, in Tables A.2-A.3, we report 2010-2017 average K/L ratios in thousands of 2010 constant
USD and PPP for Ethiopia and Tanzania plus six EU countries for total manufacturing and three
manufacturing sectors respectively. The conversion of the ratios for the six EU countries follows the
same procedure used for Ethiopia and Tanzania described above. Four of the six EU countries are lower
income than the richest EU countries and have sizable populations and manufacturing sectors. The
remaining two countries ­ the Netherlands and the UK ­ are high income countries and among the
largest foreign investors in Africa.




                                                    39
References

Abebe, G., McMillan, M.S. and Serafinelli, M., 2018. Foreign direct investment and knowledge diffusion
       in poor locations: Evidence from Ethiopia (No. w24461). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Abebe, G., T.G. Tekleselassie, and J. Haji, 2019. Skills for Trade and Economic Diversification in Ethiopia:
       A Background Paper for the Drafting of a Sector Skills Strategy for the Garment Sector in
       Ethiopia, August.

Badiane, O., Diao, X., Jayne, T.S., Otsuka, K. and Fan, S., (forthcoming). Africa's unfolding agricultural
       transformation. Agricultural development: New perspectives in a changing world. Unpublished
       book manuscript

Basu, S. and Weil, D.N., 1998. Appropriate technology and growth. The Quarterly Journal of
         Economics, 113(4), pp.1025-1054.

Blattman, C. and Dercon, S., 2018. The impacts of industrial and entrepreneurial work on income and
       health: Experimental evidence from Ethiopia. American Economic Journal: Applied
       Economics, 10(3), pp.1-38.

Bourguignon, F. and Wangwe, S., 2018. AN INSTITUTIONAL DIAGNOSTIC OF TANZANIA: SYNTHESIS.

Calì, M., Francois, J., Hollweg, C.H., Manchin, M., Oberdabernig, D.A., Rojas-Romagosa, H., Rubinova, S.
         and Tomberger, P., 2016. The labor content of exports database. The World Bank.

CSA (Central Statistical Agency), 2001. Report on Large and Medium Scale Manufacturing and Electricity
       Industries Survey, 2000-2001, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, February 2001.

_______________, 2003. Report on Small Scale Manufacturing Industry Survey 2002, Addis Ababa,
       Ethiopia, September 2003. https://www.statsethiopia.gov.et/wp-
       content/uploads/2019/06/Small-Scale-Manufacturing-Survey-Report-2002.pdf

_______________, 2004. Report on Large and Medium Scale Manufacturing and Electricity Industries
      Survey, 2003-2004, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, November 2004.

_______________, 2006. Report on Small Scale Manufacturing Industry Survey 2006, Addis Ababa,
       Ethiopia, December 2006. https://www.statsethiopia.gov.et/wp-
       content/uploads/2019/06/Small-Scale-Manufacturing-Survey-Report-2006.pdf

_______________, 2008. Report on Large and Medium Scale Manufacturing and Electricity Industries
       Survey, 2007-2008, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, November 2008.

_______________, 2010a. Report on Small Scale Manufacturing Industry Survey 2008, Addis Ababa,
       Ethiopia, April 2010. https://www.statsethiopia.gov.et/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Small-
       Scale-Manufacturing-Survey-Report-2008.pdf



                                                     40
_______________, 2010b. Report on Small Scale Manufacturing Industry Survey 2010, Addis Ababa,
       Ethiopia, 2010. https://www.statsethiopia.gov.et/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Small-Scale-
       Manufacturing-Survey-Report-2010.pdf

_______________, 2011a. Large and Medium Scale Manufacturing and Electricity Industries Survey,
       1999-2000, Study Documentation, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, January 2011.

_______________, 2011b. Large and Medium Scale Manufacturing and Electricity Industries Survey,
       2002-2003, Study Documentation, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, January 2011.

_______________, 2011c. Report on Large and Medium Scale Manufacturing and Electricity Industries
       Survey, 2009-2010, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, August 2011.

_______________, 2014. Report on Small Scale Manufacturing Industry Survey 2014, Addis Ababa,
       Ethiopia, 2014. https://www.statsethiopia.gov.et/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Small-Scale-
       Manufacturing-Survey-Report-2014.pdf

Diao, X., McMillan, M. and Rodrik, D., 2019. The recent growth boom in developing economies: A
         structural-change perspective. In The Palgrave Handbook of Development Economics (pp. 281-
         334). Palgrave Macmillan, Cham.

Eckaus, R.S., 1955. The factor proportions problem in underdeveloped areas. The American Economic
        Review, 45(4), pp.539-565.

Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC), 2019. Unpublished statistics on exports and employment in
        Ethiopia's industrial parks, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia

Farole, T., 2016. Factory Southern Africa?: SACU in global value chains-summary report (No. 102850, pp.
         1-110). The World Bank.

Gelb, A., Ramachandran, V., Meyer, C.J., Wadhwa, D. and Navis, K., 2020. Can Sub-Saharan Africa be a
        manufacturing destination? Labor costs, price levels, and the role of industrial policy. Journal of
        Industry, Competition and Trade, pp.1-23.

Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R.S. and Miranda, J., 2013. Who creates jobs? Small versus large versus
       young. Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(2), pp.347-361.

Hsieh, C.T. and Olken, B.A., 2014. The missing" missing middle". Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(3),
        pp.89-108.

Huang, S.W., 1993. Structural change in Taiwan's agricultural economy. Economic Development and
       Cultural Change, 42(1), pp.43-65.

Kaplinsky, R., 2011. Schumacher meets Schumpeter: Appropriate technology below the radar. Research
        Policy, 40(2), pp.193-203.



                                                    41
Kunst, D., 2019. Premature Deindustrialization through the Lens of Occupations: Which Jobs, Why, and
        Where? Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper, No. TI 2019-033/V, Tinbergen Institute,
        Amsterdam and Rotterdam.

Martin, L.A., Nataraj, S. and Harrison, A.E., 2017. In with the big, out with the small: Removing small-
        scale reservations in India. American Economic Review, 107(2), pp.354-86.

McCaig, B. and Pavcnik, N., 2017. Moving out of agriculture: structural change in Vietnam, Chapter 2 in
       McMillan, M., Rodrik, D. and Sepulveda, C. (Eds.), Structural change, fundamentals, and growth:
       A framework and case studies. Washington, D.C.: International Food Policy Research Institute
       (IFPRI). http://dx.doi.org/10.2499/9780896292147

McCaig, B., Pavcnik, N. and Wong, W.F., 2020. FDI Inflows and Domestic Firms: Adjustments to New
       Export Opportunities. https://www.freit.org/EIIT/2020/selected/wong.pdf

Mensah, E. B; Owusu, S; Foster-McGregor, N; and Szirmai, A., 2018. Structural Change, Productivity
      Growth and Labor Market Turbulence in Africa. Forthcoming, Journal of African Economies.

NBS (National Bureau of Statistics), 2009. National Panel Survey 2008-2009, Wave 1. The United
       Republic of Tanzania, National Bureau of Statistics. Downloaded
       from http://microdata.worldbank.org in August 2020

____________, 2010a. Annual Survey of Industrial Production and Performance, 2008: Analytic Report.
       The United Republic of Tanzania, Ministry of Industry, Trade and Marketing, National Bureau of
       Statistics, and Confederation of Tanzania Industries, September 2010.

____________, 2010b. Annual Survey of Industrial Production and Performance, 2008: Statistical Report.
       The United Republic of Tanzania, Ministry of Industry, Trade and Marketing, National Bureau of
       Statistics, and Confederation of Tanzania Industries, September 2010.

____________, 2011. National Panel Survey Report 2010-2011, Wave 2. The United Republic of
       Tanzania, National Bureau of Statistics. Downloaded from http://microdata.worldbank.org in
       August 2020

____________, 2012. Annual Survey of Industrial Production, 2009: Statistical Report. The United
       Republic of Tanzania, Ministry of Industry, Trade and Marketing, National Bureau of Statistics,
       and Confederation of Tanzania Industries, May 2012.

____________, 2013. National Panel Survey Report 2012-2013, Wave 3. The United Republic of
       Tanzania, National Bureau of Statistics. Downloaded from http://microdata.worldbank.org in
       August 2020

____________, 2015. National Panel Survey 2015-2014, Wave 4. The United Republic of Tanzania,
       National Bureau of Statistics. Downloaded from http://microdata.worldbank.org in August 2020



                                                    42
____________, 2016a. Census of Industrial Production, 2013: Analytic Report. The United Republic of
       Tanzania, National Bureau of Statistics and Ministry of Industry, Trade and Investment,
       September 2016.

____________, 2016b. Census of Industrial Production, 2013: Statistical Report. The United Republic of
       Tanzania, National Bureau of Statistics and Ministry of Industry, Trade and Investment,
       September 2016.

____________, 2018a. Annual Survey of Industrial Production, 2015: Statistical Report. The United
       Republic of Tanzania, National Bureau of Statistics and Ministry of Industry, Trade and
       Investment, October 2018.

____________, 2018b. Annual Survey of Industrial Production, 2016: Statistical Report. The United
       Republic of Tanzania, National Bureau of Statistics and Ministry of Industry, Trade and
       Investment, October 2018.

Newman, C., Page, J., Rand, J., Shemeles, A., Söderbom, M. and Tarp, F., 2016. Made in Africa: Learning
     to compete in industry. Brookings Institution Press.

Oqubay, A., 2015. Made in Africa: industrial policy in Ethiopia. Oxford University Press, USA.

Oqubay, A., 2018. The structure and performance of the Ethiopian manufacturing sector. In The Oxford
      Handbook of the Ethiopian Economy.

Rodrik, D., 2013. Unconditional convergence in manufacturing. The Quarterly Journal of
        Economics, 128(1), pp.165-204.

Pahl, Stefan, 2020. Global Value Chains and Developing Countries. University of Groningen. PhD Thesis.

Rodrik, D., 2016. Premature deindustrialization. Journal of economic growth, 21(1), pp.1-33.

Rodrik, D., 2018. New technologies, global value chains, and developing economies (No. w25164).
        National Bureau of Economic Research.

Sala-i-Martin, X., 1996. Regional cohesion: evidence and theories of regional growth and
        convergence. European Economic Review, 40(6), pp.1325-1352.

Schaefer, F. and Oya, C., 2019. Employment Patterns and Conditions in Construction and Manufacturing
       in Ethiopia. IDCEA Research Report, SOAS, University of London

Sen, Kunal 2019. What Explains the Job Creating Potential of Industrialisation in the Developing World?
        The Journal of Development Studies, 55:7, 1565-1583.

Timmer, M., de Vries, G.J. and De Vries, K., 2015. Patterns of structural change in developing countries.
      In J. Weiss, & M. Tribe (Eds.), Routledge Handbook of Industry and Development (pp. 79-97).
      Routledge.


                                                    43
Schumacher, E.F., 1973. Small is Beautiful, Blond & Briggs, London.

Stehrer, R., Bykova, A., Jäger, K., Reiter, O. and Schwarzhappel, M., 2019. Industry-level growth and
        productivity data with special focus on intangible assets: Report on methodologies and data
        construction for the EU KLEMS release 2019. The Vienna Institute for International Economic
        Studies.

UNIDO, 2020. INDSTAT 2 Industrial Statistics Database at 2-digit level of ISIC Revision 3. Vienna.
       Available from http://stat.unido.org

Wangwe, S. and Gray, H., 2018. POLITICS AND BUSINESS.

World Bank, 2020a. World Development Indicators (WDI).
       https://databank.worldbank.org/reports.aspx?source=World-Development-Indicators, last access in
       December 2020.

World Bank, 2020b. International Comparison Program (ICP).
       https://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/icp, last access in December 2020.




                                                    44
Tables & Figures
 Figure 2.1: Labor productivity growth within agricultural and nonagricultural sectors and due to structural change
                                        (annual growth rates, percentages)




Source: Updated results include 18 African countries through 2015. Original results appeared in Diao, X.,
McMillan, M. and Rodrik, D., 2019. The recent growth boom in developing economies: A structural-
change perspective. In The Palgrave Handbook of Development Economics (pp. 281-334). Palgrave
Macmillan, Cham.




                                                        45
  Figure 2.2a Negative correlation between labor productivity growth within selected nonagricultural sectors and
                                    from structural change in African countries




Source: Updated results include 18 African countries through 2015. Original results appeared in Diao, X.,
McMillan, M. and Rodrik, D., 2019.




                                                       46
Figure 2.2b Positive correlation between labor productivity growth within selected nonagricultural sectors and from
                                       structural change in Asian countries




Source: Updated results include 18 African countries through 2015. Original results appeared in Diao, X.,
McMillan, M. and Rodrik, D., 2019.




                                                        47
                                            Figure 2.3a Total, formal, small and informal manufacturing employment in Tanzania and Ethiopia

                                                                            Tanzania                                                                                                                                 Ethiopia




                                                                                                                                                                     4000
                                                                                                                                       Numbers of Employees, 1000s
  Numbers of Employees, 1000s
                          800




                                                                                                                                                                     3000
                          600




                                                                                                                                                                     2000
                          400




                                                                                                                                                                     1000
                          200




                                                                                                                                                                     0
                          0




                                   1990              1995            2000              2005            2010           2015                                                  1990              1995            2000           2005            2010             2015
                                                                               Year                                                                                                                                      Year

                                                  Total Employment, GGDC                             Formal Employment, UNIDO                                                                  Total Employment, GGDC                   Formal Employment, UNIDO
                                                  Formal Employment, ASIP (weighted)                 Informal Employment                                                                       Formal Employment, LMSM                  Informal Employment
                                   *Informal employment is derived from GGDC - UNIDO                                                                                               *Informal employment is derived from GGDC - UNIDO

Note: The vertical red line indicates the start of the country's growth acceleration                                                Note: The vertical red line indicates the start of the country's growth acceleration


                                              Figure 2.3b Total, formal, small and informal manufacturing employment in Taiwan and Vietnam

                                                                              Taiwan                                                                                                                                 Vietnam
                                                                                                                                                                 10000
                            3000
  Numbers of Employees, 1000s




                                                                                                                                       Numbers of Employees, 1000s
                                                                                                                                                                 8000
                            2000




                                                                                                                                                                 6000
                                                                                                                                                                 4000
                            1000




                                                                                                                                                                 2000
                            0




                                                                                                                                                                 0




                                   1960               1970             1980               1990                2000           2010                                           1990              1995           2000            2005            2010             2015
                                                                               Year                                                                                                                                      Year

                                                      Total Employment, GGDC                     Formal Employment, UNIDO                                                                      Total Employment, GGDC                  Formal Employment, UNIDO
                                                      Informal Employment                                                                                                                      Informal Employment
                                          *Informal employment is derived from GGDC - UNIDO                                                                                        *Informal employment is derived from GGDC - UNIDO

Note: The vertical red line indicates the start of the country's growth acceleration
                                                                                                                                    Note: The vertical red line indicates the start of the country's growth acceleration
Notes: Total manufacturing employment comes from the GGDC 10 sector database. Formal sector employment is
based on UNIDO data and in the cases of Tanzania and Ethiopia, we also plot formal sector employment using
aggregates from the firm level censuses for each country; these firms employ 10 or more workers. We label the
difference between total and formal as small and informal firm employment.




                                                                                                                                48
            Figure 2.4: Agricultural labor productivity growth and informal manufacturing employment




Notes: Formal manufacturing employment is based on UNIDO data and informal employment is the difference
between total manufacturing employment of GGDC and UNIDO data for formal employment. Agricultural labor
productivity is calculated using data from GGDC for agricultural value-added and employment. In the figure,
agricultural labor productivity is an index with its value in 1970 = 1.0.




                                                      49
                           Figure 3.1: Distribution of firms in the Tanzania ASIP panel, 2008-2016
         Number of firms
               (100,150]
                             Small firms, 2008                              Large firms, 2008
               (50,100]
               (30,50]
               (10,30]
               (5,10]
               (2,5]
               [1,2]
               No data




                             Small firms, 2016                              Large firms, 2016




Notes: These are district-level maps, the second-largest administrative division after regions, created using the
Annual Survey of Industrial Production (ASIP). Small firms are defined as having 10-49 workers, and large firms
have 50 or more workers.




                                                             50
                     Figure 3.2: Distribution of firms in the Ethiopia LMSM and SSI data, 2002-2014
 Number of firms
    (1000,6000]
    (75,1000]
    (20,75]
    (10,20]
    [1,10]
                   SSI, 2002                  LMSM, small firms, 2002              LMSM, large firms, 2002
    No data




                   SSI, 2014                  LMSM, small firms, 2014              LMSM, large firms, 2014




Notes: This map is at the zone level in Ethiopia. Data for firms with <10 employees come from the Small Scale
Manufacturing Industries (SSI), while we use data from the Large and Medium Scale Manufacturing Industries
(LMSM) for small firms with 10-49 employees and large firms with 50+ employees.
Source: Author's calculations using LMSM & SSI data




                                                          51
                                                Figure 4.1: Tanzania estimated employment growth by firm size and age



          % annual growth rate in employment

                                               4%

                                               2%

                                               0%

                                               -2%

                                               -4%
                                                     1-2
                                                           3-4
                                                                 5-6
                                                                       7-8
                                                                             9-10


                                                                                                                                                 500+
                                                                                                                                       250-499
                                                                                    11-13


                                                                                                                          50-99 100-249
                                                                                            13-16

                                                                                                                  20-49
                                                                                                    16+
                                                                                                          10-19



Notes: The coefficients plotted in this table come from regressions estimating the non-parametric relationship
between employment growth and firm size and age groups. Firms are assigned to size and age groups based on the
average employment and firm age in the first two years the firm is observed. For example, if a firm is first observed
in 2009 & 2010, it will be assigned to a firm size and age group based on its average employment and age between
those two years. The estimates of the coefficients plotted in this figure are not statistically significant.




                                                                                                          52
                                                   Figure 4.2: Ethiopia estimated employment growth by firm size and age


        % annual growth rate in employment


                                              8%
                                              6%
                                              4%
                                              2%
                                              0%
                                             -2%
                                             -4%
                                             -6%
                                                     1-2
                                                           3-4
                                                                 5-6
                                                                       7-8
                                                                             9-10




                                                                                                                                                    500+
                                                                                                                                          250-499
                                                                                    11-13




                                                                                                                          50-99 100-249
                                                                                            13-16



                                                                                                                  20-49
                                                                                                    16+


                                                                                                          10-19



Notes: The coefficients plotted in this table come from regressions estimating the non-parametric relationship
between employment growth and firm size and age groups. Firms are assigned to size and age groups based on the
average employment and firm age in the first two years the firm is observed. All of the estimated coefficients are
significant below the 0.01 level.




                                                                                                           53
                                                     Figure 5.1: Tanzania labor productivity dispersion results
                               4.00                                                                                       0.25


                               3.50
                                                                                                                          0.20
                               3.00
  Value of SD/ Coef. of Var.




                                                                                                                                 Ratio of percentiles
                               2.50
                                                                                                                          0.15

                               2.00

                                                                                                                          0.10
                               1.50


                               1.00
                                                                                                                          0.05
                               0.50


                                 -                                                                                        -
                                       2008       2009       2010       2011    2012       2013      2015         2016

                                      Coefficient of variation (VAPW)                     SD of ln (VAPW)
                                      Ratio of 25th to 75th percentile (VAPW)             Ratio of 10th 90th percentile (VAPW)

Notes: The sample used in this table corresponds to the sample used in our results for tables 4.2-4.3. Data are
winsorized. The coefficient of variation is calculated as the standard deviation divided by the mean of value added
per worker. The ratio of 25th to 75th and 10th to 90th percentiles are also calculated from levels of value added
per worker. We include the standard deviation of the natural log of value added per worker, using the log value so
that the scale of the standard deviation is manageable. If productivity dispersion is decreasing, we would expect
the coefficient of variation and standard deviation measures to decline, and the ratios of the 10th to 90th and 25th
to 75th percentiles would increase. As the ratio of the 10th to 90th percentile grows, that indicates that the bottom
10% account for a greater share of labor productivity. This in turn indicates convergence. A similar interpretation
applies to the ratio of the 25th to 70th percentile.




                                                                                54
                                                   Figure 5.2: Ethiopia labor productivity dispersion results
                               3.000                                                                                               0.250


                               2.500
                                                                                                                                   0.200
  Value of SD/ Coef. of Var.




                                                                                                                                           Ratio of percentiles
                               2.000
                                                                                                                                   0.150

                               1.500

                                                                                                                                   0.100
                               1.000

                                                                                                                                   0.050
                               0.500


                                  -                                                                                                -



                                       Coefficient of variation                             SD of ln (VAPW)
                                       Ratio of 25th to 75th percentile (VAPW)              Ratio of 10th 90th percentile (VAPW)

Notes: The sample used in this table corresponds to the sample used in our results for tables 4.2-4.3. Data are
winsorized. The coefficient of variation is calculated as the standard deviation divided by the mean of value added
per worker. The ratio of 25th to 75th and 10th to 90th percentiles are also calculated from levels of value added
per worker. We include the standard deviation of the natural log of value added per worker, using the log value so
that the scale of the standard deviation is manageable. If productivity dispersion is decreasing, we would expect
the coefficient of variation and standard deviation measures to decline, and the ratios of the 10th to 90th and 25th
to 75th percentiles would increase. As the ratio of the 10th to 90th percentile grows, that indicates that the bottom
10% account for a greater share of labor productivity. This in turn indicates convergence. A similar interpretation
applies to the ratio of the 25th to 70th percentile.




                                                                                 55
                   Table 3.1: Summary statistics from Tanzania (CIP) and Ethiopia (SSI) micro data ­ firms with less than 10 employees
     Variable                        Number of Firms        Number of Firms            Mean                SD               Min               Max
                                       (unweighted)             (weighted)
                                                                     Tanzania (2013)
     Employees (permanent)                 11,278                 47,476                  3                 2                1                  9
     Value added (real 2016 USD)           11,278                 47,476                2,067            4,731            -38,889            76,985
                                                                  Ethiopia (2002-2014)
     Employees (permanent)                     38,633               280,790                 3                 2                 0                19
     Owners                                    38,694               281,249                 2                13                 0               891
     Seasonal workers                          12,586                91,898                 9                27                 0               960
     Value added (real 2016 USD)               38,851               282,128               4,499           10,300             -84,665          167,604
Notes: The summary statistics presented in this table come from the available data covering manufacturing firms with less than 10 workers. In Tanzania, the
data come from the 2013 Census of Industrial Production (CIP). The Ethiopia data come from repeated cross sections of the Small Scale Manufacturing
Industries (SSI) surveys in 2002, 2006, 2008, 2011, and 2014. Owners and seasonal workers are not available in the CIP. The number of firms differs among the
rows because some firms did not report the variable. Value added is converted to from nominal birr to 2016 birr and then to real 2016 USD using
manufacturing-specific deflators, which are calculated from manufacturing value-added in current and constant LCU and the exchange rate in 2016 from WDI.




                                                                             56
                                              Table 3.2: Summary statistics for firm-level panels
                                                       Tanzania ASIP Panel (2008-2016)
 Number of firms = 3,526                                  Obs            Mean                 SD               Min                Max
 Employment                                             8,423                83               285                9              8,157
 Value added (real 2016 USD, $1,000)                    8,423               1,747            8,546               0             375,194
 Value added (real 2016 TZS, million)                   8,423               3,803            18,605              0             816,829
 Capital stock (real 2016 USD, $1,000)                  8,423               1,143            6,557               0             234,195
 Capital stock (real 2016 TZS, million)                 8,423               2,487            14,274              0             509,862
 Large firm                                             8,423               0.25              0.44               0                1
 Foreign firm                                           8,423               0.17              0.38               0                1
 Exporting firm                                         8,423               0.10              0.30               0                1
 Public firm                                            8,423               0.04              0.20               0                1
                                                      Ethiopia LMSM Panel (1996-2017)
 Number of firms = 8,793                                 Obs                Mean                SD             Min                Max
 Employment                                            26,179                 92              272                1              12,419
 Value added (real 2016 USD, $1,000)                   26,179               1,401            7,952               0             364,528
 Value added (real 2016 BIRR, 1,000)                   26,179               30,444          172,805              0            7,921,749
 Capital stock (real 2016 USD, $1,000)                 26,179                738             4,193            -2,089           230,637
 Capital stock (real 2016 BIRR, $1,000)                26,179               16,031          91,122           -45,406          5,012,109
 Large firm                                            26,179                0.27            0.44                0                1
 Foreign firm                                          26,179                0.06            0.23                0                1
 Exporting firm                                        26,179                0.05            0.22                0                1
 Public firm                                           26,179                0.07            0.26                0                1
Notes: The listed number of observations is unweighted; we only apply weights to the 2013 ASIP data. The weighted number of
observations in the ASIP panel is 8,578. The period covered for Tanzania is 2008-2016 and for Ethiopia is 1996-2017. Firms with 10-49
employees are classified as small firms while firms with 50 or more employees are classified as large firms (according to their average
employment in the first two periods observed; this is time-invariant). The dummy variables for exporting, foreign, and public firms are time-
variant and defined according to the firm's reporting in the current year. A firm is an exporter if it exported any of its production, is foreign
if it reports foreign or joint venture ownership, and public if it reports being publicly owned. The variables for large firm, foreign firm,
exporting firm, and public firm are all dummy variables that take a value of one if the firm has the given status, and zero otherwise. Firms
are included in the LMSM panel after they have been observed for the first time, even if they reduce their employment below 10 workers--
this is why we see a minimum employment of 1 worker in the Ethiopia data. The minimum employment in ASIP is 9 workers, however, only
20 firms in the ASIP panel report this 9 and it is likely a result of minor enumeration/reporting errors. Value added is converted to real 2016
USD in $1,000 using manufacturing-specific deflators, which are calculated from manufacturing value-added in current and constant LCU
and the exchange rate in 2016 from WDI. Capital information are missing for some firms; we exclude any large firms from the sample if they
do not report machinery assets.




                                                                       57
                       Table 4.1: Firm-level regressions, levels of value added per worker and employment
               Regressions of year dummies & firm characteristics on ln(value added per worker) and ln(employment)
                                           (1)                    (2)                        (3)                    (4)
 VARIABLES                           Tanzania, levels    Tanzania, levels of     Ethiopia, levels of VAPW   Ethiopia, levels of
                                        of VAPW             employment                                        employment
 large firm dummy                       0.670***              1.810***                  0.726***                1.796***
                                        (0.0459)              (0.0229)                   (0.0213)                (0.0147)
 exporter dummy                         0.532***              0.239***                  0.442***                0.280***
                                        (0.0474)              (0.0253)                   (0.0370)                (0.0234)
 foreign firm dummy                     0.699***              0.451***                  0.330***                0.621***
                                        (0.0732)              (0.0362)                   (0.0402)                (0.0312)
 public firm dummy                     -0.372***              0.0771**                  0.292***                0.775***
                                         (0.136)              (0.0345)                   (0.0341)                (0.0242)
 Constant                               8.943***              2.775***                  10.62***                2.469***
                                         (0.134)              (0.0476)                    (0.337)                 (0.193)

  Year dummies?                            YES                   YES                       YES                         YES
  Industry controls?                       YES                   YES                       YES                         YES
  Regional controls?                       YES                   YES                       YES                         YES
  Observations                            8,423                 8,423                    26,179                      26,179
  R-squared                               0.250                 0.722                     0.216                       0.653
Notes: The period covered for Tanzania is 2008-2016 and for Ethiopia is 1996-2017. A small firm is defined as having 10-49 workers and a large
firm is defined as having 50+ workers. Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                 58
                                         Table 4.2: Tanzania firm-level growth in value added per worker and employment 2008-2016
                                                    (1)                   (2)                 (3)                 (4)              (5)                          (6)
        VARIABLES                              Basic model       large firm dummy      exporter dummy      foreign dummy     public dummy                      + all
                                                                       Growth in value added per worker
        year (trend)                            0.0240**              -0.0134               0.0133              0.0169         0.0243**                      -0.0169
                                                (0.00974)             (0.0127)             (0.0101)           (0.0105)         (0.00976)                     (0.0128)
        year * large firm dummy                                      0.0886***                                                                              0.0717***
                                                                      (0.0196)                                                                               (0.0207)
        year * exporter dummy                                                             0.0641***                                                         0.0515***
                                                                                           (0.0166)                                                          (0.0171)
        year * foreign firm dummy                                                                              0.0277*                                       0.00877
                                                                                                              (0.0149)                                       (0.0154)
        year * public firm dummy                                                                                                -0.0130                      -0.0100
                                                                                                                                (0.0309)                     (0.0307)

        Observations                               8,423                8,423                 8,423                8,423                 8,423                 8,423
        R-squared                                  0.825                0.826                 0.826                0.825                 0.825                 0.827

                                                                             Growth in employment
        year (trend)                             -5.73e-05            0.0133***          -0.000941                0.00102              -0.000108             0.0127***
                                                 (0.00397)            (0.00416)          (0.00396)               (0.00403)             (0.00398)             (0.00412)
        year * large firm dummy                                      -0.0318***                                                                             -0.0346***
                                                                      (0.00844)                                                                              (0.00917)
        year * exporter dummy                                                             0.00532                                                              0.0106
                                                                                         (0.00823)                                                           (0.00826)
        year * foreign firm dummy                                                                                -0.00420                                     4.76e-05
                                                                                                                 (0.00719)                                   (0.00742)
        year * public firm dummy                                                                                                        0.00234               0.00245
                                                                                                                                       (0.00864)             (0.00850)

        Observations                                8,423                 8,423                 8,423                 8,423               8,423              8,423
        R-squared                                   0.956                 0.956                 0.956                 0.956               0.956              0.956
Notes: This table presents results from our fixed effects regressions of the year trend and firm characteristics on ln(value added per worker) and ln(employment). A small firm is
defined as having an average of 10-49 workers in its' first two years of operation and a large firm is defined as having 50+ workers also based on average employment in its' first
two years of operation. Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                        59
                                          Table 4.3: Ethiopia firm-level growth in value added per worker and employment 1996-2017
                                                     (1)                   (2)                 (3)                 (4)               (5)                        (6)
        VARIABLES                              Basic model        large firm dummy      exporter dummy      foreign dummy     public dummy                     + all
                                                                        Growth in value added per worker
        year (trend)                            0.0292***             0.0317***            0.0288***          0.0288***          0.0299***                   0.0314***
                                                 (0.00232)            (0.00308)            (0.00236)           (0.00233)         (0.00234)                   (0.00309)
        year * large firm dummy                                        -0.00651                                                                               -0.00626
                                                                      (0.00462)                                                                              (0.00470)
        year * exporter dummy                                                               0.00378                                                            0.00413
                                                                                           (0.00368)                                                         (0.00371)
        year * foreign firm dummy                                                                             0.00698**                                      0.00609*
                                                                                                               (0.00307)                                     (0.00312)
        year * public firm dummy                                                                                                -0.0119***                  -0.0107***
                                                                                                                                 (0.00359)                   (0.00366)

        Observations                              26,179                26,179               26,179                26,179               26,179                26,179
        R-squared                                  0.733                 0.733                0.733                 0.733                0.733                 0.733

                                                                             Growth in employment
        year (trend)                            0.0164***             0.0334***          0.0151***               0.0162***             0.0159***             0.0323***
                                                (0.00149)             (0.00175)          (0.00152)               (0.00150)             (0.00151)             (0.00174)
        year * large firm dummy                                      -0.0445***                                                                             -0.0488***
                                                                      (0.00301)                                                                              (0.00313)
        year * exporter dummy                                                            0.0113***                                                           0.0154***
                                                                                         (0.00241)                                                           (0.00239)
        year * foreign firm dummy                                                                                0.00333*                                   0.00529***
                                                                                                                 (0.00182)                                   (0.00184)
        year * public firm dummy                                                                                                      0.00872***             0.0133***
                                                                                                                                       (0.00235)             (0.00238)

        Observations                               26,179                26,179                26,179                26,179               26,179             26,179
        R-squared                                   0.903                 0.905                 0.903                 0.903                0.903              0.906
Notes: This table presents results from our fixed effects regressions of the year trend and firm characteristics on ln(value added per worker) and ln(employment). A small firm is
defined as having an average of 10-49 workers in its' first two years of operation and a large firm is defined as having 50+ workers also based on average employment in its' first
two years of operation. Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                        60
                                                  Table 4.4: Entry and exit in Tanzania, Ethiopia and Vietnam
                                                     All firms                             Small firms                                      Large firms
                                        Firms        Share of       Share of     Firms       Share of    Share of               Firms        Share of        Share of
                                                   employment        sales                employment       sales                           employment         sales
                                                                      Tanzania (2008-2016)
  Exiters                                0.82          0.78           0.73        0.87         0.84        0.81                 0.74            0.78           0.73
  Entrants                               0.93          0.81           0.76        0.96         0.93        0.92                 0.80            0.77           0.73
                                                                      Ethiopia (2008-2016)
  Exiters                                0.86          0.82           0.80        0.88         0.82        0.77                 0.79            0.82           0.81
  Entrants                               0.90          0.88           0.82        0.91         0.84        0.80                 0.88            0.89           0.83
                                                                      Ethiopia (2000-2017)
  Exiters                                0.91          0.90           0.84        0.92         0.90        0.83                 0.88            0.90           0.85
  Entrants                               0.97          0.94           0.93        0.97         0.96        0.93                 0.95            0.94           0.94
                                                                      Ethiopia (2000-2011)
  Exiters                                0.62          0.62           0.29        0.70         0.65        0.59                 0.44            0.34           0.25
  Entrants                               0.83          0.56           0.54        0.88         0.74        0.76                 0.71            0.51           0.50
                                                                      Vietnam (2008-2016)
  Exiters                                0.48          0.18           0.16
  Entrants                               0.75          0.45           0.49
                                                                      Vietnam (2000-2017)
  Exiters                                0.75          0.39           0.46
  Entrants                               0.97          0.83           0.84
Note: The "firms" column displays for exiters the percent of firms that existed in the initial year that did not survive to the final year, and for entrants the
percent of firms that existed in the final year that did not exist in the initial year. For example, 82 percent of firms in the TZA ASIP panel in 2008 did not survive
to 2016.




                                                                                   61
                                   Table 4.5: Tanzania sector-level growth in value added per worker and employment, 2008-2016
                                       Fixed effects regressions of time trend on ln(value added per worker) and ln(employment)
                              (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)            (6)            (7)              (8)             (9)
                                            All firms                                       Small firms                                    Large firms
VARIABLES                 ISIC 2 digit     ISIC 3 digit     ISIC 4 digit    ISIC 2 digit    ISIC 3 digit  ISIC 4 digit    ISIC 2 digit     ISIC 3 digit    ISIC 4 digit
                                                                    Growth in value added per worker
year                    0.0565***          0.0625***        0.0543***        0.00951          0.0186         0.0159       0.0743***        0.0643***       0.0705***
                           (0.0178)         (0.0150)         (0.0151)        (0.0268)        (0.0200)       (0.0172)       (0.0217)         (0.0193)        (0.0183)
Constant                  -103.3***        -115.6***        -99.20***         -9.235          -27.51         -22.22       -138.9***        -118.9***       -131.6***
                            (35.84)          (30.13)          (30.42)         (53.90)         (40.17)        (34.52)        (43.57)          (38.80)         (36.89)

Observations                 183              376             627             160           311               495             174              317             474
R-squared                   0.535            0.545           0.520           0.317         0.383             0.479           0.528            0.542           0.578
                                                                        Growth in employment
year                      0.0698***       0.0790***       0.0570***        0.131***      0.124***           0.101***         0.0215          0.0147         0.00531
                           (0.0119)        (0.0145)        (0.0134)        (0.0142)      (0.0134)           (0.0112)        (0.0134)        (0.0142)        (0.0132)
Constant                  -133.1***       -152.6***       -108.8***       -258.0***     -244.2***          -198.2***         -35.94          -22.97          -4.422
                            (23.98)         (29.22)         (26.91)         (28.65)       (26.87)            (22.58)         (27.02)         (28.51)         (26.55)

Observations                  183             376              627            160             311             495             174               317             474
R-squared                    0.926           0.860           0.818           0.914           0.853           0.832           0.916             0.856           0.790
Notes: This table presents results from regressing ln(VAPW) on year, at the sector-level. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Small firms are defined as those
having less than 50 workers, while large firms are defined as those having 50 or more workers. In these regressions, we assign a firm to its firm size category based on
its average employment throughout the panel. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                  62
                                    Table 4.6: Ethiopia sector level growth in value added per worker and employment, 1996-2017
                                       Fixed effects regressions of time trend on ln(value added per worker) and ln(employment)
                               (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)           (6)             (7)             (8)              (9)
                                             All firms                                      Small firms                                    Large firms
VARIABLES                 ISIC 2 digit     ISIC 3 digit     ISIC 4 digit    ISIC 2 digit    ISIC 3 digit  ISIC 4 digit    ISIC 2 digit     ISIC 3 digit     ISIC 4 digit
                                                                     Growth in value added per worker
year                    0.0509***          0.0480***        0.0430***       0.0532***       0.0438***     0.0479***       0.0459***        0.0394***        0.0382***
                           (0.00511)        (0.00450)        (0.00366)       (0.00694)       (0.00572)     (0.00495)       (0.00458)       (0.00403)        (0.00351)
Constant                  -89.93***        -84.20***        -74.20***       -95.02***        -76.24***    -84.53***       -79.77***        -66.88***        -64.33***
                            (10.26)          (9.043)          (7.347)         (13.93)          (11.48)      (9.933)         (9.195)          (8.101)          (7.047)

Observations                 372              691            1,153            334           588               934              345             608            1,010
R-squared                   0.691            0.631           0.625           0.507         0.485             0.484            0.730           0.703           0.652
                                                                        Growth in employment
year                      0.0647***       0.0462***       0.0358***       0.0754***     0.0678***          0.0660***       0.0607***       0.0416***        0.0326***
                          (0.00443)       (0.00428)       (0.00400)        (0.00478)    (0.00467)          (0.00445)       (0.00398)       (0.00438)        (0.00400)
Constant                  -122.0***       -85.58***       -65.27***       -145.1***     -130.4***          -127.4***       -113.8***       -76.09***        -58.63***
                            (8.888)         (8.596)         (8.030)         (9.595)       (9.368)            (8.937)         (7.989)         (8.788)          (8.023)

Observations                  372             691           1,153             334              588              934             345            608             1,010
R-squared                    0.916           0.877          0.815            0.898            0.852            0.792           0.898          0.814            0.741
Notes: This table presents results from regressing ln(VAPW) on year, at the sector-level. Small firms are defined as those having less than 50 workers, while large firms
are defined as those having 50 or more workers. In these regressions, we assign a firm to its firm size category based on its average employment. Robust standard
errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                   63
                 Table 4.7: Ethiopia SSI sector-level growth in value added per worker and employment, 2002-2014
                  Industry fixed effects regressions of time trend on ln(value added per worker) and ln(employment)
                                              (1)                                 (2)                              (3)
  VARIABLES                          EMP = permanent              EMP = permanent + seasonal &       EMP = permanent + seasonal &
                                                                             temporary                    temporary + owners
                                                   Growth in value added per worker
  Year                                     0.0244                              0.0135                          0.00693
                                          (0.0151)                            (0.0171)                         (0.0166)
  Constant                                  -38.52                              -17.31                           -4.389
                                           (30.38)                             (34.39)                          (33.37)

  Observations                             103                              103                                   103
  R-squared                               0.301                            0.328                                 0.306
                                                       Growth in employment
  Year                                  0.160***                        0.171***                               0.178***
                                         (0.0273)                        (0.0328)                               (0.0313)
  Constant                              -315.9***                       -336.8***                              -349.8***
                                          (54.82)                         (65.91)                                (62.93)

 Observations                             104                                    104                                104
 R-squared                               0.832                                  0.802                             0.813
Notes: The data was aggregated from the firm-level to the ISIC 3-digit level. Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                  64
                                                                    Table 5.1: Tanzania firm-level convergence
                                                      (1)                        (2)                        (3)                        (4)                        (5)
    VARIABLES                                    Basic model          With industry controls        + interaction with         + interaction with       +interaction with large
                                                                                                    exporter dummy              foreign dummy                firm dummy

    ln(initial VAPW)                             -0.0637***                 -0.0738***                  -0.0685**                 -0.0806***                 -0.0850***
                                                   (0.0236)                   (0.0261)                   (0.0270)                   (0.0272)                   (0.0287)
    Exporter dummy interaction                                                                           -0.00633
                                                                                                        (0.00878)
    Foreign firm dummy interaction                                                                                                  0.00916
                                                                                                                                   (0.00706)
    Large firm dummy interaction                                                                                                                               0.00849
                                                                                                                                                              (0.00761)
    Constant                                      0.586***                   0.715***                   0.679***                   0.747***                   0.790***
                                                   (0.224)                    (0.247)                    (0.252)                    (0.249)                    (0.259)

    2-digit ISIC dummies?                            NO                         YES                        YES                        YES                        YES
    Observations                                     518                        518                        518                        518                        518
    R-squared                                       0.021                      0.082                      0.083                      0.085                      0.084
                                                                   ( )- ( )
Notes: The basic model estimated in these regressions is given by            4          2
                                                                                            = 1 (1 ) + , where t4 is the firm's fourth year in the panel, t2 is the firm's
                                                                             4-2
second year in the panel, and t1 is the firm's first year in the panel. We run this regression on the sample of firms that have been in the data for at least four years. Column 1
present the results of this basic model, column 2 introduces 2-digit ISIC dummies, column 3 includes an interaction term between (1 )and export status, column 4
includes an interaction term between (1 ) and foreign ownership and column 5 includes an interaction term between (1 ) and large firm status (defined as
having 50+ workers engaged). Each dummy variable is assigned a value of one if the firm meets the criteria (exporting, foreign, large) in either period t1 or t4. Robust standard
errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                         65
                                                                    Table 5.2: Ethiopia firm-level convergence
                                                      (1)                       (2)                         (3)                        (4)                        (5)
    VARIABLES                                    Basic model          With industry controls        + interaction with         + interaction with       +interaction with large
                                                                                                    exporter dummy              foreign dummy                firm dummy

    ln(initial VAPW)                             -0.0597***                 -0.0711***                 -0.0718***                 -0.0692***                 -0.0765***
                                                   (0.0118)                   (0.0131)                   (0.0132)                   (0.0131)                   (0.0141)
    Exporter dummy interaction                                                                           0.00290
                                                                                                        (0.00596)
    Foreign firm dummy interaction                                                                                                  -0.00569
                                                                                                                                   (0.00510)
    Large firm dummy interaction                                                                                                                               0.00444
                                                                                                                                                              (0.00290)
    Constant                                      0.671***                   0.811***                   0.817***                   0.792***                   0.858***
                                                   (0.133)                    (0.151)                    (0.152)                    (0.151)                    (0.159)

    2-digit ISIC dummies?                            NO                         YES                        YES                        YES                        YES
    Observations                                    1,821                      1,821                      1,821                      1,821                      1,821
    R-squared                                       0.018                      0.032                      0.032                      0.033                      0.033
                                                                   ( )- ( )
Notes: The basic model estimated in these regressions is given by            4          2
                                                                                            = 1 (1 ) + , where t4 is the firm's fourth year in the panel, t2 is the firm's
                                                                             4-2
second year in the panel, and t1 is the firm's first year in the panel. We run this regression on the sample of firms that have been in the data for at least four years. Column 1
present the results of this basic model, column 2 introduces 2-digit ISIC dummies, column 3 includes an interaction term between (1 )and export status, column 4
includes an interaction term between (1 ) and foreign ownership and column 5 includes an interaction term between (1 ) and large firm status (defined as
having 50+ workers engaged). Each dummy variable is assigned a value of one if the firm meets the criteria (exporting, foreign, large) in either period t1 or t4. Robust standard
errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                         66
                                   Table 5.3: Tanzania sector-level convergence, 2009-2016, all firms
                                     (1)               (2)               (3)             (4)             (5)                     (6)
 VARIABLES                                       UNWEIGHTED                                           WEIGHTED
                                   2-digit           3-digit           4-digit         2-digit         3-digit                 4-digit

 ln (VAPW_2008)                   -0.0984***        -0.0813***        -0.0630**         -0.0633***        -0.0669***        -0.0664***
                                    (0.0338)          (0.0262)         (0.0244)           (0.0164)          (0.0196)          (0.0216)
 Constant                          1.090***          0.912***          0.709***          0.724***          0.772***          0.778***
                                     (0.362)           (0.280)          (0.263)            (0.184)           (0.220)           (0.243)

 Observations                         22                 38                57                22                38                57
 R-squared                          0.240              0.182             0.114             0.299             0.298             0.239
                                                                   (          )-(          )
Notes: The basic model estimated in these regressions is given by            2016        2009
                                                                                                = 1 (2008 ) + . Column 1 presents
                                                                                  7
the results for Tanzania from regressions at the 2-digit ISIC level; column 2 presents results at the 3-digit ISIC level, and column 3 presents
results at the 4-digit ISIC level; finally, columns 4-6 present the same sequence of results for Tanzania. The weights used in columns 4-6 are
calculated using the average of sector and total VA in 2009 and 2016. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                    67
                                     Table 5.4: Ethiopia sector-level convergence, 1998-2017, all firms
                                       (1)               (2)               (3)             (4)                  (5)                 (6)
 VARIABLES                                         UNWEIGHTED                                                WEIGHTED
                                     2-digit           3-digit           4-digit         2-digit              3-digit             4-digit

 ln (VAPW_1996)                     -0.00709            -0.0105         -0.0244**           -0.0138            -0.0174*          -0.0162*
                                   (0.00850)          (0.00692)          (0.0102)          (0.00966)          (0.00905)         (0.00941)
 Constant                             0.127            0.163**           0.325**             0.203              0.249**           0.241**
                                     (0.101)           (0.0783)           (0.120)           (0.123)             (0.111)           (0.116)

 Observations                          15                 25                 36                15                 25                36
 R-squared                           0.019              0.039              0.106             0.147              0.124             0.078
                                                                     (          )-1998)
Notes: The basic model estimated in these regressions is given by            2017
                                                                                          = 1 (1996 ) + . Column 1 presents the
                                                                               19
results for Ethiopia from regressions at the 2-digit ISIC level; column 2 presents results at the 3-digit ISIC level, and column 3 presents results
at the 4-digit ISIC level; finally, columns 4-6 present the same sequence of results, but weighted. The weights used in columns 4-6 are
calculated using the average of sector and total VA in 1998 and 2017. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                      68
                                               Table 5.5: Ethiopia SSI & LMSM sector-level convergence, 2002-2014
                                                    (1)                      (2)                    (3)                   (4)                    (5)
VARIABLES                                       SSI only                LMSM only        SSI & LMSM combined       SSI & LMSM as          SSI & LMSM as
                                                                                                                separate observations separate observations,
                                                                                                                                       with interaction term
                                                                       SSI EMP DEFINITION 1 = PERMANENT WORKERS
ln (VAPW_2002)                                   -0.0357                -0.0358***             -0.0536***              -0.00729             -0.0336***
                                                (0.0290)                  (0.0106)               (0.0181)             (0.00996)               (0.0106)
SSI dummy * ln (VAPW_2002)                                                                                                                 -0.00760***
                                                                                                                                             (0.00162)
Constant                                          0.399                  0.483***               0.676***                 0.126               0.457***
                                                 (0.316)                   (0.129)                (0.215)               (0.118)                (0.129)

Observations                                       19                        27                   31                  46                               46
R-squared                                        0.093                     0.347                0.512               0.016                            0.256
                                                                SSI EMP DEFINITION 2 = PERMANENT + SEASONAL WORKERS
ln (VAPW_2002)                                   -0.0305               -0.0358***            -0.0435**            -0.00257                         -0.0319***
                                                (0.0265)                 (0.0106)             (0.0177)           (0.00882)                           (0.0101)
SSI dummy * ln (VAPW_2002)                                                                                                                        -0.00877***
                                                                                                                                                    (0.00186)
Constant                                         0.332                  0.483***                  0.535**                  0.0701                   0.437***
                                                (0.282)                  (0.129)                  (0.210)                  (0.104)                    (0.123)

Observations                                       19                       27                       31                       46                       46
R-squared                                        0.068                    0.347                    0.338                    0.002                    0.256

Notes: The data are aggregated from the firm-level to the ISIC 3-digit sector level. The basic model estimated in these regressions is given by
(2014 )- (2002 )
                            = 1 (2002 ) + . Column 1 presents the results for Ethiopia from regressions using only the SSI sample, column 2 presents
              12
results using only the LMSM sample, column 3 presents results from adding the SSI & LMSM together and combining them into one sector-level panel, column 4
presents results when SSI & LMSM are both included in the regression but kept as distinct observations at the sector-level, and column 5 follows the model in
column 4 but introduces an interaction between the SSI indicator and (2002 ). No weights are used. VAPW at the sector level is calculated as the total VA of
all firms in the sector divided by the total EMP of all firms in the sector. We test these results with different measures of employment from the SSI data, and have
additional robustness checks with the LMSM data showing that our results do not change when including seasonal/temporary workers. Robust standard errors in
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                  69
                Table 6.1 Tanzania and Ethiopia in comparative context
                                                                      manufacturing
                per-capita       per-capita                            capital-labor
                 GDP, in          GDP, in        economy-wide        ratio (machinery
               current US$     current PPP $      capital-labor       & equipment),
                 (2017)           (2017)           ratio, 2015            2010-17
Tanzania             4.9             6.6               9.9                39.4
Ethiopia             3.5             5.2               3.4                18.7
Notes: (values for Czech Republic = 100)




                                         70
                                      Table 6.2 Comparative capital-labor ratios in manufacturing, 2010-17 average
                                    (value of total manufacturing capital-labor ratio for Czech Republic = 100)
                                                                                           Rubber & plastics products,
                                                                Food products,                                                    Textiles, wearing
                                           All                                               and other non-metallic
                                                            beverages, and tobacco                                                apparel, leather
                                                                                               mineral products
                                                                        Tanzania
 Total                                   39.4                          31.1                             74.0                              40.0
 Small                                   29.0                          37.8                             23.4                              19.9
 Large                                   41.4                          30.7                             92.6                              41.5
 Foreign                                 38.6                          26.5                             126.7                             48.0
 Exporting                               40.3                          37.2
 Top 10% large                           224.1
 Middle 80% large                        29.6
 Bottom 10% large                        11.0
 New large                               54.4
 Old large                               30.8
                                                                        Ethiopia
 Total                                    18.7                         22.3                             20.0                              18.4
 Small                                    13.8                         19.2                              8.9                              17.2
 Large                                    19.9                         23.6                             23.9                              18.5
 Foreign                                  25.6                         38.0                             27.0                              17.9
 Exporting                                19.7                                                                                            20.9
 Top 10% large                            74.9
 Middle 80% large                         13.8
 Bottom 10% large                          7.1
 New large                                22.3
 Old large                                16.2
Notes: 2010-2017 average capital-labor (K/L) ratios are calculated as $1,000 constant PPP per worker for TZA and ETH and Czech Republic. Firms with 10-49
employees are classified as small firms while firms with 50 or more employees are classified as large firms. The Tanzania employment numbers used in these
calculations cover all workers, while the Ethiopia employment numbers are limited to permanent workers. Foreign firms are defined as those with foreign
ownership for the majority of years or at least one year with data available only for two years. Exporters are firms reporting exports in every year. The definitions
used for foreign and exporting firms is constructed to create a time-invariant variable in order to track the same group of firms over time and produce consistent
aggregate estimates. Among the large firms, we further classify firms by capital intensity in the following way. First, we rank firms by capital ­ labor ratio (K/L) and
then choose the top 10% firms according to K/L for the initial year of each panel (1996 for Ethiopia and 2008 for Tanzania). In the next year, we add to these new
firms according to their K/L ratio in the same way. Thus, once a firm is classified as in the top 10% according to capital intensity, it remains in that group for every
year it is observed. We follow the same procedure to classify the bottom 10% of firms, and the middle 80% is defined as the residual. Among the large firms, we
further classify firms that enter the sample in 2010 or later as new entrants relative to firms that are in the sample prior to 2010.


                                                                            71
                                                        Table 6.3: Payroll share of total value-added
                                                                                           Rubber & plastics products,
                                                                  Food products,                                         Textiles, wearing
                                           All                                               and other non-metallic
                                                              beverages, and tobacco                                     apparel, leather
                                                                                               mineral products
                                                                        Tanzania
 Total                                    12.8                         12.7                              9.9                   19.5
 Small                                    11.9                         10.2                             14.7                   12.8
 Large                                    13.0                         12.9                              9.8                   20.5
 Foreign                                  15.0                         15.2                             11.6                   18.9
 Exporting                                10.1                         10.0
 Top 10% large                            10.9
 Middle 80% large                         14.0
 Bottom 10% large                         16.7
 New large                                11.1
 Old large                                15.4
                                                                        Ethiopia
 Total                                    11.2                         10.2                             11.0                   23.7
 Small                                    12.1                         11.5                             13.8                   71.3
 Large                                    11.1                         10.1                             10.7                   23.9
 Foreign                                  10.3                         6.4                               8.5                   28.9
 Exporting                                21.6                         32.4                                                    24.6
 Top 10% large                             8.1
 Middle 80% large                         12.1
 Bottom 10% large                         12.6
 New large                                11.5
 Old large                                11.3
Notes: See the notes in table 6.2 for variable definitions.




                                                                             72
                                    Figure 6.1 Manufacturing and economy-wide capital-labor ratios, Tanzania, Ethiopia, and Czech Republic

60                        TZA                                                   ETH                                                          CZE
                                                                                                               140
                Total economy                            35                       Total economy
50
                Manufacturing, large firms               30                       Manufacturing, large firms   120
40                                                       25                                                    100

30                                                       20                                                    80
                                                         15                                                    60
20                                                                                                                                                 Total economy
                                                         10                                                    40                                  Total manufacturing
10
                                                          5                                                    20
0                                                         0
                                                                                                                0
     2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014                  2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014
                                                                                                                     1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015

     Notes: Capital-labor (K/L) ratios are in $1,000 constant 2011 PPP $. PPP convertors differ for machinery & equipment and buildings & structures, and
     they are both from ICP. For buildings and structures, the PPP conversion for construction from ICP is used. 2010 PPP is calculated by using the growth
     rate between 2011 and 2017 PPPs from ICP, a similar approach used in WDI.




                                                                                      73
                                                                  Figure 6.2 Global declines in manufacturing employment




           Manufacturing employment share, non-manufactures exporters                                           Manufacturing employment share, manufactures exporters
                          estimated period coefficients                                                                      estimated period coefficients
                                (with 95% confidence intervals)                                                                    (with 95% confidence intervals)


   0                                                                                               0
         1960s          1970s                  1980s                 1990s         2000+                1960s              1970s                  1980s              1990s   2000+


-0.02                                                                                           -0.02




-0.04                                                                                           -0.04




-0.06                                                                                           -0.06




-0.08                                                                                           -0.08




 -0.1                                                                                            -0.1




-0.12                                                                                           -0.12




-0.14                                                                                           -0.14




Notes: Estimated coefficients on decade dummies from a regression where manufacturing shares are regressed on income, population (and their squares), country
fixed effects, and period dummies.
Source: Rodrik (2016)




                                                                                           74
                                             Figure 6.3 Declines in low-skill employment


0.005


     0
         1996     1997     1998     1999     2000    2001     2002     2003     2004       2005   2006   2007     2008    2009
-0.005


 -0.01


-0.015


 -0.02


-0.025

                     low-skill employment
 -0.03
                     intermediate-skill employment
-0.035
                     high-skill employment
 -0.04


-0.045

Notes: Estimated coefficients on year dummies from a regression where manufacturing employment shares (by skill category) are regressed
on income, population (and their squares), country fixed effects, and year dummies.
Source: Rodrik (2016)




                                                                 75
                   Figure 6.4 Analytics of technology choice




Source: Authors.




                                      76
                              Appendix
                                 Figure A1. Tanzania estimated growth in VAPW and Employment by Firm Size Group
                                                         10.0
                                                                        Growth in VA per worker
             Annual Growth in Employment & Value Added                  Growth in employment
                                                          8.0

                                                          6.0
                          Per Worker (%)




                                                          4.0

                                                          2.0

                                                          0.0
                                                                10-19           20-49             50-99       100-499     500+
                                                         -2.0

                                                         -4.0

                                                         -6.0
                                                                              Firm Size Measured by Employment Category
Notes: The estimated growth rates plotted in this figure come from a estimation similar to that used in Tables 4.2-
4.3 col. 1, except we include industry controls here and run the regressions separately for each size group, using a
more disaggregated measure of firm size than our 50 worker cutoff. We assign a firm to size groups according to its
average employment in the first two years observed.




                                                                                           77
                                    Figure A2. Ethiopia estimated growth in VAPW and Employment by Firm Size Group

                                                         5.0


             Annual Growth in Employment & Value Added
                                                                                  Growth in VA per worker
                                                         4.0                      Growth in employment
                                                         3.0

                                                         2.0
                           Per Worker (%)


                                                         1.0

                                                         0.0
                                                                10-19     20-49          50-99          100-499     500+
                                                         -1.0

                                                         -2.0

                                                         -3.0

                                                         -4.0

                                                         -5.0
                                                                        Firm Size Measured by Employment Category

Notes: The estimated growth rates plotted in this figure come from a estimation similar to that used in Tables 4.2-
4.3 col. 1, except we include industry controls here and run the regressions separately for each size group, using a
more disaggregated measure of firm size than our 50 worker cutoff. We assign a firm to size groups according to its
average employment in the first two years observed.




                                                                                    78
    Figure A3. Robustness test of capital deflators for Tanzania and Ethiopia

          TZA manufacturing capital-labor ratios, $1000 constant 2010 PPP

  70.0

  60.0

  50.0

  40.0

  30.0

  20.0

  10.0
                                                            Base model            Robustness test
   0.0
            2010       2011        2012            2013          2014      2015         2016



          ETH manufacturing capital-labor ratios, $1000 constant 2010 PPP
  40.0

  35.0

  30.0

  25.0

  20.0

  15.0

  10.0

   5.0                                                      Base model            Robustness test
   0.0
           2010      2011       2012        2013          2014      2015    2016         2017


Notes: In the base model, GDP deflator is used for buildings & structures, while
deflator for machinery & equipment is assumed to one based on CZE situations.
In the robustness test, gross capital formation is used as the deflator for both
machinery and buildings. This deflator is calculated using gross capital formation
data in current and constant LCU from WDI. For ETH the data before 2011 is from
UNSD.




                                       79
           Table A.1: Manufacturing employment shares and growth rates by firm size
Tanzania
                                                       Share           Annual growth rate
                                               2002             2012
Firms with 10+ workers                        32.4%            19.2%                  2.5%
Firms with less than 10 workers               67.6%            80.8%                  9.9%
Total                                                                                 8.0%
Ethiopia
                                                       Share           Annual growth rate
                                            2002             2016
Firms with 10+ workers                     23.6%             7.4%                  0.7%
Firms with less than 10 workers            76.4%           92.6%                  10.9%
   Small firms with powered machines       12.6%           31.7%                  16.8%
   Cottage/Non-farm Enterprises            63.8%           61.0%                   9.0%
Total                                                                              9.4%
Notes: TZA: (1) Data for firms with 10+ workers in 2002 is based on UNIDO. (2) Data for
firms with 10+ workers in 2012 is from ASIP. (3) Data for total manufacturing
employment are from the 2002 and 2012 population census. (4) Numbers for firms with
less than 10 employees are calculated as the difference between total manufacturing
employment from the census and ASIP. ETH: (1) Data for firms with 10+ workers are
from LMSM and both permanent and temporary workers are included. (2) Data for small
firms with <10 workers which use powered machinery are from SSI and and include
seasonal workers and owners. The number for 2016 is calculated using the annual
growth rate between 2008 and 2014, the two years with SSI micro data available closest
to 2016. (3) Data for cottage/non-farm enterprises in 2002 is a residual using total
manufacturing employment from GGDC minus data from LSMS and ISS. (4) Data for
cottage/non-farm enterprises in 2016 is estimated using the data from LSMS-ISA.




                                             80
   Table A.2: Capital-Labor ratios for selected EU countries, and Tanzania and Ethiopia, 2010-2017 averages
                                $1,000 constant 2010 US$                   $1,000 constant 2010 PPP $
                          Machinery &      Buildings &    M&E and      Machinery &     Buildings &   M&E and
                          equipment/       Structures/      B&S        equipment/      Structures/     B&S
                            Labor             Labor        /Labor        Labor            Labor       /Labor
Total Manufacturing
HUN                                 39.4          37.9         77.4            41.0           73.6       114.5
CZE                                 40.0          42.7         82.7            36.5           69.6       106.1
ESP                                129.0         156.7        285.7           113.6          236.7       350.3
ITA                                 79.6          47.3        126.9            70.8           64.3       135.1
NLD                                144.4          62.6        207.0           121.2           66.2       187.4
GBR                                 76.5          55.2        131.7            74.6           62.5       137.1
Tanzania
Total                               11.4           4.8         16.2             9.3           35.8        45.1
Small                                7.2           3.6         10.8             5.9           27.3        33.2
Large                               12.1           5.0         17.1            10.0           37.5        47.4
Foreign                             14.4           4.3         18.8            11.9           32.3        44.2
Exporting                           14.8           4.5         19.4            12.2           34.0        46.1
Top 10% K/L, large                  71.7          26.4         98.1            58.9          197.8       256.6
Mid 80% K/L, large                   8.2           3.6         11.8             6.7           27.2        34.0
Bottom 10% K/L, large                4.3           1.2          5.5             3.5            9.1        12.6
New large                           14.1           6.8         20.9            11.6           50.7        62.3
Old large                           10.3           3.6         13.8             8.4           26.9        35.3
Ethiopia
Total                                6.1           3.0          9.0             4.3           17.1        21.4
Small                                2.9           2.2          5.1             2.0           12.9        14.9
Large                                6.6           3.1          9.8             4.7           17.9        22.6
Foreign                             10.4           3.7         14.1             7.3           21.6        28.9
Exporting                            8.4           2.9         11.3             5.9           16.5        22.4
Top 10% K/L, large                  25.5          11.1         36.6            17.9           64.0        81.9
Mid 80% K/L, large                   4.5           2.2          6.8             3.2           12.9        16.0
Bottom 10% K/L, large                2.5           1.0          3.4             1.7            5.6         7.3
New large                            7.4           3.5         11.0             5.2           20.3        25.5
Old large                            5.3           2.6          7.9             3.7           14.8        18.5
Notes: Data for the six EU countries are from EU KLEMS




                                                     81
                       Table A.3: Capital-Labor ratios for selected sectors, 2010-2017 averages
                             $1,000 constant 2010 USD                             $1,000 constant 2010 PPP
                  Machinery &         Buildings &
                  equipment/          Structures/      M&E and         Machinery &          Buildings &        M&E and
                     Labor               Labor        B&S /Labor    equipment/ Labor     Structures/ Labor    B&S /Labor
 Food products, beverages and tobacco
 CZE                        32.7                57.4         90.1                29.8                  93.6        123.4
 ESP                        77.5              133.9         211.4                68.2                 202.3        270.5
 ITA                        93.3                40.0        133.3                83.0                  54.3        137.3
 NLD                      165.6                 74.7        240.3               139.0                  78.9        217.9
 GBR                        74.5                64.8        139.3                72.7                  73.4        146.1
 Tanzania
 Total                      10.2                 4.0         14.2                  8.4                 29.9         38.3
 Small                       9.1                 5.2         14.3                  7.4                 39.2         46.6
 Large                      10.5                 3.9         14.4                  8.6                 29.3         37.9
 Foreign                    12.5                 3.0         15.5                10.3                  22.4         32.7
 Exporting                  11.2                 4.9         16.1                  9.2                 36.8         45.9
 Ethiopia
 Total                      11.9                 3.8         15.7                  5.7                 21.8         27.5
 Small                       7.9                 3.6         11.5                  3.1                 20.6         23.7
 Large                      13.3                 3.9         17.2                  6.6                 22.5         29.1
 Foreign                    27.9                 5.4         33.3                15.8                  31.0         46.8
 Rubber and plastics products, and other non-metallic mineral products
 CZE                        39.7                55.9         95.6                36.2                  91.1        127.3
 ESP                      111.6               162.1         273.7                98.3                 244.9        343.2
 ITA                      104.3                 50.6        155.0                92.8                  68.7        161.5
 NLD                      167.2                 52.8        220.0               140.3                  55.8        196.1
 GBR                        63.3                42.6        105.9                61.7                  48.2        110.0
 Tanzania
 Total                      30.8                 9.2         39.9                25.3                  68.9         94.2
 Small                       7.9                 3.1         11.0                  6.5                 23.3         29.8
 Large                      38.5                11.5         50.0                31.6                  86.3        117.9
 Foreign                    50.9                15.9         66.9                41.8                 119.5        161.3
 Ethiopia
 Total                      11.1                 3.5         14.6                  5.3                 20.2         25.5
 Small                       5.2                 1.5          6.7                  2.6                  8.8         11.4
 Large                      13.2                 4.2         17.3                  6.3                 24.1         30.4
 Foreign                    14.3                 4.8         19.1                  6.6                 27.8         34.4
 Textiles, wearing apparel, leather and related products
 CZE                        22.1                32.9         55.0                20.2                  53.6         73.7
 ESP                        43.8                74.3        118.1                38.6                 112.3        150.8
 ITA                        31.4                19.2         50.6                28.0                  26.0         54.0
 NLD                        94.4                49.3        143.7                79.2                  52.1        131.4
 GBR                        24.3                35.1         59.3                23.7                  39.7         63.4
 Tanzania
 Total                       7.9                 3.1         11.0                  6.5                 23.0         29.5
 Small                       4.5                 1.5          5.9                  3.7                 11.0         14.7
 Large                       8.2                 3.2         11.4                  6.7                 23.8         30.6
 Foreign                     7.0                 4.0         11.0                  5.8                 29.7         35.4
 Ethiopia
 Total                       5.7                 1.9          7.6                  2.7                 10.9         13.6
 Small                       5.5                 1.7          7.3                  2.7                 10.0         12.7
 Large                       5.8                 1.9          7.7                  2.7                 11.0         13.7
 Foreign                     6.2                 1.7          8.0                  3.1                 10.0         13.2
 Exporting                   7.1                 2.1          9.1                  3.5                 11.9         15.4
Notes: HUN's sector data is not available.




                                                           82
