                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          THE ASSET PRICING IMPLICATIONS OF PLAUSIBLE DENIABILITY

                                         Kerry Back
                                        Bruce I. Carlin
                                 Seyed Mohammad Kazempour

                                       Working Paper 28348
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28348


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2021




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Kerry Back, Bruce I. Carlin, and Seyed Mohammad Kazempour. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Asset Pricing Implications of Plausible Deniability
Kerry Back, Bruce I. Carlin, and Seyed Mohammad Kazempour
NBER Working Paper No. 28348
January 2021
JEL No. D21,D82,G12,G14

                                          ABSTRACT

We derive the effect of plausible deniability on asset risk premia in a dynamic setting with
correlated firm values, systematic risk, and risk-averse investors. Firms optimally exercise
American disclosure options, which are more valuable due to the possibility that other correlated
firms may disclose high values, lifting investors' perceptions of the values of nondisclosing firms.
Risk premia rise (and average prices fall) prior to disclosures, because investors make inferences
about aggregate risks from failures to disclose, resulting in higher state prices for bad states.


Kerry Back                                       Seyed Mohammad Kazempour
Jones Graduate School of Business                Rice University
Rice University                                  Houston, TX 77005
P.O. Box 2932                                    smkazempour@gmail.com
Houston, TX 77252-2932
Kerry.E.Back@rice.edu

Bruce I. Carlin
Jones School of Business
Rice University
1900 Rice Boulevard
Houston, TX 77005
and NBER
carlin@rice.edu
    The seminal work by Dye (1985) challenged the unraveling arguments of Gross-
man and Hart (1980), Grossman (1981), and Milgrom (1981) and showed that plausi-
ble deniability could induce firms with news below an equilibrium threshold (bound-
ary) to credibly withhold information from the market. Following this, uncertainty
about whether asymmetric information exists has generally been shown to adversely
affect the quality of public knowledge.1
    But how strategic disclosure affects risk and asset prices has received little atten-
tion. This is a more challenging problem. In the classic paradigm, agents typically
receive signals about their values that are independent draws from a defined distribu-
tion. But, idiosyncratic risk does not command a risk premium in securities markets,
so the standard paradigm needs to be extended to a setting in which investors are
risk-averse and firm values are correlated (i.e., systematic risk exists).
    Additionally, to characterize the time-dependent risk premia that investors re-
quire over any horizon, it is necessary to consider a dynamic asset pricing model with
Bayesian learning.2 As Savor and Wilson (2016) point out, earnings announcement
premia routinely arise as correlated information from issuing firms conveys signals
about related firms and the general economy. Under this view, Bayesian investors
learn from news and solve a signal extraction problem to determine how much of the

   1
     See Matthews and Postlewaite (1985); Jung and Kwon (1988); Shin (2003); Acharya, DeMarzo,
and Kremer (2011); Carlin, Davies, and Iannaccone (2012).
   2
     Acharya, DeMarzo, and Kremer (2011) is the closest paper to ours and includes some of the
elements our our model. Their model is dynamic with a single firm whose value is correlated with
a public announcement. They assume the firm and investors are risk neutral. They find that a firm
with good (bad) news discloses early (late), and there is clustering after bad news in the sense that
the firm discloses more quickly after a bad public announcement than after a good announcement.
They also characterize the effect of plausible deniability on volatility and skewness.



                                                 1
announcing firm's information is systematic in nature (Ben-Rephael et al., 2020).
   In this paper, we analyze a dynamic game in continuous-time where competitive
firms stochastically receive a signal about the value of their terminal cash flow.
At each instant in time, if a firm is informed, it may choose plausible deniability,
whereby its presence in a pool of other firms commands a rational price by risk averse
investors. Otherwise, the firm discloses its value, separating from others.
   When the managers of a firm are informed, they have an American disclosure
option. They choose the optimal time to exercise this option, concealing the firm's
value prior to exercise. If the pool price drops below the known value, they incur
a cost at each instant of time they do not disclose. However, the possible benefit
of remaining in the pool is that another firm may become informed and disclose a
higher value, thereby raising the pool price and prolonging the value of plausible
deniability.
   Given this, the Nash equilibria that arise are fundamentally different from pre-
vious studies because they are history-dependent and strategic. The disclosure of
one firm endogenously affects the equilibrium boundary of other firrms. Not only is
the market price of firms in the pool a function of the probability of being informed
(presence of plausible deniability), but it depends on previous disclosures (correlated
values) and the time at which they disclosed. We obtain the equilibrium disclosure
threshold by solving a fixed point condition at each point in time, conditioned on
prior disclosures.
   One main result is that risk premia rise over time prior to disclosures. Conse-
quently, prices are lower on average than they would be if disclosure were mandatory.


                                          2
Prior to disclosures, investors regard firm values as having a mixture distribution,
with the mixing variable being whether a firm has learned its value and hence could
feasibly disclose. The distribution conditional on having learned the value is trun-
cated from above at the disclosure boundary, so the mixture is a combination of the
unconditional and a truncated distribution. Investors make inferences about aggre-
gate risks from firms' failures to disclose conditioning on the mixture distribution.
These inferences combined with risk aversion cause state prices for bad states to rise
faster than probabilities, producing rising risk premia for the firms.
   A novel feature of our model is that more than two distributions are mixed
after some firm has disclosed, because there can be different truncation boundaries
depending on whether a firm learned its value before the other firm disclosed or
after it disclosed. We study a setting with only two firms and hence at most two
truncation boundaries. Some of our analysis can be extended to more than two firms,
but dealing with multiple truncation boundaries becomes difficult as the number of
firms and hence the number of such boundaries increases.
   We document various properties of the equilibrium, some of which relate to prior
literature. For example, we analyze the excess of the disclosure boundary over the
price, which arises due to the real option effect that another firm may disclose and
lift the pool price, prolonging the value of plausible deniability as mentioned above.
Acharya, DeMarzo, and Kremer (2011) do not solve a multi-firm model, but they
do point out that this real option effect will not exist for uncorrelated or for per-
fectly correlated firms. We confirm this and show that the excess of the disclosure
boundary over the price is in fact hump-shaped in the correlation between the firms


                                          3
and is zero for a correlation of zero or one. The emphasis of Acharya, DeMarzo, and
Kremer (2011) is on clustering of announcements in response to a negative exoge-
nous announcement. A similar clustering happens in our model: the time between
disclosures is smaller on average when the disclosing firm announces relatively bad
news.
   We separate disclosure returns into scheduling returns (the returns firms would
experience if it were announced that a firm has decided to disclose, without condi-
tioning on the content of the disclosure) and announcement returns (total returns
less scheduling returns). Both scheduling returns and announcement returns are pos-
itive on average for the disclosing firm and also for the nondisclosing firm, though
naturally smaller for the nondisclosing firm. The scheduling return is positive on av-
erage under both the risk-neutral probability and the physical probability, because
it is good news that a firm is separating from the pool. The average announcement
return is a pure risk premium. Both the disclosing firm and the nondisclosing firm
earn a risk premium in our model because some risk is resolved for both. Because
risk premia rise and prices fall prior to disclosures, average announcement returns are
higher than unconditional risk premia, consistent with the high average announce-
ment returns that have been documented empirically (e.g., Beaver, 1968; Ball and
Kothari, 1991; Cohen et al., 2007).
   Positive scheduling returns are natural in a model of plausible deniability but
can be puzzling in other settings. For example, Ross (1989) shows, using only no-
arbitrage assumptions, that a change in the rate of information flow should not affect
asset prices. In Ross's model, the change in information flow is exogenous, whereas


                                          4
in our model the change is endogenous (a disclosure) and signals the firm's value.
   Section 1 presents the model and some facts about the risk-neutral and condi-
tional distributions. Section 2 solves the model with a single firm and explains how
the change in the mixture distribution produces a risk premium that rises as time
passes prior to the firm's disclosure. Section 3 solves the model with two firms. Un-
like the single-firm model, the two-firm model contains the real option effect that
delaying disclosure can be valuable because a firm that delays has the potential to
benefit from the other firm disclosing. Section 4 discusses the implications for asset
prices. Section 5 concludes. All proofs are in the appendices.

1. Model Set-Up

   Assume firms learn their date­T values x
                                          ~i at random times ~i  [0, T ]. We

make assumptions about firm values and market pricing that are consistent with
the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM). There is a representative investor with
constant absolute risk aversion  who maximizes the expected utility of her wealth w
                                                                                  ~
at date T . The values x
                       ~i are symmetrically distributed and joint normally distributed
with w
     ~ . Therefore,
                                  x
                                  ~i =  +  w
                                           ~+~i

for some  and  , where the ~i are normally distributed mean-zero variables that
are independent of w
                   ~ and independent of each other. Denote the mean and standard
deviation of w
             ~ by µw and w , respectively. Let µ =  + µw denote the mean of x
                                                                            ~i ,
and let  denote the standard deviation of                      ~i is  2 =  2 w
                                          ~i . The variance of x             2
                                                                               + 2
                                                                                   .
The correlation of x       ~j is  =  2 w
                   ~i with x           2
                                         / 2 .


                                          5
   Assume the interest rate r is constant. The stochastic discount factor (SDF) at
date 0 for pricing payoffs at date T is proportional to the representative investor's
marginal utility, which is proportional to e- w
                                              ~
                                                . Because the interest rate is r, the
expected SDF must be e-rT . Hence, the SDF is

                                               e- w
                                                  ~
                                 ~ = e-rT
                                 m                    .
                                              E[e- w
                                                   ~]


We will use risk-neutral pricing. The risk-neutral expectation of any random variable
~ is E [~
y       y ] = erT E[m
                    ~x~]. Lemma 1.1 below shows that the risk-neutral and physical
                                                         ~i . Let µ denote the risk-
distributions differ only with regard to the mean of the x
                               2
neutral mean. The risk premium w in Lemma 1.1 equals risk aversion multiplied
by the covariance of the firm value x
                                    ~i with the representative investor's wealth w
                                                                                 ~,
as in the CAPM (the CAPM holds in our model at date 0 but not at subsequent
dates, due to the non-normalities induced by investors' inferences in the presence of
plausible deniability).

Lemma 1.1. Under the risk-neutral probability, firm values x
                                                           ~i are joint normally
distributed with means µ = µ - w
                               2
                                 and with the same standard deviations and
correlation as under the physical probability. Conditional on x
                                                              ~j , the value x
                                                                             ~i of firm
                                                                       ~j + (1 - )µ
i = j is normally distributed under the physical probability with mean x
and with standard deviation       1 - 2 . The conditional distribution is the same
                                                                       ~j + (1 - )µ .
under the risk-neutral probability except that the conditional mean is x

   Assume the random times ~i are uniformly distributed on [0, T ] and are indepen-

dent of each other and independent of the x
                                          ~i and w
                                                 ~ . This implies that the ~i are

independent of each other and independent of the x
                                                 ~i under the risk-neutral distri-

                                          6
bution also. Assume no information arrives to the market between 0 and T other
than through the disclosures of firms (or the absence of disclosures). Let Pt denote
the price at date t of all firms that have not disclosed (the pool price). This price
evolves deterministically between disclosures and jumps up or down when there is a
disclosure. After a firm discloses, its price is e-r(T -t) x
                                                           ~i .
   Assume the firm's objective is to choose a disclosure date   ~i to maximize

                                 T
  E            e-rt Pt dt +          e-rt e-r(T -t) x
                                                    ~i dt
        0                     
                                                                    
                                                      = E              e-rt Pt dt + (T -  )e-rT x
                                                                                                ~i . (1.1)
                                                                0


For any time t prior to ~i , the firm has no choice but to remain silent. However, for

t~i , it optimally chooses  to maximize its payoff from t onward. The disclosure

date  is chosen based on all information prior to that date, including the firm's
own value and any disclosures made by other firms. Our choice of the objective
function (1.1) is motivated by the assumption that the firm or its managers benefit
from having a higher share price over the course of time until T . For simplicity, we
assume the benefit is additive in time and that the benefit is valued according to the
market's SDF, producing the objective (1.1).

2. A Single Firm

   We first solve the model with only a single firm. This model is analyzed in
Section IIIA of Acharya, DeMarzo, and Kremer (2011), but here we are assuming
a risk-averse representative investor rather than risk neutrality. This enables us to
calculate the dynamics of the risk premium.


                                                            7
   The equilibrium price Pt before the firm discloses is the discounted risk-neutral
expectation of x
               ~, conditional on the firm not having disclosed. We conjecture that
Pt decreases as time passes, because the likelihood that the firm has learned its value
and is exercising plausible deniability increases as time passes. In this circumstance,
the firm will choose to disclose its value as soon as its discounted value exceeds
the price; consequently, the equilibrium price will indeed decrease as time passes as
                                             ~  er(T -t) Pt . Thus, Bt = er(T -t) Pt is
conjectured. So, the firm discloses whenever x
the disclosure threshold (boundary).
   Let  and  denote the standard normal density and distribution functions. At
any date t, there are two possible events. With probability (T - t)/T , the firm
has not received a signal, in which case its expected value is µ . With probability
(t/T )((Bt - µ )/ ), it received a signal and x
                                              ~1  Bt , in which case (from the
standard formula for the mean of a truncated normal) its expected value is µ -
((Bt - µ )/ )/((Bt - µ )/ ). These facts lead immediately to the following
formula for Pt .

Lemma 2.1. The market price Pt of the firm prior to disclosure is

                                            t((Bt - µ )/ )
                   Pt = e-r(T -t) µ -                           .                 (2.1)
                                         T - t + t((Bt - µ )/ )

   When we combine (2.1) with the condition Bt = er(T -t) Pt , we obtain a fixed-point
problem. It turns out that we can solve this fixed-point problem for a standardized
model (µ = 0 and  = 1) and then just scale and translate to solve it for general
(µ ,  ). We denote the negative of the solution of the standardized model as z (t)


                                          8
and compute it as follows.

Lemma 2.2. The equation
                                            t(z )
                                   z =                                              (2.2)
                                          T - t(z )

has a unique solution z (t). The solution is positive and is increasing in t.

With Lemmas 2.1 and 2.2, we have

Proposition 2.1. The unique equilibrium price is Pt = e-r(T -t) Bt , where


                                  Bt = µ - z (t) .                                  (2.3)


   We can use Proposition 2.1 to calculate the risk premium prior to disclosure.
The risk premium is (e-r(T -t) Et [~
                                   x] - Pt )/Pt , where Et is the expectation conditional
on date­t information. In Lemma 2.1, we compute the risk-neutral conditional ex-
pectation. The same reasoning can be applied to calculate the physical conditional
expectation, which is
                                             µ-Bt
                                         t    
                                 µ-                    .                            (2.4)
                                       T-   t µ- 
                                                  Bt


Figure 2.1 plots the risk premium and shows that it rises over time prior to disclosure.
   The fundamental reason that the risk premium rises prior to disclosure is that
investors make inferences about the aggregate state from the failure to disclose,
producing rising state prices for bad states. A state price is the price of an Arrow
security, meaning a security that pays $1 in a particular state of the world and 0
otherwise. The price of an Arrow security (relative to Lebesgue measure) is the



                                            9
                                     9%

                                     8%


                      risk premium   7%

                                     6%

                                     5%
                                          0.0    0.2     0.4          0.6   0.8       1.0
                                                               time

Figure 2.1: This figure shows the risk premium (e-r(T -t) Et [~
                                                              x] - Pt )/Pt , conditioning on
the firm not having disclosed by t. The parameter values are T = 1, µ = 105, µ = 100,
 = 15, and r = 0.


SDF multiplied by the physical density.3 State prices equal the discounted risk-
neutral density. Figure 2.2 shows the risk-neutral and physical densities of x
                                                                             ~ at
different dates, conditioning on the firm not having disclosed by that date.4 In a
risk-neutral world, state prices equal the discounted physical density. Even with
risk neutrality, state prices for bad states rise prior to disclosure as Figure 2.2 shows,

   3
       In our model, the SDF at date t for pricing payoffs that depend on x
                                                                          ~ at date T is

                                            e-r(T -t) e-(~
                                                         x-µ)/
                                                                    Et e-(~
                                                                          x-µ)/
                                                                                  ,              (2.5)

where  = (µ - µ )/ and where Et denotes the physical expectation conditioned on date­t infor-
mation.
   4
     The event that the firm does not disclose by t is, as discussed preceding Lemma 2.1, the joint
event { ~ > t}{ ~  t, x
                      ~ < Bt }. Under either the risk-neutral or physical probability, the probability
that x~  a for any real a conditioned on this event is

                                                 x  a  Bt ) + (T - t) prob(~
                                          t prob(~                         x  a)
                                                                                 .
                                                          x  Bt ) + T - t
                                                   t prob(~

Differentiating produces the densities shown in Figure 2.2.


                                                               10
because such states become more probable. However, the combination of risk aversion
with systematic risk causes state prices for bad states to rise faster than the physical
density rises (and state prices for good states to fall faster than the physical density
falls), producing the rising risk premium.
                                                (a) t=0
                                                                        risk-neutral
                          0.02                                          physical
                density




                          0.01

                          0.00
                                                (b) t=0.5
                                                                        risk-neutral
                          0.03                                          physical
                density




                          0.02
                          0.01
                          0.00
                                                (c) t=0.9
                          0.06                                          risk-neutral
                                                                        physical
                          0.04
                density




                          0.02
                          0.00
                                 40   60   80   100         120   140         160


Figure 2.2:     The risk-neutral and physical densities of the firm value x~ are shown at
different dates, conditional on the firm not having disclosed by that date. The parameter
values are T = 1, µ = 105, µ = 100,  = 15, and r = 0.


   Because the firm can exercise plausible deniability, its announcement is frequently
delayed relative to the time at which it acquires information. The probability that
the firm discloses before any date t is (t/T ) prob(~
                                                    x > Bt ). Differentiating through
the fixed-point condition in Lemma 2.2 to calculate z (t), it is straightforward to
calculate the density of the disclosure time. Under the physical probability, the

                                                11
                    3.0                                       disclosure density
                                                              signal density
                    2.5
                    2.0
                    1.5
                    1.0
                    0.5
                    0.0
                          0.0   0.2        0.4          0.6         0.8            1.0
                                                 time

Figure 2.3: The physical density of the firm's disclosure date is shown, compared to the
uniform density of the arrival time of information to the firm. The parameter values are
T = 1, µ = 105, µ = 100,  = 15, and r = 0.


density is
               1     µ - Bt           t    µ - Bt         (z (t)) + z (t)(z (t))
                                +                                                .       (2.6)
               T                      T                       T - t(z (t))
Figure 2.3 provides an illustration.

3. Multiple Firms

   When multiple firms have correlated values and some have not yet disclosed, it
may be optimal for a firm to continue to exercise plausible deniability even after
the pool price drops below its discounted value. This is due to the possibility that
another firm may become informed, disclose a high value, and cause the pool price
to jump upwards, which prolongs the value of plausible deniability. In other words,
like typical American options, the disclosure option must be sufficiently far in the




                                                 12
money before it is optimal to exercise it.5
       We analyze this disclosure option like any other American option. The optimal
disclosure threshold is determined by a differential equation in the inaction region, in
conjunction with value matching and smooth pasting conditions at the boundary of
the region. As in Section 2, let Pt denote the price of any firm that has not disclosed,
and let Bt denote the optimal disclosure boundary. At each date t after a firm learns
its value x
          ~i , define the value function
                                                                 T
                 Jt = sup Et             e-r(u-t) Pu du +            e-r(u-t) e-r(T -u) x
                                                                                        ~i du .   (3.1)
                                  t                           


The supremum in (3.1) is taken over disclosure times that can depend on all prior
information, and the value (3.1) depends on all prior disclosures and on the firm's
value x
      ~i .
       We can rewrite (3.1) as
                 T                                    T
        Et           e-r(u-t) Pu du + sup E               e-r(u-t) e-r(T -u) x
                                                                             ~i - Pu du .         (3.2)
             t                                     


The second term in (3.2) is the value of an American exchange option in which the
firm exchanges the reward process Pu for the process e-r(T -u) x
                                                               ~i . The formulation
(3.2) is natural from an option-pricing point of view, but another formulation is also

   5
    Acharya, DeMarzo, and Kremer (2011) describe this same real option effect relative to the
exogenous announcement that they study. The difference in our model is that all announcements
are endogenous. Each firm takes into account the option values created by others, and, in turn,
each firm's optimal reaction to the option value affects the options values of all other correlated
firms.




                                                      13
interesting. We can write (3.1) as:
                                                       
          (T - t)e-r(T -t) x
                           ~i + sup E                     e-r(u-t) Pu - e-r(T -u) x
                                                                                  ~i du .   (3.3)
                                                   t


The first term in (3.3) is the value the firm would achieve if disclosure were manda-
tory, and the second term is the value of plausible deniability.
   Bellman's Principle of Optimality implies that the stochastic process
                                            t
                                                e-ru Pu + e-rt Jt                           (3.4)
                                        0


is a martingale under the risk-neutral probability. Taking the differential of (3.4),
we see that the martingale property of (3.4) can be stated as

                                  (P - rJ ) dt + E [dJ ] = 0 .                              (3.5)

The value Jt is determined by equation (3.5) in conjunction with value matching
and smooth pasting. The value matching condition is that, at the optimal disclosure
time t =  ,
                            T
               Jt =             e-r(u-t) e-r(T -u) x
                                                   ~i du = (T - t)e-r(T -t) x
                                                                            ~i .            (3.6)
                        t


The smooth pasting condition at the boundary is that J paste together smoothly
(in x) with the value on the right-hand side of (3.6).
   We show in Appendix A that equation (3.5), value matching, and smooth pasting
are equivalent to a simple marginal condition for the exercise boundary. Consider a
                ~i such that e-r(T -t) x
firm with value x                      ~i > Pt . In other words, the firm would trade
at a higher price if it disclosed. The cost of delaying disclosure for an instant dt


                                                       14
is [e-r(T -t) x
              ~i - Pt ] dt. The benefit of delaying disclosure is that another firm may
disclose a high value during the instant dt, lifting the pool price and producing
a positive jump Jt in Jt .6 The marginal condition is that the cost of delaying
disclosure must equal the expected benefit for a firm that is at the optimal exercise
boundary. Thus, the optimal exercise boundary at date t is the number Bt such that

                          e-r(T -t) Bt - Pt dt = Et [Jt | x
                                                          ~i = Bt ] .                           (3.7)

    The reasoning leading to (3.7) is valid for any number of firms, and it is also valid
in a single-firm model with an exogenous disclosure as in Acharya, DeMarzo, and
Kremer (2011). The complication that we address in this paper is that in our model
(3.7) is an equilibrium condition rather than just an optimality condition, because
the jumps Jt in our model depend on the disclosure policies of other firms, which in
a symmetric equilibrium must also conform to the time-varying Bt defined by (3.7).
    We are able to solve this equilibrium condition explicitly when there are only
two firms, which we assume henceforth. Let us define Stage 1 of the game to be the
(endogenous) period of time during which no firm has made a disclosure. Likewise,
let Stage 2 be the time period when one firm is left, as in Section 2. Let Pit and
Bit denote the price of any firm that has not disclosed and the optimal disclosure
boundary, respectively, in stage i of the model. The price P and boundary B jump

   6
     For a firm at the optimal exercise boundary, downward jumps in Jt are not possible, because
a downward jump in the boundary does not affect the optimal policy of a firm that is already at
the boundary ­ the firm should still disclose, so the value of J is still the right-hand side of (3.6)
after such a jump. On the other hand, an upward jump in the boundary means that it is optimal
to continue to exercise plausible deniability a while longer, so the value of J becomes larger than
the right-hand side of (3.6), that is, there is a positive jump Jt .



                                                 15
from P1,t and B1,t to P2,t and B2,t , respectively, at the time that the first firm discloses.
We solve the model by working backwards.

3.1. Stage 2

   After one firm has disclosed, the model is similar to the single-firm model studied
in Section 2. The only difference is that the market's inference problem can be more
complicated in Stage 2 of a two-firm model. Without loss of generality, denote the
firm that discloses first by firm 1. Let  denote the disclosure time. Consider a date
t   prior to firm 2's disclosure. We know that firm 2 will disclose as soon as the
                                                      ~2  er(T -t) P2t . So, B2 and P2
price drops below its discounted value, that is, when x
are related as in Section 2, namely, B2t = er(T -t) P2t .
   The market computes P2t by conditioning on x
                                              ~1 and on the event

               ~2 > t  
                       ~2  , x
                             ~ < B1  B2t   < ~2  t, x
                                                    ~ < B2t .

The three events in this union are (i) firm 2 learns its value after t, (ii) firm 2 learns its
value before  and the value is less than both B1 and B2t , and (iii) firm 2 learns its
value between  and t and the value is less than B2t . These are the three possibilities
given that firm 2 has not disclosed by t. To understand event (ii), note that if firm 2
received its value before  , then it would have disclosed before  if x
                                                                     ~2 > B1 and
would have disclosed before t if x
                                 ~2 > B2t , so if it has not disclosed before t then it
must be that both x
                  ~2 < B1 and x
                              ~2 < B2t . On the other hand, in event (iii), if the
firm learned its value between  and t and has not disclosed by t, then we can be
sure that its value is below B2t , but we cannot be sure that it is below B1 . In this
case, both boundaries affect the pool price. However, if it happens to be true that

                                             16
B2t  B1 , then in both (ii) and (iii), the discounted value is known to be lower
than B2t , and we can combine events (ii) and (iii) as: (ii ) firm 2 learns its value
before t and the discounted value is less than B2t . The case (ii ) is the same as the
conditioning in Lemma 2.1. As time passes, B2t will drop, and we will eventually be
in case (ii ).
    We are now conditioning on x
                               ~1 also. As stated in Lemma 1.1, the risk-neutral
                                                                  def
distribution of x
                ~2 conditonal on x                      ~
                                 ~1 is normal with mean µ 2         ~1 + (1 - )µ
                                                                  = x
                             def
and standard deviation 2 =            1 - 2 . As in Section 2, we can solve the model
                                 µ
for a standardized distribution (~ 2 = 0 and 2 = 1) and then scale and translate to

                                  µ
produce the solution for general (~ 2 , 2 ). For any real number y and any date t   ,

consider the fixed point condition

                                      (y ) + (t -  )(z )
                           z =                             .                       (3.8)
                                   T -  (y ) - (t -  )(z )

Lemma 3.1. Equation (3.8) has a unique solution z2 (, t, y ). It is positive and is an
increasing function of t. Furthermore, z2 (, t, y ) < y if and only if z (t) < y , where
z (t) is defined in Lemma 2.2.

    We are now able to describe the equilibrium price and boundary in Stage 2. The
standardized boundary switches from the fixed point in Lemma 3.1 to the fixed point
in Lemma 2.2 when we move to case (ii ) as described above. This appears in (3.10)
below as the switch from z2 to z .

                                          ~1 at date  and consider t   . The
Proposition 3.1. Suppose firm 1 discloses x
unique equilibrium price of firm 2 after the disclosure of firm 1 and before the dis-



                                           17
closure of firm 2 is P2t = e-r(T -t) B2t , where


                                          ~
                                    B2t = µ 2 - 2 Z2t                             (3.9)


and where                            
                                     
                                     z2 (, t, y
                                              ~) if z (t) < y
                                                            ~
                            Z2t =                                               (3.10)
                                     
                                     z (t)
                                                   otherwise ,

with y    µ
     ~ = (~ 2 - B1 )/2 .


3.2. Stage 1

   Now, we back up and find the equilibrium price and exercise boundary before
either firm discloses. We begin by finding the equilibrium price conditional on the
boundary. Then, we will use the marginal condition (3.7) to find the boundary.
Consider any date t and suppose neither firm disclosed prior to t. The equilibrium
price is
               P1t = e-r(T -t) E [~
                                  xi | neither firm disclosed prior to t] .     (3.11)

Unlike the single-firm model, in which we condition on a firm not disclosing, here we
also have to condition on the lack of disclosure by another correlated firm that may
also be exercising plausible deniability. This depresses the equilibrium price further.
The event on which we are conditioning in (3.11) is the union of the following four
disjoint events:

  (i) neither firm learned its value prior to t;
 (ii) firm 1 learned its value x
                               ~1 < B1t prior to t and firm 2 did not learn its value
      prior to t;

                                             18
(iii) firm 2 learned its value x
                               ~2 < B1t prior to t and firm 1 did not learn its value
     prior to t;

(iv) both firms learned their values x
                                     ~i < B1t at dates prior to t.

As before, we can work with standardized distributions and then scale and translate
for general (µ ,  ). We will obtain B1t = µ - z1 (t), where z1 is a deterministic
function that does not depend on the parameters µ and  . Let (· | ) denote
the bivariate distribution function for normal random variables with zero means,
unit standard deviations, and correlation equal to . By combining the risk-neutral
expectations of the four events described above, we obtain the following description
of the equilibrium price conditional on the boundary, that is, conditional on z1 (t).

Lemma 3.2. Suppose there has been no disclosure prior to date t. Then,


  er(T -t) P1t - µ
           
                                                              1-
                             t(1 + ) (z1 (t)) T - t              z (t)
                                                              1+ 1
            = -                       2                                              , (3.12)
                     T - t (z1 (t))       + t2  (-z1 (t), -z1 (t) | ) - (-z1 (t))2

             def
where z1 (t) = (µ - B1t )/ .

   From Lemma 3.2, the left-hand side of the marginal condition (3.7), that is, the
cost of waiting to disclose for a firm at the boundary, can be computed in terms of




                                                19
the unknown z1 (t) as


  e-r(T -t) B1t - P1t =  e-r(T -t) ×
                                                                          
                                               1-
                   t(1 + ) (z1 (t)) T - t      1+ 1
                                                   z ( t )
      
                         2                                        - z1 (t) . (3.13)
          T - t (z1 (t)) + t2  (-z1 (t), -z1 (t) | ) - (-z1 (t))2

We can derive a useful bound on the equilibrium disclosure boundary from the fact
that (3.13) must be nonnegative. Nonnegativity of (3.13) follows from the fact that
a firm will never disclose when the pool price is above its discounted value. The
bound relates the boundary in Stage 1 of the two-firm model to the boundary in the
single-firm model in Section 2. On the one hand, the boundary (and price) should be
lower in the two-firm model because it is bad news that another correlated firm has
also not disclosed; on the other hand, the boundary should be higher in the two-firm
model because of the real option effect represented in the marginal condition (3.7).
We can most conveniently express the relationship between the boundaries in terms
of the negatives of the standardized boundaries (z1 and z ) as follows.

Lemma 3.3. In equilibrium prior to either firm's disclosure, it must be true that

                                            1+
                                z1 (t)         z (t) .                          (3.14)
                                            1-

   Now, consider the right-hand side of the marginal condition (3.7). To compute
the value of waiting to disclose when at the boundary, suppose firm 2 is at the
exercise boundary at t, that is, x
                                 ~2 = B1t . Suppose firm 1 discloses at t. As discussed
previously, there will be a nonzero jump in firm 2's value function if and only if the


                                          20
boundary rises following the disclosure--that is, if and only if B2t > B1t .
    So, which disclosures by firm 1 have the property that B2t > B1t ? By combining
the description of B2t in Proposition 3.1 with the bound in Lemma 3.3, we obtain
the following. We use the same definition of y
                                             ~ as in Proposition 3.1.

Lemma 3.4. Suppose firm 1 discloses x
                                    ~1 at date t. Then B2t > B1t if and only if


                               def   ~1 + (1 - )µ - B1t
                                     x
                           y
                           ~ =                          > z (t) .                              (3.15)
                                              2

A necessary condition for (3.15) is that x
                                         ~1 > B1t .

    Lemma 3.4 shows that a jump in the value of firm 2 occurs at date t if and only
                                                                  ~1 > B1t .7 Now we
if firm 1 learns its value at t and has a sufficiently high value x
turn to computing the jump in firm 2's value when B2t > B1t . Given our working
assumption that firm 2 is at the boundary at t, its value at t is
                                            T
                               Jt =             e-r(u-t) e-r(T -u) B1t du .                    (3.16)
                                        t


When firm 1 discloses at t and we have a jump in the boundary B2t > B1t , then
firm 2 will continue to exercise plausible deniability and earn the reward P2u until
P2u drops down to e-r(T -u) B1t , equivalently, B2u drops down to B1t . The jump in

    7
      This result is quite important for rendering the model tractable. It means that, for computing
the marginal condition (3.7), we can ignore the case in which firm 1 learns its value before t and
discloses at t (which happens only when x   ~1 = B1t ). The arrival rate of such disclosures depends on
the slope of the boundary B1 at t (more disclosures happen in a given time interval if the boundary
is steeper) . Thus, absent a result like Lemma 3.4, we would have to solve the marginal condition
(3.7) as a dynamical system, perhaps as a differential equation. Because of Lemma 3.4, we can
instead solve for the boundary pointwise in t, by solving the fixed-point problem in Proposition 3.2
at each t.


                                                     21
firm 2's value function is the difference between the value of this and the value (3.16),
which is
                                        s
                                            e-r(u-t) P2u - e-r(T -u) B1t du ,                  (3.17)
                                    t

where s denotes the date after t at which B2s = B1t . From Proposition 3.1, the date s
                           ~, that is, it is s = z -1 (~
is the solution of z (s) = y                           y ). Furthermore, Proposition 3.1
shows that, for u  [t, z -1 (~
                             y )],

               e-r(u-t) P2u - e-r(T -u) B1t               = 2 e-r(T -t) [~
                                                                         y - z2 (t, u, y
                                                                                       ~)] .   (3.18)

Combining these facts, we conclude that the risk-neutral expected jump in firm 2's
value conditional on a jump occurring and conditional on firm 2 being at the bound-
ary at t is
                         z -1 (~
                               y)
         -r(T -t) 
   2 e         E                     y - z2 (t, u, y
                                    [~             ~)] du x
                                                          ~2 = B1t , firm 1 discloses, y
                                                                                       ~ > z (t) .
                     t
                                                                                               (3.19)
   We need to derive the density of y
                                    ~ given the information on which we are condi-
tioning in (3.19). Maintaining our assumption that x
                                                   ~2 = B1t , the distribution of x
                                                                                  ~1
               ~2 is normal with mean B1t + (1 - )µ and standard deviation 2 .
conditional on x
An easy calculation then shows that the distribution of y
                                                        ~ conditional on x
                                                                         ~2 is normal
with mean       1 - 2 z1 (t) and standard deviation . The distribution of y
                                                                          ~ conditional
on x
   ~2 and conditional on y
                         ~ > z (t) is truncated normal with density

                1            1 - 2 z1 (t) - y                     1 - 2 z1 (t) - z (t)
                                                                                          .    (3.20)
                                                                         

   The last piece we need is the arrival rate of disclosures by firm 1 having y
                                                                              ~ > z (t).



                                                         22
For any    > 0, the probability that firm 1 learns its value at some u  (t, t + ) and
y
~ > z (t), conditional on x
                          ~2 = B1t , is
                                             t+
                                1                          1 - 2 z1 (u) - z (t)
                                                                                    du .
                                T        t                        

The probability conditional on x
                               ~2 = B1t and conditional on firm 1 not having dis-
closed prior to t is
               t+
                         1 - 2 z1 (u) - z (t)                                          1-
                                                                 du        T - t          z1 (t)       .
           t                                                                           1+

The arrival rate (hazard rate) is the derivative of this ratio with respect to , evaluated
at = 0, so it is

                        1 - 2 z1 (t) - z (t)                                       1-
                                                                      T - t           z1 (t)     .         (3.21)
                                                                                   1+

Putting these things together, we arrive at the following formula for the right-hand
side of the marginal condition (3.7).

Lemma 3.5.


                                                    1 - 2 -r(T -t)                         1-
  Et [J2t | x
            ~2 = B1t ] =                                 e                 T - t              z1 (t)
                                                                                           1+
                                        z -1 (y )
                                                                              1 - 2 z1 (t) - y
                    ×                               [y - z2 (t, u, y )]                           du dy . (3.22)
                        z (t)       t                                              


   We can now express the marginal condition (3.7) as a numerically tractable fixed-
point condition. Note that the only model parameter that appears in (3.24) is the
correlation . The correlation determines the standardized boundary and price, and


                                                                23
then we obtain the general boundary and price by scaling and translating as discussed
before.

Proposition 3.2. Prior to any disclosure, the equilibrium disclosure boundary at t
is
                                    B1t = µ - z1 (t) ,                                       (3.23)

where z1 (t) satisfies

                                              1-
             t(1 + ) (z1 (t)) T - t              z (t)
                                              1+ 1
                      2                                                       - z1 (t) =
     T - t (z1 (t))  + t2  (-z1 (t), -z1 (t) | ) - (-z1 (t))2
                                                                      
                                  z -1 (y )                              1-2 z1 (t)-y
                           z (t) t
                                            [ y - z2 ( t, u, y )]             
                                                                                       du dy
                 1 - 2
                        ×                                                                    . (3.24)
                                                T - t             1-
                                                                     z  ( t )
                                                                  1+  1



     Figure 3.1 shows the equilibrium pool price and disclosure boundary described
in Proposition 3.2 and also the pool price and disclosure boundary in the single-firm
model. In all versions of the model, the price begins at µ at date 0 and decreases
to - as t  T . The pool price is uniformly decreasing in the correlation at each
date, because the failure of another correlated firm to disclose is more meaningful,
and hence the price is lower, when the correlation is higher. In the single-firm model,
the boundary and price are the same (with r = 0); however, in the multi-firm model,
the boundary exceeds the price due to the real option effect. Therefore, the boundary
in the multi-firm model is initially higher than in the single-firm model.
     Figure 3.2 shows the equilibrium timing of disclosures. The first announcement
in the two-firm model generally occurs before the announcement in the single-firm


                                               24
                               (a) Boundary                                (b) Price
             100

              90

              80

              70
                         single firm                                 single firm
              60         corr=0.5                                    corr=0.5
                         corr=0.9                                    corr=0.9
                   0.0   0.2    0.4    0.6    0.8   1.0        0.0   0.2   0.4     0.6   0.8   1.0
                                  time                                       time

Figure 3.1: Panel (a) presents the equilibrium disclosure boundary, and Panel (b) presents
the equilibrium pool price for the single-firm model and for Stage 1 of the two-firm model
with different correlations . The parameter values are T = 1, µ = 105, µ = 100,  = 15,
and r = 0.


model, both because the minimium of the two information arrival times is generally
smaller than the arrival time in the single-firm model and because the boundary in
the multi-firm model is generally lower than the boundary in the single-firm model.
The second of the two announcements generally occurs after the announcement in
the single-firm model. Recall that the boundary that determines the second of the
two announcements is the Stage 2 boundary described in Proposition 3.1.

4. Implications for Asset Prices

   We first present our main results regarding risk premia and average prices. Then,
we discuss some issues considered by Acharya et al. (2011). Finally, we describe the
scheduling and announcement returns for the disclosing and nondisclosing firms.




                                                          25
                      
                              VLQJOHILUP
                              ILUVWRIWZRILUPV
                              VHFRQGRIWZRILUPV

                      

                      

                      

                      

                      
                                                                
                                                 WLPH


Figure 3.2: The red curve is the density function of the disclosure time in the single-firm
model, as shown in Figure 2.3. The histograms are the distributions of the first and second
disclosure times in the two-firm model, generated from 100,000 simulations of the model.
The parameter values are  = 0.5, T = 1, µ = 105, µ = 100,  = 15, and r = 0.


4.1. Risk Premia and Average Prices

   As in the single-firm model, the risk premium rises over time prior to disclosures.
Figure 4.1 shows that it rises faster with multiple firms than with a single firm and
rises faster when the firms are more highly correlated. The risk premium rises for the
same reason that it rises in the single-firm model: rising state prices for bad states.
It rises faster with multiple firms and with higher correlation, because the market
makes a stronger inference from the absence of disclosures by correlated firms.
   Figure 4.2 shows the effect of plausible deniability on average prices. We compute
the expectation under the physical probability of the average of the two firms' prices
at each date, given the equilibrium disclosure times and the market pricing described
in Section 3. We compare this to the expectation of the average price when disclosure




                                                 26
                                     20%         single firm
                                     18%         corr = 0.2
                                                 corr = 0.5
                                     16%         corr = 0.8




                      risk premium
                                     14%
                                     12%
                                     10%
                                      8%
                                      6%
                                      4%
                                           0.0        0.2      0.4          0.6   0.8   1.0
                                                                     time

Figure 4.1: The Stage 1 risk premium is computed as the difference between the market's
discounted conditional expectation of x
                                      ~i and the price divided by the price. The parameter
                            
values are r = 0, µ = 105, µ = 100, and  = 15.


is mandatory.8
       Figure 4.2 shows that the possibility of plausible deniability depresses average
prices.9 This is due to the higher risk premium that plausible deniability induces.
Of course, the risk is eventually resolved as firms disclose, so the effect of plausible
deniability vanishes as t  T , as Figure 4.2 shows. The patterns for different corre-
lations are due to (i) the risk premium rises faster in Stage 1 when the correlation
is higher, as shown in Figure 4.1, so the average price initially falls faster when the
correlation is higher, and (ii) when the correlation is higher, the risk reduction for the

   8
      When disclosure is mandatory, the pool price is µ until one firm discloses, and then the price
for the nondisclosing firm (firm 2) is x ~1 + (1 - )µ . Integrating over the information arrival times,
we can easily compute that the expected average price is t2 µ + t(1 - t)[(1+ )µ +(1 - )µ ]+(1 - t)2 µ .
    9
      Thus, firms might prefer, if possible, to commit to disclosing as soon as they learn their values.
A preference for commitment occurs in many contexts. We should note however that the discounted
prices are martingales under the risk-neutral probability, so it is only under the physical probability
that the average price is depressed, and we are assuming firms maximize risk-neutral expectations.




                                                               27
                                              0.0%                      corr = 0.1
                                                                        corr = 0.5




                  % average price reduction
                                                                        corr = 0.9
                                              -0.2%

                                              -0.4%

                                              -0.6%

                                              -0.8%

                                              -1.0%
                                                      0.0   0.2   0.4          0.6   0.8   1.0
                                                                        time


Figure 4.2: The figure presents the difference between the expected average price in the
two-firm model (computed from 100,000 simulations for each correlation) and the expected
average price with mandatory disclosure, shown as a percent of the expected average price
with mandatory disclosure. The parameter values are r = 0, µ = 105, µ = 100, and
 = 15.


second firm to disclose is greater when the first firm discloses, so the risk premium
and price reduction are generally smaller with higher correlations at later dates.

4.2. Real Option Effect and Clustering

   Here we examine two issues addressed by Acharya et al. (2011). In their model,
the firm is willing to allow the pool price to drop some distance below its value before
disclosing, because of the possibility that the public announcement will be good news,
which will lift the pool price and prolong the value of plausible deniability. This
real option effect (relative to the other firm's disclosure rather than an exogenous
announcement) is what underlies our marginal condition (3.7). Figure 4.3 plots the
excess of the Stage 1 boundary over the price in our model, in relation to the price,
as a function of the firms' correlation. In their discussion of a multi-firm model,
Acharya et al. (2011) point out that this excess will be zero at correlations of 0 and

                                                                  28
1 when there are multiple firms and no exogenous announcement. This is confirmed
in Figure 4.3, which shows moreover that the pattern is in general hump-shaped.


                                         
                                               t = 
                                               t = 
                                               t = 
                  H[FHVVRIEG\RYHUSULFH
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                         
                                                                       
                                                      FRUUHODWLRQ

Figure 4.3: The figure presents the difference between the Stage 1 boundary and the Stage
1 price in relation to the price: (B1t - P1t )/P1t . The parameter values are r = 0, µ = 105,
µ = 100, and  = 15.


   The marginal condition (3.7) demonstrates that the spread between the Stage 1
boundary and price shown in Figure 4.3 depends on the probability that the other
firm discloses, the distribution of the other firm's potential disclosure, and the effect
of the other firm's disclosure on the market's inference regarding the nondisclosing
firm. Correlation of firm values has two opposing effects on the spread. First, the
higher the correlation, the greater the inference the market will make regarding the
nondisclosing firm. So, for any given disclosure by the other firm, the benefit for the
nondisclosing firm is greater when the correlation is higher. Second, the higher the
correlation, the less likely it is that the other firm will disclose a value markedly dif-
ferent from the nondisclosing firm's value. This channel reduces the potential benefit


                                                         29
of disclosure by the other firm, and hence reduces the spread between boundary and
price, when the correlation is increased. Figure 4.3 shows that the first effect dom-
inates at low correlations--the spread rises with correlation--and the second effect
dominates at high correlations--the spread falls with correlation.
   The passage of time affects both channels described in the previous paragraph.
The distributions of value from both the market's perspective and from the perspec-
tive of the nondisclosing firm become more skewed as time passes, as explained in
Section 2. Section 2 discusses how the relation between risk-neutral and physical dis-
tributions changes with the truncation-induced skewness. The distributions that are
relevant for Figure 4.3 are the nondisclosing firm's perception of the other firm's value
and the nondisclosing firm's perception how the market will perceive its value after
disclosure of the other firm's value. The first distribution (the distribution of x
                                                                                  ~1 given
x                                                         ~2 +(1 - )µ and standard
~2 ) is a truncation of the normal distribution with mean x
deviation                                                          ~1 +(1 - )µ con-
              1 - 2 . The second distribution (the distribution of x
                                                                        ~2 + (1 - 2 )µ
            ~2 ) is a truncation of the normal distribution with mean 2 x
ditional on x
and standard deviation         1 - 2 . The difference between the distributions obvi-
ously depends on the correlation . Thus, how the passage of time affects the spread
between the boundary and the price depends on the correlation. The upshot is that
the passage of time increases the spread between the boundary and price for low
correlations (on the left in Figure 4.3, the green curve is highest) and decreases the
spread for low correlations (on the right in Figure 4.3, the green curve is lowest).
   Acharya et al. (2011) show that disclosures happen faster after a negative public
announcement than a positive public announcement. The same phenomenon occurs


                                           30
                    110
                    105
                    100
                     95
                     90
                     85         disclosure= 99.0
                                disclosure= 109.0
                     80         disclosure= 119.0
                                Stage 1
                          0.0       0.2       0.4          0.6   0.8   1.0
                                                    time

Figure 4.4: The figure presents Stage 1 and Stage 2 boundaries. The red curve is the
Stage 1 boundary prior to t = 0.2. The other curves are Stage 2 boundaries resulting
from different disclosures at t = 0.2. The parameter values are  = 0.5, r = 0, µ = 105,
µ = 100, and  = 15. At t = 2, the Stage 1 boundary is 99.0, so a disclosure at 99.0 causes
the Stage 2 boundary to drop relative to the Stage 1 boundary, as shown in Lemma 3.4.


in our model relative to the endogenous announcements by the firms: the second firm
delays less after the first firm's announcement when the first firm's announcement
is relatively bad news. The second firm announces when its value is above the
Stage 2 boundary, so this clustering effect is equivalent to the Stage 2 boundary
being lower when the first firm's announcement is worse news. The clustering effect
is an implication of Proposition 3.2. Figure 4.4 illustrates the phenomenon. It plots
equilibrium Stage 2 boundaries conditional on various possible disclosures. The
Stage 2 boundary is higher--implying that the second disclosure will be delayed
longer on average--when the disclosure is better news.
   When the first firm's disclosure is at or near the Stage 1 boundary, the Stage 2
boundary is lower at the disclosure date than the Stage 1 boundary, as shown in



                                                    31
Lemma 3.4. This is illustrated in Figure 4.4. If the second firm has learned its value
and its value lies in the interval between the two boundaries, then it will disclose
at the same time as the first firm. Thus, there is a nonzero probability that both
firms will disclose at the same time, even though their information arrival times are
independently and uniformly distributed. This is the extreme case of clustering.

4.3. Scheduling and Announcement Returns

       Now, we look at announcement returns. Announcements in our model occur
at unpredictable times. In practice, announcements are usually scheduled ahead of
time. In a world where plausible deniability is a possibility, the mere act of scheduling
an announcement conveys good news, because it demonstrates that the firm wants
to separate from the pool. So, there should be a positive market reaction when the
announcement is scheduled.10 On the other hand, the market reaction to the actual
news that is released should be zero on average under the risk-neutral probability and
positive on average under the physical probability only if it is positively correlated
with the pricing kernel. To separate the reaction to the scheduling and the reaction
to the actual announcement in our model, we compute the risk-neutral expectation
of the announcement at the announcement date, conditioning on an announcement
occurring but not conditioning on the content of the announcement. This is the price
at which the firm would trade an instant before the announcement if it were known
at that time that an announcement was forthcoming. Call this price the interim

  10
    As mentioned in the introduction, plausible deniability is one answer to a question asked by Ross
(1989): "how could the mere announcement of the acceleration of the release of some information
concerning its future payoff possibly influence the price of an asset?" In Ross's model (as apparently
in the example of New York City bonds that he cites) the acceleration is not a signal, but it is a
signal in a model with plausible deniability.


                                                 32
price. The total announcement return is the pre-announcement-to-interim return
compounded with the interim-to-post-announcement return. We call the former the
scheduling return and the latter the announcement return.
   Figure 4.5 shows that the scheduling return for the disclosing firm is substantially
larger than the expected announcement return (the announcement risk premium) in
our model. The same is true for the non-disclosing firm, which also experiences a
positive scheduling return and earns a positive risk premium upon announcement as
shown in Panel (b) of Figure 4.5. Both the scheduling return and the announcement
risk premium are smaller for the non-disclosing firm than for the disclosing firm,
consistent with Savor and Wilson (2016). All of the returns are larger if the disclosure
happens later, consistent with the rising risk premium shown in Figure 4.1.

                               (a) Disclosing Firm                      (b) Non-Disclosing Firm
                             expected total return                        expected total return
                 50%         scheduling return                            scheduling return
                             expected announcement return                 expected announcement return
                 40%

                 30%
        return




                 20%

                 10%


                       0.0   0.2    0.4     0.6    0.8      1.0   0.0   0.2    0.4    0.6    0.8    1.0
                                       time                                      time

Figure 4.5: Average returns are calculated as a function of the first disclosure time. The
definitions of the returns are given in the text. The parameter values are  = 0.5, T = 1,
µ = 105, µ = 100,  = 15, and r = 0.




                                                            33
5. Conclusion

   When plausible deniability is possible, risk premia rise prior to disclosures and
consequently prices decline on average. This is a consequence of investors making
inferences about the aggregate risks from firms' failure to disclose. The rising risk
premia and falling prices produce announcement returns that are higher than un-
conditional risk premia, consistent with the empirical evidence of Savor and Wilson
(2016). These effects are stronger when firm values are more highly correlated.
   We demonstrate these results in a model that advances the literature in two
respects: risk-averse investors and competing firms. We solve the model by solving a
fixed-point condition at each date. One might expect that the equilibrium disclosure
boundary at any date would depend on the boundary at other dates and hence
could be obtained at best as the solution of a differential equation. However, we
show that disclosures at the boundary cause the boundary for the nondisclosing firm
to fall, which simplifies the problem substantially, making it possible to solve for
the boundary pointwise in time. This result also implies that there is a nonzero
probability of simultaneous disclosure by the two firms, an extreme version of the
clustering studied by Acharya et al. (2011). Whether this simplification can be
attained with more than two firms is an open question. However, many of our
results (in particular, the rising risk premia and the effect of correlation on the real
option effect) should be robust to the number of firms.




                                          34
Appendix A. Marginal condition for Optimal Stopping

   We want to describe the equilibrium boundary in Stage 1 of the two-firm model.
Consider a firm that has learned its value x. If it has disclosed at t, then its remaining
value is equal to
                            
                               e-r(u-t) e-r(T -u) x = (T - t)e-r(T -t) x            (A.1)
                        t

Prior to disclosing, its value function depends on whether the other firm has disclosed.
If not, then we are in Stage 1 and we write the value function as J1 (t, x). If the other
firm has disclosed, then we are in Stage 2 and the firm's value function depends
on (t, x) and on the timing and content of the other firm's disclosure. Write it as
J2 (, d, t, x) where  denotes the date of the other firm's disclosure and d denotes the
content of the other firm's disclosure. Set
                           
                           
                           J1 (t, x)
                           
                                              in Stage 1
                           
                       J = J2 (, d, t, x)     in Stage 2
                           
                           (T - t)e-r(T -t) x after disclosure
                           


The value matching condition is that J equal (A.1) when x is at the optimal disclosure
boundary. The smooth pasting condition is that

                                    J
                                      = (T - t)e-r(T -t)                            (A.2)
                                    x

when x is at the optimal disclosure boundary.
   For concreteness, label the firm whose value we are studying as firm 2, so x denotes
the realization of x                                     ~1 . We need to compute E [dJ ]
                   ~2 , and d denotes the realization of x



                                               35
in Stage 1. We have
                                               J1 (t, x)
                               E [dJ ] =                 dt + E [J ]                           (A.3)
                                                 t
where the possible jump J would be a result of a disclosure by firm 1. The jump
size and arrival rate of disclosures is discussed in the text. Let (t, x) denote the
arrival rate of disclosures that create jumps, so

                        E [J ] =         E [J2 | jump] - J1 (t, x) dt .

Denote
                                        E [J2 | jump](t, x)

by  (t, x). Substituting into the martingale condition (3.5), we have

                                                        J1 (t, x)
                P1t - [r + (t, x)]J1 (t, x) +                     +  (t, x) = 0 .              (A.4)
                                                          t

For each x, this is an ordinary differential equation (ODE) for J1 as a function of t.
The value matching condition is a terminal condition for the ODE. Let  (x) denote
the date t such that x = B1t . Solving the ODE subject to the value matching
condition gives, for t   (x),

                                                         (x)
  J1 (t, x) = x[T -  (x)]e-r(T -t) exp -                         (u, x) du
                                                    t
                              (x)                            u
                                    -r(u-t)
                    +               e         exp -              (s, x) ds [P1u +  (u, x)] du . (A.5)
                         t                               t


To apply the smooth pasting condition, we differentiate with respect to x and eval-




                                                  36
uate at t =  (x). Equating the derivative to (T - t)e-r(T -t) gives

                e-r(T -t) x - P1t =  (t, x) - (T - t)e-r(T -t) x(t, x) .     (A.6)

This is the same as equation (3.7).

Appendix B. Proofs Excluding Lemma 3.3

Proof of Lemma 1.1. Project w
                            ~ on x
                                 ~1 + x
                                      ~2 as


                           ~ - µw = (~
                           w              ~2 - 2µ) + u
                                     x1 + x          ~,                      (B.1)


where u
      ~ is the residual and is independent of x
                                              ~1 and x
                                                     ~2 , and where

                                                      2
                             cov(w,
                                 ~ x~1 + x
                                         ~2 )       w
                        =                     =           .
                              var(~
                                  x1 + x~2 )    2 2 w
                                                    2 + 2
                                                        



Thus,
                         ~|x
                       E[w ~1 , x
                                ~2 ] = (~    ~2 ) + µw - 2µ .
                                        x1 + x

The correlation of x      ~2 is  =  2 w
                   ~1 and x           2
                                        / 2 , and we have

                                              
                                      =          .
                                          (1 + )

The conditional variance of w
                            ~ given x
                                    ~1 and x
                                           ~2 is the variance of u
                                                                 ~ in (B.1), and we
have
                         2                                 1-
                    u) = w
                var(~      - 2 4 2 w
                                   2
                                     + 2 2
                                                      =            2
                                                                   w .
                                                           1+



                                           37
   We have
                                                  e-rT
                           ~ |x
                         E[m       ~2 ] =
                              ~1 , x                      E[e- w
                                                               ~
                                                                 |x
                                                                  ~1 , x
                                                                       ~2 ] .
                                                 E[e- w~]


From Step 1 and the usual formula for the mean of an exponential of a normal
random variable,
                                                                  2 w2
                            E[e- w
                                 ~
                                   ] = exp -µw +
                                                                   2

and

                                                                                1-       2 w2
      E[e- w
           ~
             |x    ~2 ] = exp -(~
              ~1 , x                 ~2 ) - µw + 2µ +
                                x1 + x                                                              .
                                                                                1+        2

Thus,

                                                                              
          ~ |x
        E[m       ~2 ] = exp -rT - (~
             ~1 , x                      ~2 ) + 2µ -
                                    x1 + x                                             2 w
                                                                                         2
                                                                                                .
                                                                             1+

   Consider any numbers a1 and a2 and let A denote the event {x
                                                              ~ 1  a1 , x
                                                                        ~2  a2 }.
The risk-neutral probability of the event is


                   Q(A) = erT E[1A m
                                   ~ ] = erT E 1A E[m
                                                    ~ |x
                                                       ~1 , x
                                                            ~2 ] .


Therefore, from Step 2,


                            2  2 /(1+)
           Q(A) = e-          w          E[1A e-(~   x2 -2µ)
                                                 x1 +~
                                                             ]
                                            a2    a1
                         - 2 w
                             2 /(1+)
                   = e                                 e-(x1 +x2 -2µ) g (x1 , x2 ) dx1 dx2 ,            (B.2)
                                          -      -



where g denotes the density function of (~
                                         x1 , x
                                              ~2 ).

                                                   38
   Set x = (x1 x2 ) , µ = (µ µ) , and  = (1 1) . Let  denote the covariance matrix
of x
   ~, which is                            
                                      1  2
                                           .
                                        1

We use the standard fact that for any vector b,


                       e-b (x-µ) g (x) = eb b/2 g (x + b) .                  (B.3)


Set b = . Direct calculations show that

                                  2 2
                                    2
                                        1
                                      = b b ,
                                 1+     2

        2
and b = w . Substituting these and (B.3) into (B.2), we obtain

                           a2    a1
                                              2        2
                 Q(A) =               g (x1 + w , x2 + w ) dx1 dx2 .
                          -     -



This shows that x
                ~1 and x
                       ~2 have the same distribution under the risk-neutral proba-
                                                                    2
bility as under the physical probability, but with means shifted by w .
   The remaining task is to compute the distribution of x
                                                        ~i given x
                                                                 ~j . Project x
                                                                              ~i on
x
~j under the physical probability as


                                ~i - µ = b(~
                                x          xj - µ) + e
                                                     ~                       (B.4)




                                           39
where e
      ~ is the residual and is independent of x
                                              ~j . Thus,


                                 xi | x
                               E[~             ~j + (1 - b)µ ,
                                      ~ j ] = bx


and we have
                                       cov(~
                                           xi , x
                                                ~j )
                                 b =                 = .
                                         var(~
                                             xj )

The conditional variance of x
                            ~i given x
                                     ~j is the variance of e
                                                           ~, and (B.4) implies that
this conditional variance is
                                      e) =  2 (1 - 2 ) .
                                  var(~

The calculation is the same under the risk-neutral probability with µ replacing µ.

Proof of Lemma 2.1. This follows from a direct calculation of the expected value.

Proof of Lemma 2.2. Fix t and T such that 0  t  T . Equation (2.2) can be
rewritten as
                                 def
                       F (t, z ) = z [T - t(z )] - t(z ) = 0 .                     (B.5)

We have F/z = T - t(z ) > 0, F (0) < 0, and limz F (t, z ) = . Therefore,
F (t, z ) = 0 admits a unique solution for every t, and the solution is positive. Because
F is continuously differentiable and F/z = 0, the implicit function theorem states
that z (t) is also continuously differentiable and

                    dz     F           F   z (z ) + (z )
                       = -               =               > 0.
                    dt     t           z     T - t(z )




                                             40
Proof of Proposition 2.1. Use Lemmas 2.1 and 2.2 and the substitutions (-z ) =
(z )
                 T - t + t(-z ) = T - t + t[1 - (z )] = T - t(z ) .




Proof of Lemma 3.1. Equation (3.8) is equivalent to


               z T -  (y ) - (t -  )(z ) -  (y ) - (t -  )(z ) = 0 .                 (B.6)


The left-hand side of (B.6) is negative at z = 0 and infinite at z = . Furthermore,
its derivative with respect to z is


                             T -  (y ) - (t -  )(z ) > 0 ,


so there is a unique solution z of (B.6), and the solution is positive. Denote the
solution by z2 (, t, y ). The implicit function theorem gives us

                     z2 (, t, y )        z (z ) + (z )
                                  =                         > 0.
                         t          T -  (y ) - (t -  )(z )

     Because (B.6) is strictly monotone in z , the condition y < z2 (, t, y ) is equivalent
to
               y T -  (y ) - (t -  )(y ) -  (y ) - (t -  )(y ) < 0 ,

which simplifies to
                               y T - t(y ) - t(y ) < 0 .                             (B.7)


                                            41
The definition of z (t) is that z (t) = z where


                             z T - t(z ) - t(z ) = 0 .                          (B.8)


The left-hand side of (B.8) is strictly monotone in z , as noted in the proof of
Lemma 2.2, so (B.7) is equivalent to y < z (t).

Proof of Proposition 3.1. The equilibrium boundary is the solution B2t of the fixed-
point condition


  B2t =

   E x  ~1 , 
     ~2 x    ~2 > t  ~2  , x
                           ~ < B1  B2t   < ~2  t, x
                                                  ~ < B2t                     . (B.9)


There are two possible cases: (i) B2t  B1 , and (ii) B2t > B1 . In case (i), the fixed
point problem in (B.9) translates to a single-firm problem, whose solution is given
in Proposition 2.1. Hence, in case (i),


                                        ~
                                  B2t = µ 2 - 2 z (t) .




The condition B2t  B1 translates to z (t)  y
                                           ~. In case (ii), the fixed point problem
in (B.9) becomes


 B2t = E x
         ~2 x
            ~1 , ~2 > t  ~2  , x
                               ~ < B1   < ~2  t, x
                                                 ~ < B2t                     . (B.10)


              µ
Define Z2t = (~ 2 - B2t )/2 . We can calculate the probabilities of the events on the



                                           42
right-hand side of (B.10) as


                                      ~2 > t         T -t
                                   Pr              =       ,
                                                       T
                            ~2  , x                  
                         Pr       ~ < B1           =    1 - (~  y) ,
                                                     T
                            ~2  t, x                 t-
                      Pr  <        ~ < B2t         =         1 - (Z2t ) .
                                                       T

Using these probabilities and the fact that E [~
                                               x2 |x             ~
                                                        ~2  a] = µ
                                                   ~1 , x         2 - 2 (a)/(a), we

can rewrite (B.10) as

                                  T -t
             B2t =                                  ~
                                                   ×µ 2
                       T -  (~ y ) - (t -  )(Z2t )
                               1 - (~   y)                      (~y)
                     +                               ~
                                                   × µ  2 - 2
                       T -  (~ y ) - (t -  )(Z2t )            1 - (~ y)
                           t -  1 - (Z2t )                      (Z2t )
                     +                               ~
                                                   × µ  2 - 2            .
                       T -  (~ y ) - (t -  )(Z2t )            1 - (Z2t )

This simplifies to

                                           (~y ) + (t -  )(Z2t )
                              ~
                        B2t = µ 2 - 1                               ,,
                                        T -  (~ y ) - (t -  )(Z2t )

which is equivalent to

                                       (~y ) + (t -  )(Z2t )
                           Z2t =                                .
                                    T -  (~ y ) - (t -  )(Z2t )

This implies Z2t = z2 (, t, y
                            ~).

Proof of Lemma 3.2. Set k = z1 (t). The risk-neutral probabilities of the events (i)­


                                              43
(iv) are, respectively,

                                         t(T - t)
                                  p1 =             (-k )
                                             T2
                                         t(T - t)
                                  p2   =           (-k )
                                             T2
                                          t2
                                  p3   = 2  (-k, -k, )
                                         T
                                         (T - t)2
                                  p4   =          .
                                             T2

The risk-neutral expectation of x
                                ~1 conditional on each of the four events is


                                def
                          a1    = E [~
                                     x1 | x
                                          ~1 < B1t ]
                                def
                          a2    = E [~
                                     x1 | x
                                          ~2 < B1t ]
                                def
                          a3    = E [~
                                     x1 | x
                                          ~1 < B1t , x
                                                     ~1 < B1t ]
                                def
                          a4    = E [~
                                     x1 ] .


                                    ~i = µ + i , where the i are correlated standard
To compute a1 , a2 , and a3 , write x
normals under the risk-neutral probability. We have


                          a1 = µ +  E [1 | 1 < -k ]

                               = µ - (-k )/(-k ) ,

                          a2 = (1 - )µ + E[~
                                           x2 | x
                                                ~2 < B1t ]

                               = µ +  E [2 | 2 < -k ]

                               = µ - (-k )/(-k ) .



                                              44
Also,


                       a3 = µ +  E [1 | 1 < -k, 2 < -k ]

                           = µ -  E [-1 | -1 > k, -2 > k ]
                                        (1 + )(-k )(- )
                           = µ -                        .
                                           (-k, -k, )

We use equation (1) in Rosenbaum (1961) for the last line. The equilibrium price is

                                                         4
                                     -r(T -t)            i=1 pi ai
                                 e              ·          4         ,
                                                           i=1 pi


which simplifies to the formula stated in the lemma.

                                ~
Proof of Lemma 3.4. Notice that µ 2 - 2 y                            ~
                                        ~ = B1t . Furthermore, B2t = µ 2 - 2 Z2t .

Therefore, B2t > B1t if and only if Z2t < y
                                          ~. It follows from the definition (3.10) of
Z2t and Lemma 3.1 that this is equivalent to z (t) < y
                                                     ~. Now, if x
                                                                ~1 = B1t , then

               (1 - )(µ - B1t )             1-                   µ - B1t     1-
         y
         ~ =                    =                            ·           =      z1 (t) .
                      2                         1-       2                   1+

Combining this with Lemma 3.3, we see that if x               ~  z (t). Hence,
                                              ~1 = B1t , then y
x
~1 > B1t is a necessary condition for z (t) < y
                                              ~.

Proof of Lemma 3.5. The calculation is explained in the text.

Proof of Proposition 3.2. This follows directly from Proposition 3.1 and Lemmas 3.2­
3.5.




                                                    45
Appendix C. Proof of Lemma 3.3

   Set k = z1 (t) and
                                                  1-
                                        d =          k.
                                                  1+
We need to establish that d  z (t). Because z (t) > 0, this is clearly true if d < 0, so
we can assume d  0. The definition of z (t) in Lemma 2.2 is that z (t) = z where

                                   z [T - t(z )] - t(z ) = 0 .

The derivative of the left-hand side of this is T - t(z ) > 0, so the left-hand side is
a monotone function of z . Hence, the condition d  z (t) is equivalent to

                                   d[T - t(d)] - t(d)  0 .

So, what we need to show is that

                                                 t(d)
                                        d               .                             (C.1)
                                               T - t(d)

What we know from the nonnegativity of (3.13) is that

                                      t(1 + ) (k ) T - t (d)
                 k                       2                                .
                          T - t (k )         + t2  (-k, -k | ) - (-k )2

Multiplying by    (1 - )/(1 + ), we obtain

                                      t 1 - 2  (k ) T - t (d)
                 d                       2                                .
                          T - t (k )         + t2  (-k, -k | ) - (-k )2

Therefore, to establish (C.1), it suffices to show that

                               1 - 2  (k )                         (d)
                      2                                                       2   .   (C.2)
         T - t (k )       +   t2    (-k, -k | ) -    (-k )2      T - t(d)

                                                46
Given d, we can regard the left-hand side of (C.2) as a function of either k or  ,
because
                                         1+                    k 2 - d2
                                k=d                        =            .                        (C.3)
                                         1-                    k 2 + d2
The right-hand sideof (C.2) is the same function evaluated at  = 0  k = d. It
suffices therefore to show that (C.2) is decreasing in k when we set  = (k ) as
defined in (C.3).
     Taking the log of (C.2) and differentiating, it suffices to show that

                    2                                                d log   1 - (k )2  (k )
      T - t (k )        + t2  (-k, -k | (k )) - (-k )2
                                                                               dk
                           d                     2
                                 T - t (k )          + t2  (-k, -k | (k )) - (-k )2            . (C.4)
                           dk

We have
                                                           2dk
                                         1 - (k )2 =             ,
                                                          d2+ k2
so
                d log       1 - (k )2  (k )  1    2k         
                                            = - 2    2
                                                       -k = - -k.
                              dk             k d +k          k
Therefore, the left-hand side of (C.4) is

                                 2                                              
            -   T - t (k )           + t2  (-k, -k | (k )) - (-k )2               +k ,
                                                                                k

Also,
                           d                 2
                              T - t (k )         = -2t T - t (k ) (k )                           (C.5)
                           dk
and
                                 d
                                    -(-k )2 = 2(-k )(k ) .                                       (C.6)
                                 dk



                                                     47
We prove the following at the end of this appendix.

Lemma C.1.

                  d                                   d(d)
                     (-k, -k ) | (k )) = 2(k ) (-d) + 2                              (C.7)
                  dk                                 d + k2

   Equations (C.5)­(C.7) imply that the right-hand side of (C.4) is

                                                        d(d)
           -2t(k ) T - t (k ) + 2t2 (k ) (-d) +                 + (-k ) .
                                                       d2 + k 2

Substituting (-k ) = 1 - (k ), this simplifies to

                                                          d(d)
                       -2tT (k ) + 2t2 (k ) 1 + (-d) +
                                                         d2 + k 2

The inequality (C.4) is therefore equivalent to

                  2                                      
     T - t (k )       + t2  (-k, -k | (k )) - (-k )2       +k
                                                         k
                                                                       d(d)
                                    2tT (k ) - 2t2 (k ) 1 + (-d) +                   (C.8)
                                                                      d2 + k 2

A sufficient condition for (C.8) is

                       2                                             d(d)
       T - t (k )            +k    2tT (k ) - 2t2 (k ) 1 + (-d) +                .
                           k                                        d2 + k 2

We can rewrite this as

                             d(d)                
  2t2 (k ) 1 + (-d) +        2    2
                                     + t2 (k )2    +k
                            d +k                 k
                                                                   
                               - 2tT  (k )    + k - 2tT (k ) + T 2   + k  0 (C.9)
                                           k                       k



                                           48
The left-hand side is quadratic in t with a unique minimum at
                                           
                                T  (k )    k
                                               + k + T (k )
                                               d(d)               
                       2(k ) 1 + (-d) +        d2 +k2
                                                        + (k )2   k
                                                                      +k

Substituting this into (C.9) and cancelling a T 2 factor, we see that (C.9) holds for
all t if and only if

                           d(d)                               
    2(k ) 1 + (-d) +       2   2
                                 + (k )2   +k                   +k
                          d +k           k                    k
                                                                                          2
                                                                (k )         + k + (k )
                                                                           k

This simplifies to

                                           d(d)         
                  2 (-k ) + (-d) +                        + k - (k )  0 .           (C.10)
                                          d2 + k 2      k

   Set x = d/k so d = xk . Then, (C.10) is equivalent to

                                  x(xk )         1 - x2
       2 k (-k ) + k (-xk ) +                           + k 2 - k 2 (k )  0 .       (C.11)
                                  1 + x2         1 + x2

It will suffice to establish (C.11) for all k > 0 and all x  (0, 1). A sufficient condition
for (C.11) is

                             1 - x2     2   2xk 2 (k )
                  2k (-k )          + k   +            - k 2 (k )  0 .              (C.12)
                             1 + x2          1 + x2

The left-hand side of (C.12) is larger than 2k 3 (-k ) - k 2 (k ), so (C.12) holds if
2k (-k ) - (k )  0.
  Set h(k ) = 2k (-k ) - (k ). Then h (k ) = 2(-k ) - k(k ) and h (k ) = (k 2 -
                                                                         
3)(k ). Thus, h is a decreasing function for k > 3. It is negative at k = 3 and



                                               49
                                                                          
hence negative for all k >   3. This means that h is decreasing for k > 3. The
                             
function h is positive at k = 3 and is equal to 0 at k = , so it is positive for all
                                                                      
k > 3. We have h < 0 for k < 3, so h is concave on the region (0, 3); hence,
                             def
it is positive for all k > k  = inf {x | h(x) > 0}  0.62 and negative for k < k  .
   We have shown that (C.12) holds for k  k  . Consider k < k  . Multiply by
(1 + x2 )/k to write (C.12) as

              2(-k ) 1 - x2 + k 2 (1 + x2 ) - (1 - 2x + x2 )k(k )  0 .           (C.13)

This can be rearranged as

               kh(k ) - 2(-k ) x2 + 2k(k )x + 2(-k ) + kh(k )  0 .               (C.14)

The left-hand side of (C.14) is concave in x when k < k  . It is equal to 4k 2 (-k ) > 0
                                   def
at x = 1, and it is equal to j (k ) = 2(-k ) + kh(k ) at x = 0. A concave function
on (0, 1) that is positive at 0 and at 1 must be positive everywhere on (0, 1), so it
suffices now to show that j (k ) > 0 when k < k  . The function j is decreasing on
(0, k  ), because its derivative is 2h(k ) - (1 + k 2 )(k ). Furthermore, h(k  ) = 0, so
j (k  ) = 2(-k  ) > 0. Hence, j must be positive on (0, k  ).

Proof of Lemma C.1. Consider two standard normals with correlation  defined as
x
~1 = ~1 and x
            ~2 = ~1 +     1 - 2 ~2 where ~1 and ~2 are independent standard normals.




                                          50
We have

                                                          b - ~1
                  (a, b | ) = prob ~1  a, ~2 
                                                           1 - 2
                                                   
                                  a      (b-1 )/    1-2
                             =                            (2 ) d2 (1 ) d1
                                  -   -
                                  a
                                           b - 1
                             =                            (1 ) d1
                                  -            1 - 2

So, using the fact that

                           b - 1
                                  = (1 - 2 )-3/2 (b - 1 ) ,
                           1 -  2



we obtain

                                           a
             (a, b | )                                b - 1
                       = (1 - 2 )-3/2                            (b - 1 )(1 ) d1
                                          -            1 - 2

Also,

                    b - 1                  1       1 (b - 1 )2
                                 (1 ) =      exp -             + 2
                                                                 1
                     1 - 2                2        2   1 - 2

and
                           (b - 1 )2    2     2   (1 - b)2
                                     +  1 = b   +
                             1 - 2                 1 - 2

so
                           b - 1                            1 - b
                                      (1 ) = (b)                       .
                             1-   2                            1 - 2



                                               51
Hence,

                                                  a
              (a, b | )                                                 1 - b
                        = (1 - 2 )-3/2 (b)            (b - 1 )                       d1
                                                -                        1 - 2


Finally, making the change of variables u = (1 - b)/                1 - 2 , we obtain

                                                                        
             a                                                 (a-b)/      1-2
                             1 - b                         2
                 (b - 1 )               d1 = (1 -  )                             -u(u) du
         -                    1 - 2                            -

                                                                   a - b
                                             = (1 - 2 )                          .
                                                                    1 - 2

Therefore,
                       (a, b | )         1                       a - b
                                 =                · (b)                      .
                                        1 - 2                    1 - 2

Also, we have
                                                      b - a
                              (a, b | ) =                         (a)
                            a                          1 - 2

and
                                                      a - b
                              (a, b | ) =                        (b) .
                            b                         1 - 2

Substituting a = -k and b = -k , we obtain

                                b - a        a - b
                                         =                 = -d .
                                 1 - 2          1 - 2

Furthermore,
                                                       2dk
                                  1 - (k )2 =                ,
                                                      d2+ k2



                                             52
and
                                         4d2 k
                             (k ) =                ,
                                      (d2 + k 2 )2

so
                              (k )                 2d
                                          =             .
                             1-   (k )2       d2   + k2

Therefore,

       d                                               1
          (-k, -k ) | (k )) = 2(-d)(-k ) +       · (-k ) (-d)  (k )
       dk                                  1 - 2
                                         2d
                         = 2(-d)(k ) + 2      (d)(k )
                                       d + k2
                                         d(d)
                         = 2(k ) (-d) + 2        .
                                        d + k2




                                      53
References

Acharya, Viral V., Peter DeMarzo, and Ilan Kremer, 2011, Endogenous information
  flows and the clustering of announcements, American Economic Review 101, 2955­
  2979.

Ball, Ray, and S.P. Kothari, 1991, Security returns around earnings announcements,
  The Accounting Review 66, 718­738.

Beaver, William H., 1968, The information content of annual earnings announce-
  ments, Journal of Accounting Research 6, 67­92.

Ben-Rephael, Azi, Bruce I. Carlin, Zhi Da, and Ryan Israelsen, 2020, Information
  consumption and asset pricing, Journal of Finance .

Carlin, Bruce I., Shaun W. Davies, and Andrew Iannaccone, 2012, Competition,
  comparative performance, and market transparency, American Economic Journal:
  Microeconomics 4, 202­237.

Cohen, Daniel A., Aiyesha Dey, Thomas Z. Lys, and Shyam V. Sunder, 2007, Earn-
  ings announcement premia and the limits to arbitrage, Journal of Accounting and
  Economics 43, 153­180.

Dye, Ronald A., 1985, Disclosure of nonproprietary information, Journal of
  Accounting Research 23, 123­145.

Grossman, Sanford J., 1981, The informational role of warranties and private disclo-
  sure about product quality, Journal of Law and Economics 24, 461­483.


                                        54
Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver D. Hart, 1980, Disclosure laws and takeover bids,
  Journal of Finance 35, 323­334.

Jung, Woon-Oh, and Young K. Kwon, 1988, Disclosure when the market is unsure of
  information endowment of managers, Journal of Accounting Research 26, 146­153.

Matthews, Steven, and Andrew Postlewaite, 1985, Quality testing and disclosure,
  RAND Journal of Economics 16, 328­340.

Milgrom, Paul, 1981, Good news and bad news: Representation theorems and ap-
  plications, Bell Journal of Economics 12, 380­391.

Rosenbaum, S., 1961, Moments of a truncated bivariate normal distribution, Journal
  of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B 23, 405­408.

Ross, Stephen A., 1989, Information and volatility: The no-arbitrage martingale
  approach to timing and resolution irrelevancy, Journal of Finance 44, 1­17.

Savor, Pavel, and Mungo Wilson, 2016, Earnings announcements and systematic
  risk, Journal of Finance 71, 83­138.

Shin, Hyun S., 2003, Disclosures and asset returns, Econometrica 71, 105­133.




                                         55
