                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      RECIPES AND ECONOMIC GROWTH:
             A COMBINATORIAL MARCH DOWN AN EXPONENTIAL TAIL

                                       Charles I. Jones

                                     Working Paper 28340
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28340


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2021




I am grateful to Daron Acemoglu, Pablo Azar, Sebastian Di Tella, Guido Imbens, Pete Klenow,
Sam Kortum, Erzo Luttmer, Ben Moll, Chris Tonetti, and seminar participants at the Harvard
Growth Lab, the LSE, the Minneapolis Fed, Stanford, and UAB Barcelona for helpful discussions
and comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Charles I. Jones. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Recipes and Economic Growth: A Combinatorial March Down an Exponential Tail
Charles I. Jones
NBER Working Paper No. 28340
January 2021
JEL No. O40

                                        ABSTRACT

New ideas are often combinations of existing goods or ideas, a point emphasized by Romer
(1993) and Weitzman (1998). A separate literature highlights the links between exponential
growth and Pareto distributions: Gabaix (1999) shows how exponential growth generates Pareto
distributions, while Kortum (1997) shows how Pareto distributions generate exponential growth.
But this raises a "chicken and egg" problem: which came first, the exponential growth or the
Pareto distribution? And regardless, what happened to the Romer and Weitzman insight that
combinatorics should be important? This paper answers these questions by demonstrating that
combinatorial growth in the number of draws from standard thin-tailed distributions leads to
exponential economic growth; no Pareto assumption is required. More generally, it provides a
theorem linking the behavior of the max extreme value to the number of draws and the shape of
the tail for any continuous probability distribution.


Charles I. Jones
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305-4800
and NBER
chad.jones@stanford.edu
                          RECIPES AND ECONOMIC GROWTH                                1


1. Introduction

It has long been appreciated that new ideas are often combinations of existing goods or
ideas. Gutenberg's printing press was a combination of movable type, paper, ink, met-
allurgical advances, and a wine press. State-of-the-art photolithographic machines for
making semiconductors weigh 180 tons and combine inputs from 5000 suppliers, in-
cluding robotic arms and mirrors of unimaginable smoothness (The Economist, 2020).
Romer (1993) observes that ingredients from a children's chemistry set can create more
distinct combinations than there are atoms in the universe. Building on this insight,
Weitzman (1998) constructs a growth model in which new ideas are combinations of
old ideas. Because combinatorial growth is so fast, however, he finds that growth is
constrained by our limitations in processing an exploding number of ideas, and the
combinatorics plays essentially no formal role in determining the growth rate: there
are so many potential ideas that the number is not a constraint. It is somewhat dis-
appointing and puzzling that the combinatorial process does not play a more central
role.
   A separate literature highlights the links between exponential growth and Pareto
distributions. Gabaix (1999), Luttmer (2007), and Jones and Kim (2018) emphasize that
exponential growth, tweaked appropriately, can generate a Pareto distribution for city
sizes, firm employment, or incomes. Conversely, Kortum (1997) shows that Pareto dis-
tributions are key to exponential growth: if productivity is the maximum over a number
of draws from a distribution (you use only the best idea), then exponential growth in
productivity in his paper requires that the number of draws grows exponentially and
that the distribution being drawn from is Pareto, at least in the upper tail. Exponential
growth and Pareto distributions, then, seem to be two sides of the same coin.
   But this leads to a "chicken and egg" problem: which came first, the exponential
growth or the Pareto distribution? And regardless, what happened to the Romer and
Weitzman insight that combinatorics should be central to understanding growth?
   This paper answers these questions by combining the insights of Kortum (1997)
and Weitzman (1998). As in Kortum, we think of ideas as draws from some probability
distribution. Building on Weitzman, we highlight a crucial role for combinatorics.
   To see the insight, suppose ideas are combinations of existing ingredients, much
like a recipe. Each recipe has a productivity that is a draw from a probability dis-
   2                                   CHARLES I. JONES



tribution. As in Romer and Weitzman, the number of combinations we can create
from existing ingredients is so astronomically large as to be essentially infinite, and we
are limited by our ability to process these combinations. Let Nt denote the number
of ingredients whose recipes have been evaluated as of date t. In other words, our
"cookbook" includes all the possible recipes that can be formed from Nt ingredients: if
each ingredient can either be included or excluded from a recipe, a total of 2Nt recipes
are in the cookbook. Finally, research consists of adding new recipes to the cookbook
-- i.e. evaluating them and learning their productivities. In particular, suppose that
researchers evaluate the recipes that can be made from new ingredients in such a way
that Nt grows exponentially. We call a setup with 2Nt recipes with exponential growth
in the number of ingredients combinatorial growth.
   One key result in the paper is this: combinatorial expansion is so fast that draw-
ing from a conventional thin-tailed distribution -- such as the normal distribution --
generates exponential growth in the productivity of the best recipe in the cookbook.
Combinatorics and thin tails lead to exponential growth.
   The way we derive this result leads to additional insights. For example, let K denote
the cumulative number of draws (e.g. the number of recipes in the cookbook) and
let ZK be max of the K draws. Let F ¯ (x) denote the probability that a draw has a
productivity higher than x -- the complement of the cdf -- so that it characterizes the
search distribution. Then a key condition derived below relates the rise in ZK to the
number of draws and to the search distribution: ZK increases asymptotically so as to
            ¯ (ZK ). That is, given a time path for the number of draws Kt , the maximum
stabilize K F
                                                                              ¯ (ZKt )
productivity marches down the upper tail of the distribution so as to make Kt F
stationary. Kortum (1997) can be viewed in this context: exponential growth in the max
ZK is achieved by an exponentially growing number of draws K from a Pareto tail in
¯ (·). Alternatively, with thinner tailed distributions like the normal or the exponential,
F
combinatorial growth in K is required to get exponential growth in the max. Even the
Romer (1990) model can be viewed in this light: linear growth in K requires a log-Pareto
tail for the search distribution. This same logic can essentially be applied to any setup:
if you want exponential growth in ZK from a particular search distribution F     ¯ (·), then
                                                                               ¯ (ZK ).
you need the rate at which you take draws from the distribution to stabilize K F
   This perspective suggests a resolution of the "chicken and egg" problem mentioned
                               RECIPES AND ECONOMIC GROWTH                                         3


above: exponential growth is the primitive and comes first. Economic growth does not
require a Pareto assumption but can be obtained from combinatorial draws from stan-
dard thin-tailed distributions. Then, through the logic suggested by Gabaix (1999) and
Luttmer (2007), exponential growth can generate the Pareto distributions we observe.1
       Section 2 below explains these basic insights in a simple setting, while Section 3 em-
beds the setup in a full growth model. Section 4 connects our results with the literature
on extreme value theory and shows how the results generalize to different distributions.
In Section 5, we see that the combinatorial case has an important empirical prediction
that distinguishes it from other cases: in the combinatorial setup, the number of "good"
new ideas grows exponentially over time. By contrast, Kortum (1997) predicts that
the flow of superior new ideas should be constant, even as the number of researchers
grows. Empirically, the flow of annual U.S. patents exhibits rapid growth in recent
decades, supporting the prediction of the combinatorial model. We defer a further
review of the literature to the end of the paper in Section 6; several of the other impor-
tant inspirations for this project -- especially Acemoglu and Azar (2020) -- are easier to
discuss after we've laid out our framework.



2. Combining Weitzman and Kortum

As in Romer (1993), suppose there are a huge number of ingredients in the world that
can be combined into ideas. This number is presumably finite, but Romer's point was
that it is so large that the number of potential combinations is effectively infinite. Our
cookbook, C , is the set of all recipes we've evaluated as of some point in time. Let K
denote the number of recipes in the cookbook.
       Each recipe is an idea, and the idea can be good or bad or somewhere in between.
In one of the early seminars in which Paul Romer discussed these combinatorial cal-
culations, George Akerlof is said to have remarked, "Yes the number of possible com-
binations is huge, but aren't most of them like chicken ice cream!" Suppose the value
(productivity) associated with each recipe is an independent draw from some distribu-
tion. In particular, let zc denote the value of recipe c and let F (x) be the cumulative
   1
    Other resolutions to the "chicken and egg" problem are possible, of course: any theory of exponential
growth that doesn't rely on Pareto distributions can qualify, such as Aghion and Howitt (1992) or Luttmer
(2015). What is new here is explaining how to do this in the class of models that involves marching down
the tail of some probability distribution.
   4                                   CHARLES I. JONES



distribution function for each independent zc . The only condition we make on F (x) is
that it is continuous and strictly increasing.
   Now assume that we are interested in only the best recipe in our cookbook. That
is, different ideas have different productivities, zc , and we use the idea with the highest
productivity, similar in spirit to Kortum (1997). Let ZK  max zc where c = 1, ..., K . Be-
cause we care about the best idea, it is convenient to define the tail probability (some-
times called the survival function):

                                            ¯ ( x)  1 - F ( x) .
                             Pr [ zc  x ] = F                                            (1)


   From a growth perspective, the question we are interested in is this: How does the
productivity associated with the best idea, ZK , change as the number of recipes in the
cookbook, K , increases over time? And in particular, under what conditions can we get
exponential growth in ZK ?
   To answer these questions, consider the distribution of the maximum productiv-
ity, ZK , if we have taken K draws from the distribution F (x). Because the draws are
independent,


                      Pr [ ZK  x ] = Pr [ z1  x, z2  x, . . . , zK  x ]

                                   = F ( x) K
                                          ¯ (x))K .
                                   = (1 - F                                              (2)


If we take more and more draws from the distribution over time so that K gets larger,
then obviously F (x)K shrinks. To get a stable distribution, we need to "normalize" the
max by some function of K , analogous to how in the central limit theorem we multiply
the mean by the square root of the number of observations to get a stable distribution.
                                       ¯ (x) on the right side of (2) with something that
Mechanically, we need to "replace" the F
depends on 1/K and then take the limit as K goes to infinity so that the exponential
function appears.
   The following theorem provides a general result that will be useful in our growth
application but may be useful more broadly as well.
                          RECIPES AND ECONOMIC GROWTH                               5


Theorem 1 (A simple extreme value result). Let ZK denote the maximum value from K
independent draws from a distribution with a strictly decreasing and continuous tail cdf
F¯ (x). Then


                                    ¯ (ZK )  m
                           lim Pr K F               = e -m .                            (3)
                          K 



Proof. Given that ZK is the max over K i.i.d. draws, we have

                                                  ¯ (x))K .
                              Pr [ ZK  x ] = (1 - F                                     (4)

          ¯ (ZK ) denote a new random variable. Then
Let MK  K F


                         Pr [ MK  m ] = Pr K F¯ (ZK )  m

                                           ¯ (ZK )  m
                                      = Pr F
                                                      K
                                                  ¯ -1 m
                                      = Pr ZK  F
                                                        K
                                             m K
                                      = 1-
                                             K

                                              ¯ (x) is a strictly decreasing and con-
where the penultimate step uses the fact that F
tinuous function and the last step uses the result from (4). The fact that limK  (1 -
m/K )K = e-m proves the result.                                                     QED

   Let's pause here to notice what is happening in Theorem 1. We have a new random
            ¯ (ZK ). As K goes to infinity, ZK -- the max over K draws from the distri-
variable, K F
                                ¯ (ZK ) -- the probability the next draw exceeds ZK --
bution -- is getting larger. So F
is shrinking toward zero as we march down the tail of the distribution. Multiplying by
                                                           ¯ (ZK ) that is asymptotically
K raises the value away from zero, and it is the product K F
stationary. Theorem 1 says that under very weak conditions -- basically that the under-
lying distribution we draw from is continuous and monotone -- K F  ¯ (ZK ) converges in
distribution to a standard exponential distribution.
   A few remarks about this theorem are helpful. First, for using the theorem, it is
convenient to note that the result can be written as

                                   ¯ (ZK ) =  + op (1)
                                  KF                                                    (5)
      6                                  CHARLES I. JONES



where  is an exponential random variable with a mean equal to one. This version
helps make apparent the sense in which the increases in K and ZK offset in a way that
                                                       ¯ (· ).
is mediated by the tail of the underlying distribution F
      Second, nothing in the theorem requires that the distribution be unbounded. For
example, the theorem applies to the uniform distribution as well: even though the max
is bounded, F¯ (ZK ) is falling to zero, and blowing this up by the factor K leads to an
exponential distribution for the product.
      Finally, an alternative version of Theorem 1 is presented in Section 3 that uses a
Poisson assumption as in Kortum (1997) to derive the result at each point in time with-
out needing to take the limit as t goes to infinity.
      Results related to Theorem 1 are of course known in the mathematical statistics lit-
                                                                                ¨
erature. It is closely related to Proposition 3.1.1 in Embrechts, Mikosch and Kluppelberg
(1997). Galambos (1978, Chapter 4) develops a "weak law of large numbers" and a
"strong law of large numbers" for extreme values; some of the results below will fit this
characterization.2 However, the tight link between the number of draws, the shape of
the tail, and the way the maximum increases is not emphasized in these treatments.
More generally, I discuss the result's relationship with standard extreme value theory in
Section 4.
    The result in (3) means that K F ¯ (ZK ) is asymptotically stationary. Since ZK and K
                                                                ¯ (·) decays tells us how the
are both rising, the rate at which the tail of the distribution F
rates of increase of ZK and K are related. We now apply this logic to growth models,
first as in Kortum (1997) and then in a new way involving combinatorics.



2.1 Kortum (1997)

Kortum (1997) showed that one way to get exponential growth in productivity ZK in a
setup similar to this is to assume that F (x) is a Pareto distribution, at least in the upper
tail, and to have K grow exponentially -- for example because of population growth in
the number of researchers.
    To see how this works, let F (x) = 1 - x- so that F ¯ (x) = x- , which is a Pareto
                                                                         ¯ (ZK ) = KZ -
distribution where a higher  means a thinner upper tail. In this case, K F                    K

  2
   But not all: for example, the Kortum (1997) result and the Romer (1990) example at the end are
convergence in distribution results, not convergence in probability results.
                           RECIPES AND ECONOMIC GROWTH                             7


and Theorem 1 gives

                                   ¯ (ZK ) =  + op (1)
                                  KF
                                       -
                                     KZK =  + op (1)
                                        K
                                         
                                             =  + op (1)
                                        ZK




and therefore
                                 ZK
                                      = ( + op (1))-1/ .                               (6)
                                 K 1/
   In words, to get a stable distribution for the max over K draws from a Pareto dis-
tribution, we divide the max ZK by K 1/ . This scaled-down max then is distributed
asymptotically just like ~  -1/ , which has a Fr´
                                                echet distribution. For K large,


                                      ZK  K 1/ ~.


If the number of draws K grows exponentially at rate gK (say because each researcher
gets one draw per period and there is population growth), then the growth rate of
productivity ZK asymptotically averages to

                                               gK
                                        gZ =      .                                    (7)
                                                

It equals the growth rate of the number of draws deflated by  , the rate at which good
ideas are getting harder to find. This is the Kortum (1997) result.


2.2 Weitzman meets Kortum

The Kortum result is beautiful, and it may be the way the world works. However, there
are two features that are slightly uncomfortable. First, does the real world's idea dis-
tribution have a Pareto upper tail? Maybe. But given the large literature on generating
Pareto distributions from exponential growth, it is slightly uncomfortable to have to
assume an underlying Pareto distribution to get economy-wide growth. Can we do
without this assumption?
   Second, the combinatorics of ideas that Romer (1993) and Weitzman (1998) empha-
   8                                  CHARLES I. JONES



sized is entirely missing from this structure. What we show next is that addressing these
two concerns together reveals an elegant alternative.
   Let's change the Kortum setup in two ways. First, rather than drawing from a distri-
bution with a Pareto upper tail, we draw from a standard thin-tailed distribution, such
as the normal or exponential. To illustrate the logic, we begin with the exponential
                                      ¯ (x) = e-x .
distribution: F (x) = 1 - e-x so that F
   Second, let's assume that our cookbook consists of all recipes that come from com-
bining N ingredients. Each ingredient can either be included or excluded from a recipe,
so there are a total of K = 2N recipes that can be made from N ingredients. (Recall
             N   N
that 2N =    k=0 k   , the total number of combinations.) At a given point in time, the
economy picks from K = 2N different combinations and chooses the recipe that is
best. We say K exhibits combinatorial growth if K = 2N and N itself grows at a constant
exponential rate.
                                         ¯ (x) = e-x gives
   Applying Theorem 1 to this setup with F

                              ¯ (ZK ) =  + op (1)
                             KF

                              Ke-ZK =  + op (1)

                       log K - ZK = log( + op (1))
                                     1
                              ZK = [log K - log( + op (1))]
                                     
                              ZK     1    log( + op (1))
                                   =   1-
                             log K            log K

and therefore
                                   ZK    p
                                        - Constant                                    (8)
                                  log K

where here and later we will follow the convention that "Constant" denotes an unim-
portant positive constant that may change across equations. With draws from an expo-
nential distribution, the max grows asymptotically with the natural log of the number
of draws, a well-known result.
   If the number of draws K were to grow exponentially at rate gK , say because of
population growth in the number of researchers, then productivity would grow linearly
rather than exponentially, and the exponential growth rate would converge to zero, a
point noted by Kortum (1997).
                           RECIPES AND ECONOMIC GROWTH                                 9


   A key insight in this paper is that if the number of draws is combinatorial instead,
exponential growth is restored. In particular if K = 2N and N grows exponentially at
rate gN , then
                               ZK      ZK      p
                                    =         - Constant                                   (9)
                              log K   N log 2
and the asymptotic growth rate of productivity in this economy will equal


                                     gZ = glog K = gN .                                (10)


Productivity growth is asymptotically equal to the growth rate of the number of ingre-
dients whose recipes have been evaluated.
   To summarize, the first new growth result is this: if recipes are combinations of N
ingredients, and if the number of ingredients processed by the economy grows expo-
nentially over time, then we no longer require draws from a thick-tailed Pareto distribu-
tion. Combinatorial expansion is so fast that we get enough draws from the thin-tailed
exponential distribution to generate exponential growth in productivity.


2.3 The Weibull Distribution

A convenient shortcut allows us to generalize this result to other distributions. For now,
we show how it generalizes to the Weibull distribution, as this will be particularly useful.
In Section 4, we will derive a necessary and sufficient condition for combinatorial draws
to generate exponential growth, precisely characterizing the generality.
   Equation (8) states that the max from K draws of an exponential, divided by log K ,
converges in probability to a constant. Now, consider the Weibull distribution, F (x) =
        
1 - e-x and define y = x . If x is distributed as Weibull, then y is exponentially
distributed. We can combine this change of variables with the scaling result for an
exponential:

                                       max y p
                                             - Constant
                                       log K
                                      max x p
                                            - Constant
                                      log K
                                      max x    p
                                              - Constant                               (11)
                                   (log K )1/
   10                                 CHARLES I. JONES



That is, the maximum over K draws from a Weibull distribution grows asymptotically as
(log K )1/ . Assuming K = 2N , the max grows with N 1/ , and if N grows exponentially
at rate gN , the growth rate of the max is asymptotically given by

                                       weibull     gN
                                      gZ       =                                    (12)
                                                    

Intuitively, a higher value of  means a thinner tail of the Weibull distribution -- the
exponential tail decays more rapidly. The growth rate of the max is the growth rate of
the number of ingredients deflated by  , the rate at which ideas are getting harder to
find. The Weibull distribution is to combinatorial growth what the Pareto distribution
was to an exponentially growing number of draws in Kortum (1997).




3. Growth Model

This section embeds the extreme value logic provided above into a basic growth model.
The setup is similar to Kortum (1997) except that we use a thin-tailed search distribu-
tion and combinatorial growth in the number of draws.




3.1 A Poisson Version of Theorem 1

We first state a corollary to Theorem 1 that uses a Poisson assumption to get the extreme
value result for all t rather than as an asymptotic result. I am grateful to Sam Kortum
for suggesting it and providing a derivation.


Corollary 1 (Poisson version of Theorem 1). Let ZK denote the maximum over P in-
dependent draws from a distribution with a strictly decreasing and continuous tail cdf
¯ (x) and suppose P is distributed as Poisson with parameter K . Then
F

                                    ¯ (ZK )  m = e-m .
                               Pr K F                                               (13)

                 ¯ (ZK ) denote a new random variable, conditional on P . Given that
Proof. Let MP  K F
ZK is the max over P i.i.d. draws, exactly the same steps used in proving Theorem 1
                           RECIPES AND ECONOMIC GROWTH                                  11


gives

                                                              m      P
                                Pr [ MP  m ] = 1 -
                                                              K

   Now we use the Poisson assumption to get the unconditional distribution:

                                         
                    ¯ (ZK )  m =
               Pr K F                          Pr [ MP  m ] · Pr [ P | K ]
                                        P =0
                                         
                                                      m   P       e -K K P
                                    =           1-            ·
                                                      K              P!
                                        P =0
                                                
                                         -m           e-K (1-m/K ) (K (1 - m/K ))P
                                    =e
                                                                    P!
                                               P =0
                                         -m
                                    =e


where the last step uses the fact that the summation term is just the probability that
any number of events occurs for a Poisson distribution with parameter K (1 - m/K ),
i.e., the value of the CDF at infinity which is equal to one.                            QED

   The advantage of this Poisson version is that it applies at each point in time, not
just asymptotically. Therefore we can average over a continuum of sectors to get rid of
the randomness and then use continuous time methods for the growth theory, which
simplifies the presentation and derivation of several of the later results.


3.2 The Environment

The economic environment for the full growth model is shown in Table 1. The setup
embeds combinatorial draws from a Weibull distribution into a simple continous-time
growth framework.
   Aggregate output is a CES combination of a unit measure of varieties, as in equa-
tion (14). The production of each variety is given by (15). Each variety is produced
using a (typically different) recipe from the cookbook. A recipe uses Mit ingredients that
combine in a CES fashion, and one unit of each ingredient can be produced with one
                                     -1/
worker, as in equation (16). The Mit           term in (15) is a Benassy (1996)-type term that
neutralizes the standard love-of-variety effect, so that recipes that use more ingredients
are neither better nor worse inherently. Instead, the productivity of a recipe is captured
 12                                 CHARLES I. JONES




                         Table 1: The Economic Environment


                                                                    
                                                1       -1          -1
                                                        
Aggregate output                  Yt =               Yit     di               with  > 1                 (14)
                                            0

                                                                                       
                                                                  Mit                  -1
                                                                              -1
                                                -1
Variety i output                  Yit =   ZKit Mit                            
                                                                         xijt di            with  > 1   (15)
                                                                  j =1


Production of ingredients         xijt = Lijt                                                           (16)

Best recipe                       ZKit = max zic                                                        (17)
                                                 c

                                                                     
Weibull distribution of zic       zic  F (x) = 1 - e-x                                                  (18)

Number of ingredients evaluated   N t = R N  ,  < 1                                                     (19)
                                         t t


Cookbook (Poisson parameter)      Kt = 2Nt                                                              (20)

                                          Mi                             1
Resource constraint: workers      Lit =          Lijt and                    Lit di = Lyt               (21)
                                          j =1                       0


Resource constraint: R&D          Rt + Lyt = Lt                                                         (22)

Population growth (exogenous)     Lt = L0 egL t                                                         (23)
                             RECIPES AND ECONOMIC GROWTH                           13


by its productivity index, zic .
   We assume the productivity of recipes in the cookbook is revealed as a Poisson
process. In particular, the flow of recipes that are learned between date s and date t
is Poisson with parameter Kt - Ks . Because of the additivity of the Poisson process,
the total number of recipes in the cookbook as of date t is Poisson with parameter
Kt = 2Nt . A new recipe applies to one of the unit measure of varieties, with equal
probability. Each recipe has a productivity that is i.i.d. with z  F (z ). For now, we
assume the draws are from a Weibull distribution; in the next section, we will explain
how this generalizes. One way to think about the randomness of the Poisson process
versus the combinatorics associated with 2N is that occasionally a recipe can apply to
more than one variety or can be completely useless, and that is the randomness that
allows the cookbook to contain more or fewer than 2Nt recipes precisely at date t.
   The Poisson parameter governing the evolution of recipes in the cookbook follows
a combinatorial growth process, as defined earlier. That is, Kt = 2Nt , where Nt will
(eventually) grow at a constant exponential rate. We generalize it slightly to incorporate
                                               t = R N  is the flow of new ingredients
two possible spillovers. With Rt researchers, N       t   t

whose recipes get evaluated each period, where  > 0 and  < 1 as in Jones (1995). The
parameter  allows for "stepping on toes" effects such as duplication, for example if
 < 1. The parameter  allows for intertemporal spillovers: as researchers evaluate
more ingredients over time, it can get easier via "standing on shoulders" effects ( > 0)
or possibly harder because of "fishing out" effects ( < 0).
   The remainder of Table 1 gives the resource constraints for the economy. In short,
the sum of all the workers and the researchers is equal to the total population, Lt . And
there is exponential population growth at a constant rate gL .



Does the idea distribution shift out over time? The model is built around the as-
                                                   ¯ (x) that determines the productivity
sumption that there is a single fixed distribution F
of all recipes. At some philosophical level, this is arguably a plausible assumption: the
space of past, current, and future technologies is a set of recipes and each technology is
associated with some productivity. Let F¯ (x) be the distribution of these productivities.
   When one asks about a shifting distribution, what one really has in mind is that
ideas are discovered in some order: it would have been inconceivable that the smart-
   14                                        CHARLES I. JONES



phone was discovered before telephones, radio, and semiconductors. This insight is
captured in the current framework through the processing of ingredients. Imagine
ingredients are ordered in such a way that the recipes for the telephone and radio get
evaluated before the recipe for the smartphone. In that sense, the framework we've
laid out incorporates the notion that the internet and television could not have been
discovered before electricity.


3.3 Solving the Model

To keep things simple, we consider the allocation that maximizes Yt at each point in
time with a fixed rule-of-thumb allocation of people between research and working:
Rt = s
     ¯Lt .
   The symmetry in equations (15) and (16) imply that it is efficient to use the same
quantity of each ingredient, so that

                                                               Lit
                                           xijt = xit =            .
                                                               Mit

Subsituting this into the production function in (15) gives


                                            Yit = ZKit Lit .                            (24)


   Given a number of workers Lyt = (1 - s
                                        ¯)Lt , the allocation that maximizes Yt solves

                                                                                
                                                  1                  -1         -1
                               max Yt =               (ZKit Lit )         di            (25)
                               {Lit }         0

              1
subject to   0 Lit di   = Lyt . The solution to this standard CES problem is given by


                                        Yt = ZKt (1 - s
                                                      ¯)Lt where                        (26)
                                                                     1
                                                      1              -1
                                                            -1
                                    ZKt =                 ZKit di                       (27)
                                                  0


   Turning to the research side of the model,

                                        Nt  Rt     sLt )
                                                  (¯
                                           = 1- =        .
                                        Nt  Nt    Nt1-
                           RECIPES AND ECONOMIC GROWTH                             15


This stable differential equation implies a constant asymptotic growth rate for N . In
that case, the ratio on the right-hand side of the equation must be constant, which
implies that the numerator and denominator grow at the same rate. Therefore

                                                 Nt   gL
                                      gN  lim       =    .                          (28)
                                               t Nt   1-

Given the combinatorial growth process, we then have

                                                         gL
                                       glog K = gN =
                                                         1-

and therefore Kt goes to infinity as a double exponential process.
   Combining Corollary 1 with the Weibull distribution F  ¯ (x) = e-x gives


                             ¯ (ZKi ) = 
                            KF
                                        
                              Ke-ZKi = 
                               
                      log K - ZKi = log 

                               ZKi = (log K - log )1/
                                                                            1/
                                                                    log 
                               ZKi = (log K )1/ 1 -
                                                                   log K

Now we can integrate across the different sectors -- and change the variable of integra-
tion to  -- to get aggregate productivity, as in equation (27):

                                                 1
                                 1               -1
                                       -1
                   ZKt =             ZKit di
                             0
                                                                              1
                                                                -1            -1
                                                        log     
                        = (log K )1/                1-               dG()
                                                       log K

                                                          h( K )
                                      1/
                        = (log K )         h( K )


where G() is the cdf of a standard exponential and h(K ) is a particular moment of
this distribution that depends on K . More importantly, notice that h(K ) converges to a
   16                                 CHARLES I. JONES



constant as K goes to infinity and therefore

                                       Kt
                                      Z     glog K   gN
                            gZ  lim       =        =
                                   K  ZKt             

and
                                             gN   1 gL
                                 gy = gZ =      =      .                                (29)
                                                  1-

   As was suggested by the basic statistical model, we have a setting where output
per person, y  Y /L, grows exponentially. Superior new ideas get increasingly hard
to find over time, at a rate that depends on  , the parameter governing the thinness
of the tail of the Weibull distribution. But combinatorial growth in the number of
recipes, driven by population growth in the number of researchers, offsets the thinness
of the tail and produces exponential growth in incomes. Interestingly, this formulation
simultaneously allows for both "ideas get harder to find" via  and "standing on the
shoulders of giants" via  > 0.



4. Generalizing to other distributions

In the previous sections, we characterized the asymptotic growth rate of ZK when the
underlying distribution was Pareto, exponential, or Weibull. In this section, we explain
how these results generalize.


4.1 Relationship with extreme value theory

The classic results in extreme value theory take the following form: Let aK > 0 and bK
                                                         ZK -bK
be normalizing sequences that depend only on K . If        aK     converges in distribution,
then it converges to one of three types, two of which are the Fr´
                                                                echet and the Gumbel
mentioned above. Moreover, this convergence occurs if and only if the tail of the dis-
tribution behaves in particular ways. In other words, the theorem requires strong as-
sumptions on the underlying F (x). This featured prominently in Kortum (1997) and is
given textbook treatment by Galambos (1978), Johnson, Kotz and Balakrishnan (1995),
                         ¨
Embrechts, Mikosch and Kluppelberg (1997), de Haan and Ferreira (2006), and Resnick
(2008).
                                    ¯ (ZK ) converges in distribution to an exponential,
   Interestingly, the result that K F
                              RECIPES AND ECONOMIC GROWTH                                     17


as shown in Theorem 1, does not require any such assumptions. In particular, all we
assumed essentially is that the distribution function is continuous and invertible.
   At some level, of course, this is not surprising: we are applying the distribution
         ¯ itself to the max, and this "undoes" the role played by the distribution in the
function F
convergence. This logic leads to a tighter intuition. Because ZK is a random variable,
¯ (ZK ) is also a random variable. Importantly, recall that F
F                                                           ¯ (x) is uniformly distributed
on (0, 1) when x is a continuously-distributed random variable, and this is true regard-
less of the particular distribution. Since ZK is the max from F (x) and since F   ¯ (x) is
                       ¯ (ZK ) is the minimum over K draws from a U (0, 1). In this
a decreasing function, F
interpretation, equation (3) of Theorem 1 is an example of the result that K times the
minimum of K draws from a U (0, 1) is asymptotically distributed as an exponential.
This result is well-known in statistics and is just one special case of the extreme value
                                                           ¯ (ZK ) is of particular interest:
theorem.3 What is novel here is that the special case of K F
the fact that this random variable is asymptotically stationary has broad implications
for how the max ZK increases with K .


4.2 A General Condition for Combinatorial Growth

Up to this point, we have shown that the exponential and Weibull distributions lead
combinatorial growth in the number of draws to produce exponential growth in the
max extreme value. In this section and the next, we explain how this results generalizes.
We begin by characterizing the set of distributions such that this is true.




  3
   In particular, it leads to the third type of extreme value distribution, the Weibull, of which the
exponential distribution is a special case.
       18                                      CHARLES I. JONES



Theorem 2 (A general condition for combinatorial growth). Consider the growth model
of Section 3 but with zi  F (z ) as a general continuous and unbounded distribution,
where F (·) is monotone and differentiable. Let  (x) denote the elasticity of the tail cdf
                              ¯ (x)
¯ (x); that is,  (x)  - d log F
F                                   . Then
                              d log x


                                                 Kt
                                                Z     gN
                                              lim   =                                                    (30)
                                              t ZKt    
if and only if
                                               ( x)
                                        lim         = Constant > 0                                       (31)
                                        x     x
for some  > 0.

Proof. See Appendix A.2.                                                                               QED


       It has long been appreciated that constant exponential growth requires power func-
tions, and this result shows that combinatorial growth is no different. The set of distri-
butions that lead to constant exponential growth in the max when draws are combina-
torial is the set for which the elasticity of the tail cdf is asymptotically a power function.
       Some remarks and examples are helpful to understand this result. First, consider
the Kortum (1997) result where the upper tail must be equivalent to a Pareto distribu-
                  ¯ (x) = x- so  (x) = ; the elasticity itself is constant. Combinatorial
tion. For Pareto, F
growth moves the constant elasticity "down a log-derivative." For example, consider
                              ¯ (x) = e-x . In this case, it is straightforward to show
the Weibull distribution with F
that  (x) = x ; the exponential distribution is the same with  = 1.
                                                                                      ¯ ( x) =
       Another useful example is the standard normal distribution, which has tail cdf F
             x   -u2 /2 du.
1-     1
       2     - e              The similarity between the normal and the Weibull with  = 2
                                                                             2
is suggested by the fact that the tail of a normal falls with e-x and the tail of a Weibull
                 
falls with e-x . In fact,  (x) behaves like x2 asymptotically in the normal case, just like
the Weibull with  = 2. Therefore, the max over K draws from a normal rises with
(log K )1/2 , and combinatorial draws from a normal distribution lead to exponential
growth at the rate gN /2.4
                                                                ¯ (x) = x e-x . In this
       Next, consider a "generalized Weibull" distribution with F
                                                        2                                       
   4
     For the standard normal distribution,  (x) = xe-x /2 /F ¯ (x) (where we are ignoring the 1/ 2 since it
                                                   2
                                                          ¯ (x)) and one use of L'Hopital's rule verifies that
does not affect the elasticity). Then  (x)/x2 = e-x /2 /(xF
this has a constant limit as x  . (The result uses the fact that  (x)   for the normal.)
                           RECIPES AND ECONOMIC GROWTH                              19


case,  (x) = x -  , which is asymptotically a power function with parameter  once
                                                ¯ (x) = e-(x +x ) where  >  . It is
again. Or generalizing a different way, suppose F
straightforward to show that the asymptotic power exponent is again just  .
   Familiar examples of distributions in this class include the normal, the exponential,
the Weibull, the Gumbel, the logistic, and the gamma distributions. Additional less
familiar examples are provided in the next section.
   One final remark about Theorem 2 is helpful in putting the result into context. There
is nothing essential about the number 2 in the expression K = 2N for generating the
result (though it is of course valuable for the combinatorial interpretation). Instead, for
                                                           nt
example, we could make the base e itself so that Kt = ee and the tail of F    ¯ continues
                   
                                                                       ¯ looks like
to behave like e-x . Compare this to Kortum (1997), where Kt = ent and F
x- . We are making the tail exponentially thinner and but marching down this thin
tail exponentially faster. It just so happens that many conventional distributions have
precisely this kind of thin tail, and combinatorial growth is an intuitive example of this
"double" exponential growth.


4.3 Scaling and Growth for Other Distributions

The previous subsection characterized the class of distributions for which combinato-
rial growth in draws leads to exponential growth in the extreme value. We now consider
some other distributions and use Theorem 1 to characterize the max.
   First, consider the lognormal distribution. In that case, log x has a normal distribu-
tion. Using the change-of-variables method and the normal scaling discussed above,
we obtain

                                   max log x p
                                               - Constant
                                   (log K )1/2
                                    max x      p
                                              - Constant .
                                 exp( log K )
                                
That is, the max grows with exp( log K ). If K = 2N and N itself grows exponentially,
                                                   
then the max grows with exp( N ) and gZ = 1/2 · gN N , so the growth rate itself grows
exponentially.
   This is an important and perhaps slightly surprising finding: not all thin-tailed dis-
tributions give rise to exponential growth when draws are combinatoric. When x is
       20                                   CHARLES I. JONES



drawn from a normal distribution, exponential growth emerges. But when log x is drawn
from a normal distribution, the tails are now too thick: we are drawing proportional
increments from the normal and those proportional increments grow exponentially,
which delivers faster than exponential growth. This same logic applies to other cases:
if we find a distribution for which the max x grows as a power function of log K , then if
log x is drawn from that same distribution, its tail will be "too thick" and combinatorial
growth in K will cause the max to explode.5
   However, one can calculate the growth rate of K that is required to produce expo-
                                                                             
nential growth in ZK in the lognormal case. Because the max grows with exp( log K ),
         
we need log K = gt and therefore log K = (gt)2 or Kt = exp(gt)2 : the number of draws
grows faster than exponentially but slower than combinatorially.
       Our next instructive example features tails that are "thinner" than the class of exponential-
like distributions. Consider the Gompertz distribution, which is commonly used by de-
mographers to model life expectancy. Its distribution function is F (x) = 1-exp(-(ex -
                        ¯ (x) = exp(-(ex - 1)). In other words the exponential tail of the
1)) so that its tail is F
distribution itself falls off exponentially as ex rather than as a power function like x in
the Weibull case. It is well known (and easy to show using Theorem 3 in Appendix A.1)
that the Gompertz distribution is in the Gumbel domain of attraction. The change-of-
variables method works here: assume y is exponentially distributed, and let y = ex - 1
so that x has a Gompertz distribution. Then

                                             max y p
                                                   - Constant
                                             log K
                                      max ex - 1 p
                                                - Constant
                                        log K
                                            max ex p
                                                   - Constant
                                             log K
                                           max x       p
                                      1               - Constant
                                          log(log K )

In this case, the max grows with log(log K ). Exponential growth in the max requires

   5
    To see another interesting application of this fact, suppose log x is drawn from the exponential
distribution. But this is equivalent to x being drawn from a Pareto distribution. Exponential growth in
K delivers exponential growth in the max, as in Kortum (1997). Therefore, combinatorial draws will lead
to explosive growth.
                             RECIPES AND ECONOMIC GROWTH                            21


log(log K ) to grow exponentially. Even combinatorial expansion is not enough: if K =
2N , the max grows with log N , and exponential growth in N yields arithmetic (linear)
growth in the max.
   Another distribution that features a double exponential is the Gumbel distribution
                   -x
itself, F (x) = e-e . However, notice that the Gumbel distribution is "tail equivalent"
                                                   ¯ ( x ) /G
to the exponential distribution, in the sense that F        ¯ (x)  Constant:

                                          e -x
                                     lim         = 1.
                                     x 1 - e-e-x

                        -x
That is, for x large, e-e     1 - e-x , so the Gumbel has an exponential upper tail. For
this reason, the max grows directly with log K , just like the exponential.


Microfoundations for Romer (1990).         There is a final special case worth considering.
One of the interesting findings in Kortum (1997) is that, in his setup, there did not exist
a stationary distribution from which a constant number of draws each period leads to
exponential growth in the max. In other words, in Kortum's environment, there was no
microfoundation for the Romer (1990) model, in which a constant population leads
to exponential growth. However, this turns out to result from the fact that Kortum
restricted his setup to one in which the classic Extreme Value Theorem applies (i.e.
that an affine transformation of the max converges in distribution). The alternative
approach here can be used to derive just such a microfoundation.
   Suppose y is drawn from a Pareto distribution. Let y = log x and let us say that x
has a log-Pareto distribution (analogous to the lognormal): F (x) = 1 - 1/(log x) and
¯ (x) = 1/(log x) . We could use the change-of-variables method to get the scaling
F
immediately, but it is even more instructive to go back to equation (5):

                                     ¯ (ZK ) =  + op (1)
                                    KF
                                      K
                                            =  + op (1)
                                  (log ZK )
                                                             1/
                                     log ZK         1
                                            =                                         (32)
                                      K 1/        + op (1)
       22                                      CHARLES I. JONES



       Next, because  is distributed as exponential with mean one, then -1/ is a Fr´
                                                                                   echet
random variable with parameter .6 Using this fact in equation (32) gives

                                          log ZK a
                                                  Fr´
                                                    echet()                                             (33)
                                           K 1/

and therefore
                                        log ZK = K 1/ (~
                                                        + op (1))                                       (34)

where ~ is a Fr´
               echet random variable with parameter .
       To see the microfoundations for Romer (1990), suppose Kt = L where L is a
constant population. Then Kt = K0 + gt grows linearly where g  L and -- if  = 1
-- log ZK will grow linearly as well, apart from the shocks, which delivers exponential
growth in ZK .7 In other words, if our productivity draws are log-Pareto distributed
with the Pareto parameter equal to one, we get a microfoundation for the Romer (1990)
model.
       It is interesting to contrast this result with Kortum (1997). Kortum found that stan-
dard Extreme Value Theory could not provide a microfoundation for Romer (1990).
Looking at equation (32), we can see why: to get a stationary distribution, we need
to take the natural logarithm of ZK . This is a nonlinear transformation rather than an
affine transformation and therefore does not fit the framework of the standard Extreme
Value Theory.
       Finally, it is worth noting that the microfoundation of the Romer case leads to sev-
eral counterfactual predictions. For example, according to equation (33), the log of
productivity, not the level, would have a Fr´
                                            echet distribution and therefore a Pareto

   6
       Since  has an exponential distribution with a mean equal to one,

                                      e-m = Pr [   m ]
                                                 1  1
                                          = Pr     
                                                    m
                                                       1/               1/
                                                   1            1
                                          = Pr              
                                                                m

Now let y  -1/ and x  m-1/ so that m = x- . With these substitutions we have
                                                                -
                                            Pr [ y  x ] = e-x       .

   7
     The Fr´echet distribution now shocks the growth rate, and for  = 1, the tail of the Fr´
                                                                                           echet distribution
is so thick that the mean of these shocks does not exist.
                                  RECIPES AND ECONOMIC GROWTH                               23


upper tail. This implies much more inequality in the firm size distribution than we
observe; see Axtell (2001) and Luttmer (2010). In addition, if K rises linearly, then the
variance of log productivity would increase over time.8 But even that prediction is more
complicated than it first appears: for  = 1, neither the mean nor the variance of the
  echet distribution for 
Fr´                      ~ exist; the tail of the distribution is too thick. All of this is to
say that I see the microfoundations for the Romer case as an interesting illustration of
the technique, not as providing a realistic model of growth.



Summary.          These results are collected together in Table 2. In particular, they show
how the number of draws from the search distribution, Kt , must behave in order to
generate exponential growth in ZK for different distributions. That is, they show how
               ¯ (ZK ). There is a tradeoff between the shape of the tail of the search
to stabilize K F
distribution and the rate at which we march down that tail.
      In order for combinatorial growth to deliver exponential growth in the maximum,
we need the max to grow with (log K )1/ , i.e. as a power function of the log of the
number of draws. Distributions in which the tail has an elasticity that is asymptotically
equivalent to a power function -- the Weibull being a canonical example -- deliver this
result. Examples include the exponential, the Gumbel, and the normal distributions,
                             ¨
but Embrechts, Mikosch and Kluppelberg (1997) provide other examples as well, in-
cluding the gamma distribution and the Benktander Type I and Type II distributions. If
instead the log x is drawn from one of these distributions, the tail will be too thick and
combinatorial growth will explode. Alternatively, if the tail falls off as the exponential
of an exponential function (as in the Gompertz case), then the tail will be too thin for
combinatorial draws to deliver exponential growth.
      In Kortum (1997), an exponentially-growing number of draws from any distribution
in the Fr´
         echet domain of attraction leads to exponential growth in the max. One might
have conjectured that combinatorial growth would work the same way. In particular,
a natural guess is that all distributions in the basin of attraction of the Gumbel dis-
tribution could deliver exponential growth in productivity when the number of draws
grows combinatorially. This guess turns out to be wrong. The set of distributions in the
Gumbel basin of attraction is large and includes "slightly thick" tails like the lognormal,

  8
      For this to hold, suppose  > 2, so the variance of the Fr´
                                                               echet distribution exists.
   24                                              CHARLES I. JONES




                      Table 2: Scaling of ZK for Various Distributions


                                                                          bK (N ) for    Growth rate
Distribution                 cdf                                bK       for K = 2N      for K = 2N

Exponential              1 - e-x                            log K                  N           gN
                               -x
  Gumbel                   e -e                             log K                  N           gN
                                                                                               gN
  Weibull                1 - e -x                       (log K )1/          N 1/                

                                   2 /2                                                        gN
  Normal              1      e -x         dx            (log K )1/2            N
                      2                                                                         2

                                       2 /2                                        
                                                                                          gN
                                                                                                   
Lognormal          1      e-(log x)           dx      exp( log K )             e   N           ·   N
                   2                                                                       2

                                                       1                   1
 Gompertz         1 - exp(-(ex - 1))                       log(log K )         log N     Arithmetic

                                 1
Log-Pareto              1-   (log x)                   exp(K 1/ )                  ...         ...

                                                            p
  Note: In all rows except the final one, ZK /bK - Constant. The final row is more subtle, as
  discussed in the main text. The last two columns focus on the combinatorial case. The penultimate
  column translates this into scaling with N for K = 2N (ignoring some multiplicative constants).
  The final column shows the asymptotic growth rate of ZK if N (t) grows exponentially at rate gN .
                              RECIPES AND ECONOMIC GROWTH                             25


thin tails like the normal, exponential, gamma, and the Gumbel itself, as well as even
thinner tails, like the Gompertz.
   The productivity of each recipe can be drawn from a normal, Weibull, exponential,
gamma, logistic, or Gumbel distribution -- or indeed any distribution that has a thin
tail in the sense that its decay is dominated by the exponential of a polynomial function
of x. In all of these cases, the maximum over K draws will rise with log K = log 2N .
Therefore, if the number of ingredients being evaluated rises exponentially, all of these
cases will lead to exponential growth. Combinatorial expansion with draws from many
common thin-tailed distribution generates exponential growth.




5. Evidence

One of the facts that Kortum (1997) sought to explain was the time series of patents in
the United States. In particular, Kortum emphasized the relative stability of patents:
the number of patents granted to U.S. inventors in 1915, 1950, and 1985 was roughly
the same, around 40,000. In his setup, each new idea is endogenously a proportional
improvement on the previous state-of-the-art, so that a constant flow of new ideas can
generate exponential growth.
   However, even at the time he was writing, this fact was already changing. Figure 1
shows the time series for patents granted by the U.S. Patent Office, both in total (i.e.
including foreign inventors) and to U.S. inventors only. Far from being constant, the
patent series viewed from the perspective of 2020 looks much more like a series that
itself exhibits exponential growth. Put differently, the rise in patents in the United States
would, in Kortum (1997), imply a substantial increase in the rate of economic growth,
something we don't see empirically.
   One resolution of this discrepancy is that perhaps the meaning of a "patent" has
changed over time. Legal reforms and other changes may imply that a patent in 2020 is
not the same as a patent in 1980; if they are not comparable, then one cannot view this
graph as telling us about the behavior of ideas over time. Perhaps a true series for new
ideas is actually constant.
   Alternatively, perhaps the series for superior new ideas is in fact growing exponen-
tially over time, as suggested by Figure 1. The interesting observation I want to put
   26                                            CHARLES I. JONES




           Figure 1: Patents Granted by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
            THOUSANDS

           400

           350

           300
                        Total in 2019: 390,000
           250           U.S. origin: 186,000
           200           Foreign share: 52%
                                                                      Total
           150

           100

            50                                                            U.S. origin

             0
             1900          1920         1940         1960      1980      2000           2020
                                                                                   YEAR


   Source: U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (2020).




forward in the remainder of this section is that this is precisely what the combinatorial
growth model predicts.
   To see this point, we first have to define what we mean by a patent in the model.
We follow Kortum (1997) in defining patents or superior new ideas to be those that are
improvements over the state-of-the-art. If there are Kt recipes in the cookbook, how
many of them exceeded the "state-of-the-art" when they were discovered?
   The theory of record breaking suggests the following simple insight. If the draws are
independent, then the probability that any one of the Kt recipes is the best is just 1/Kt .
In fact, this insight links very nicely with our main extreme value result. First, recall that
the main result of Theorem 1 can be written as

                                          ¯ (ZK ) =  + op (1).
                                         KF


Rearranging implies
                                        ¯ (ZK ) = 1 ( + op (1)).
                                        F                                                      (35)
                                                  K
In words, after K draws, the probability that the next draw exceeds the max is approx-
imately 1/K . This is a nice connection between Theorem 1 and the theory of record
                              RECIPES AND ECONOMIC GROWTH                                     27


breaking. The difference with the exact 1/K intuition given at the start of this paragraph
is that now ZK is a random variable, but the spirit is the same.
                                                                              t new
    What does this imply about the flow of patents in the growth model? With K
ideas being discovered at date t and the fraction 1/Kt exceeding the frontier, the time
                                                
series of "patents" in the model is simply K
                                           Kt . This is precisely the logic in Kortum (1997),
                                            t


and it is therefore easy to see how the flow of patents could be constant in that setup.
   In the combinatorial model, however, this quantity is not constant. Instead, first
                             t = Rt (i.e.  = 1 and  = 0).
consider the model in which N


                                        Kt = 2Nt
                                        t
                                        K
                                           = log 2 · Nt
                                        Kt
                                            = log 2 · Rt

                                                      ¯L0 egL t
                                            = log 2 · s                                         (36)


That is, the number of patents in the combinatorial model grows exponentially over
time. In fact, the number of patents per researcher would actually be constant in this
case. More generally, if one allows for  = 1 or  = 0, the number of patents will
(asymptotically) exhibit exponential growth and the number of patents per researcher
can either decline or increase over time.9
    The intuition for this result is straightforward: because of the thin tail of the prob-
ability distribution, the typical new idea is only slightly better than the previous state-
of-the-art. Exponential growth in productivity requires us to march down the tail very
quickly -- combinatorially -- and this delivers exponential growth in the number of
"patents" in the model. The growth that we see empirically in the actual patent series,
then, is potentially evidence for the combinatorial growth process itself.


Can researchers evaluate a combinatorially growing number of recipes?                   This is now
a good place to discuss one of the features of the model that might raise a question. An
implication of our setup is that researchers are evaluating the productivity of a rapidly-
increasing number of recipes over time: they each evaluate the recipes associated with,
   9
     Kogan, Papanikolaou, Seru and Stoffman (2017) document that patents per capita were relatively
stationary between 1930 and 1990 but have risen since then. The pre-1990 evidence would be consistent
with the combinatorial model with  = 0, while the period since 1990 is more consistent with  > 0.
   28                                CHARLES I. JONES



say,  new ingredients each period, but the number of recipes that can be formed from
the new and existing number of ingredients grows combinatorially. Is it possible for
researchers to evaluate a combinatorially growing number of recipes to find the best
one?
   We have two responses to this question. The first is the empirical evidence provided
above: the combinatorial process leads to exponential growth in patenting, which is
a good description of the data itself. Second, and more philosophically, perhaps it
is only the truly good ideas that take time to evaluate: Akerlof's "chicken ice cream"
can be discarded quickly. Chess grandmasters sort through a combinatorial number
of moves with remarkable speed and often find the best move according to comput-
ers that search billions of moves per second (Sadler and Regan, 2019). The number
of "truly new" ideas grows exponentially precisely with the number of researchers in
equation (36) above, so each researcher would need to devote time to a constant num-
ber of new ideas, which seems reasonable.


6. Discussion and Further Connections to the Literature

This concluding section explores various extensions of the setup and connections to
the literature.


Acemoglu and Azar (2020). Beyond Kortum (1997) and Weitzman (1998), the most
important inspiration for this paper is Acemoglu and Azar (2020). They study endoge-
nous production networks in which every good uses a combination of other goods as
an intermediate input. If there are N goods in the economy, then there are 2N possible
combinations of intermediate goods that could be used to produce a particular prod-
uct, and Acemoglu and Azar (2020) let the productivity of each of these combinations
be a draw from a probability distribution. Their setup inspired the approach taken in
this paper.
   Where the two papers go in different directions is in thinking about how the number
of goods/ingredients evolves over time. Because it is not the main contribution of
their paper, Acemoglu and Azar (2020) focus on the case in which one new good gets
introduced each period, so there is arithmetic growth in Nt and therefore exponential
growth in 2Nt . For this to produce exponential growth in productivity, they require
                                   RECIPES AND ECONOMIC GROWTH                                       29


the standard Kortum (1997) assumption that the probability distribution determining
productivity has a Pareto upper tail.10 Their Corollary 2 suggests that broader results
are possible with different growth rates for the number of new goods, and the present
paper can be viewed as exploring those broader results.


New ideas as new ingredients?             To what extent are new ideas themselves new ingredi-
ents that can be used in future recipes? We made a conscious decision early on in this
paper to follow Weitzman (1998)'s lead in emphasizing that there are large numbers of
potential ideas and growth is limited by our ability to evaluate the merits of those ideas.
In this sense, the evaluation equation N  t = R N  and the size of the cookbook 2Nt
                                                            t   t

do not change just because new ideas are themselves potential new ingredients that
can be tried. As in Weitzman, there are so many potential ideas that processing and
evaluation are the key limits. An alternative approach one could take, however, is to say
the number of ingredients is initially small and that the new ideas are themselves new
ingredients. This approach can lead to faster-than-combinatorial expansion, more like
                      2...
the "towers" of 22           . Ultimately, this is just another reason why our ability to evaluate
ideas is the decisive constraint.


Correlation.   A related concern is that of correlation. What if the draws from the
search distribution F¯ (x) are correlated for recipes that share many ingredients? This
would be a useful extension to explore but is beyond the scope of the present paper.
Most of the results in the extreme value literature, for example, consider the i.i.d. case.
Still, broader results are possible. For example, if the correlation dies off quickly, there
are results related to "blocks" of draws that can be viewed as i.i.d. In this sense, the
result is likely to generalize to cases with correlation.


Models of technology diffusion.             A potentially interesting direction for future research
is related to Lucas and Moll (2014), Perla and Tonetti (2014), and the extensive literature
that has built on these papers. The basic insight in these papers is similar to Kortum
(1997): an exponentially growing number of draws (e.g. because of meetings between
firms or people) from a Pareto distribution can generate exponential growth and an
  10
     They state the assumption in a different form: that the log of productivity is drawn from a Gumbel
distribution. But, as they note, this is identical to saying that productivity itself is drawn from a Fr´
                                                                                                        echet
distribution.
   30                                  CHARLES I. JONES



evolving distribution of heterogeneous productivities. Because of revolutions in com-
munication technologies, it is arguable that the diffusion of ideas occurs much faster
today than in the past. Perhaps combinatorial diffusion plus thinned-tailed distribu-
tions can be applied in this setting as well.


Pareto and the chicken-and-egg problem.         Finally, as discussed in the Introduction,
one of the motivations for this project was the "chicken-and-egg" aspect of exponential
growth and Pareto distributions. We do seem to see Pareto distributions empirically in
many places, including the size of cities, the size of firms, and the income and wealth
distributions. The resolution suggested here is that exponential growth comes first.
Then the mechanism of Gabaix (1999) and Luttmer (2007) that exponential growth
can be used to generate Pareto distributions is a candidate explanation for the Pareto
distributions that we see in the data. It would be interesting to micro-found this story
using the combinatorial process presented here.


Conclusion.    In the end, the paper can be read in two ways. First, there is the "Weitz-
man meets Kortum / combinatorial growth" interpretation: if we have the number of
draws growing combinatorially then we do not need thick-tailed Pareto distributions
to generate economic growth. Instead, draws from standard distributions with thin
exponential tails are sufficient. Second, there is a broader contribution embodied in
Theorem 1. In considering the max ZK over K i.i.d. draws from a distribution with tail
                      ¯ (x), the transformed random variable K F
distribution function F                                        ¯ (ZK ) asymptotically
has an exponential distribution under very weak conditions. This result can be used
to characterize the way in which the max ZK increases for any continuous distribution
F¯ (x) and any time path of (large) K .
                                RECIPES AND ECONOMIC GROWTH                                        31




A. Appendix

A.1      Extreme Value Theory

This appendix section provides a brief discussion of the standard Extreme Value Theo-
rem and how it relates to results derived using Theorem 1 in the main text.
       Like the Central Limit Theorem, the Extreme Value Theorem is quite general. In
particular, it says that if the asymptotic distribution of the normalized maximum over
K i.i.d. random variables exists, then it takes one of three forms: Fr´
                                                                      echet, Gumbel,
or a bounded distribution. The bounded case occurs when the draws themselves are
from a distribution that is bounded from above, which is not especially interesting
from a growth standpoint, so we will ignore that case. The other two have already
been suggested by the examples in the main text. Here, we note how those examples
generalize. These points are explored in great detail by Galambos (1978), Johnson, Kotz
                                                  ¨
and Balakrishnan (1995), Embrechts, Mikosch and Kluppelberg (1997), and de Haan
and Ferreira (2006).
  The tail characteristics of the F (x) distribution determine whether the normalized
maximum has a Fr´                                                    ¯ (x) declines as a
                 echet or a Gumbel distribution. If tail probability F
power function (polynomial function), then the normalized max converges to a Fr´
                                                                               echet
distribution. Examples of distributions that satisfy this condition are the Pareto, the
Cauchy, the Student t, and the Fr´ echet distribution itself.11
                     ¯ (x) declines as an exponential function, then the normalized max
   Alternatively, if F
has a Gumbel distribution. Many familiar unbounded distributions fall into this cat-
egory: the normal, lognormal, exponential, Weibull, Gompertz, logistic, and gamma
  11
     Example 1.3.3 of Galambos (1978) considers F (x) = 1 - 1/ log(x). Notice that this tail falls off more
slowly than a power function. It has a thicker tail even than a Pareto distribution with parameter value
1, for which the mean fails to exist. The distribution of the normalized maximum fails to converge in this
case. Galambos calculates that the maximum over just four draws from this distribution has a greater than
20 percent probability of being larger than 60 million!
   32                                  CHARLES I. JONES



distributions, as well as the Gumbel distribution itself. These distributions feature a
wide range in terms of the thickness of the upper tail.
   The extreme value theorem for distributions in the domain of attraction of the Gum-
bel distribution can be stated as follows, using definitions we've already provided.


Theorem 3. Consider the unbounded distribution F (x), and let ZK be the maximum
                                                                              ¯ (x)/F  (x)
over K i.i.d. draws from the distribution. Define h(x) = (1 - F (x))/F  (x) = F
to be the inverse hazard function. If limx h (x) = 0, then there exist normalizing
sequences aK > 0 and bK such that

                                       ZK - bK          -x
                              lim Pr            x = e -e .                             (37)
                              K          aK

Furthermore, let U (t) be defined as the inverse function of 1/(1 - F (x)). Then the nor-
malizing sequences aK and bK can be chosen as bK = U (K ) and aK = KU  (K ) =
1/(KF  (bK )).


Proof. This is just a restatement of (a simplified version of) Theorem 1.1.8 in de Haan
and Ferreira (2006).
   Some remarks about this theorem. First, the function h(x) is just a scaled version
of the probability that the draws are above x. If this tail probability falls to zero suffi-
ciently quickly, then the normalized maximum asymptotically has a standard Gumbel
distribution. Written differently,

                                     ZK - bK a
                                              Gumbel                                   (38)
                                       aK

   Now we can show how this standard EVT result relates to the results derived in the
paper. Letting  be a random variable from a standard Gumbel distribution, equa-
tion (38) is equivalent to
                                ZK = bK + aK  + op (aK ).                              (39)

Dividing both sides by bK ,

                                ZK     aK    op ( a K )
                                   =1+    ·+            .
                                bK     bK       bK

Finally, it can be shown that limK  aK /bK = 0 according to Embrechts, Mikosch and
                                  RECIPES AND ECONOMIC GROWTH                                            33


  ¨
Kluppelberg (1997).12 Therefore, we have the result that

                                                  ZK p
                                                     - 1.                                                  (40)
                                                  bK

This is a special case of Theorem 4.1.1 in Galambos (1978) (his theorem further allows
for dependence rather than assuming the draws are i.i.d.).
       That is, the ratio of the max to bK converges in probability to the value one. Asymp-
totically, in other words, the max grows just like the normalizing sequence bK = U (K ).
To understand the growth of the max, then, we just need to understand bK = U (K ).
                                               ¨
       Table 3.4.4 of Embrechts, Mikosch and Kluppelberg (1997) reports the bK (which is
dn in their notation) for many distributions, confirming the results derived in the main
text for distributions in the Gumbel domain of attraction.


A.2      Proof of Theorem 2

Here we prove Theorem 2, which provides a necessary and sufficient condition on
the shape of the search distribution for combinatorial growth in the draws to deliver
exponential growth in the max extreme value.
   In proving this result, the following lemma is very helpful, as it allows us to go
back and forth between the elasticity of F¯ and the elasticity of F
                                                                  ¯ -1 . We will use the
notation  to denote the following type of convergence: f (x)  x is equivalent to
limx f (x)/x = Constant.

                 ¯ (x) where F
Lemma 1. Let y = F           ¯ is a continuous, differentiable, and invertible function.
Then

                                                       ¯ ( x)
                                                 d log F
                                             -                 x
                                                   d log x

if and only if

                                          d log F¯ -1 ( y )
                                      -                       ¯ -1 (y )]-
                                                             [F
                                              d log y

                                                                   ¯ (x)  0).
(recognizing that the relevant limits are as x   and therefore y = F
  12
     See p. 149 and p. 141, noting that their notation is cn /dn ; it is easy to verify for example distributions
in their Table 3.4.4.
   34                                     CHARLES I. JONES



                  ¯ -1 (y ). Applying the function F
Proof. Let h(y )  F                                ¯ to both sides gives


                                   ¯ (h(y ))
                                 y=F
                                         ¯ (h(y ))
                             log y = log F
                                     d log F¯ (h(y ))
                           d log y =                  · d log h(y ).
                                       d log h(y )

Rearranging then gives

                                                 ¯ (h(y ))        -1
                             d log h(y )   d log F
                                         =
                               d log y       d log h(y )

and therefore

                                   ¯ -1 ( y )         ¯ (h(y ))    -1
                            d log F             d log F
                                              =
                                d log y           d log h(y )

                                      ¯                            ¯ -1
Then the result is obvious. If - d log F (x) 
                                   d log x  x , then -
                                                       d log F (y )
                                                           d log y
                                                                      ¯ -1 (y )]- and vice
                                                                     [F
                ¯ ( x) .
versa since y = F                                                                    QED




Proof of Theorem 2. We are now ready to prove Theorem 2.




Proof. By Corollary 1, we have

                                         ¯ (ZKit ) = 
                                      Kt F




Inverting the distribution function and solving for ZKit gives

                                          ¯ -1      
                                   ZKit = F               .
                                                    Kt

Recall the definition of aggregate productivity ZKt is a power mean of the individual
variety productivites, and let's change the variable of integration from i to  to take
                            RECIPES AND ECONOMIC GROWTH                              35


advantage of the continuum of varieties:

                               -1         -1
                             ZKt  =     ZKt  dG()
                                                           -1
                                            ¯ -1     
                                   =        F                   dG()
                                                     Kt

where G() is the cdf of a standard unit-mean exponential random variable.
                                           ¯ -1 (y ). Taking logs and differentiating both
  To simplify the notation, define h(y ) = F
sides of the above equation with respect to time gives

                Kt                              -2
               Z    -1                                                
                                                                    dKt
        ( - 1)     =  -1           h                 h           -     2dG()
               ZKt  ZKt                Kt                 Kt         dt
                                                                     Kt
                                              -1                        t
                          -1                       h (/Kt ) · /Kt K
                     =      -1     h             -                        dG()
                          ZKt          Kt              h(/Kt )         Kt
                                                -1           ¯ -1 (/Kt ) K t
                          -1       ¯ -1               d log F
                     =      -1     F                -                        dG()
                          ZKt             Kt             d log(/Kt )      Kt

   Rearranging the terms slightly and taking limits gives

        Kt
       Z                     h(/Kt )-1            d log F¯ -1 (/Kt )       t
                                                                           K
     lim   =        lim                   · lim -                             dG()    (41)
     t ZKt                 h(/Kt )-1 dG()            d log(/Kt )           Kt




Only If: At this point, we are ready to consider the two directions of the proof. We be-
                                                                                      ¯ -1
gin with the "only if" portion. In particular, we can apply Lemma 1 to see that - d log  F (/K )
                                                                                     d log(/Kt ) 
¯ -1 (/Kt )- which gives
F

                Kt
               Z                     h(/Kt )-1            K   t /Kt
              lim  =         lim                  · lim ¯ -1 (/Kt ) dG()              (42)
             t ZKt                 h(/Kt )-1 dG()       F

where  is the limiting factor of proportionality from the elasticity term.
   Now consider the limit of the second key term in equation (42) for each fixed value
       36                                     CHARLES I. JONES



of  and using the combinatoric growth of Kt :

                                            K   t /Kt
                                     vt  ¯ - 1
                                          F (/Kt )
                                           N   t log 2
                                        = ¯ -1
                                          F (/Kt )
                                                      egN t
                                        = Constant ¯ -1
                                                   F (/Kt )

where the last expression uses the fact that Nt grows at a constant exponential rate.13
       By inspection, the limit of vt is / as t  , so we apply L'Hopital's rule to get
the limit:

                                                   gN egN t
             lim vt = lim Constant
                                      ¯ -1 (/Kt )-1 (F
                                      F              ¯ -1 ) (/Kt ) - 2 K
                                                                       t
                                                                    K          t

                       gN         Constant egN t                           
                   =      · lim                    · lim
                                      t /Kt
                                     K                                             ¯ -1
                                                            ¯ -1 (/Kt )] · - d log F (/Kt )
                                                           [F                   d log(/Kt )
                       gN
                   =
                        

where the last two terms in the penultimate equation each are equal to one.
       Finally, substituting this expression in for the limit of vt back into equation (42) gives

                           Kt
                          Z     gN                     h(/Kt )-1
                        lim   =    lim                              · dG()
                        t ZKt                        h(/Kt )-1 dG()
                                gN
                              =
                                 

That completes the "only if" part of the proof.


                                                                               ZKt        
If:     Now return to equation (41) and let's prove the "if" direction: if lim Z Kt
                                                                                    = gN /,
then  (x) is asymptotically a power function with exponent . Applying this condition
to (41) gives

              gN                h(/Kt )-1            d log F¯ -1 (/Kt )            t
                                                                                   K
                 =     lim                   · lim -                                  dG()
                              h(/Kt )-1 dG()            d log(/Kt )                Kt

                                                                                               = Rt =
  This is easiest in the case where Nt = N0 egN t is just assumed, but also holds exactly for N
  13

s
¯Lt when  = 1 and  = 0, or asymptotically when  > 0 and  < 1.
                               RECIPES AND ECONOMIC GROWTH                           37


The first term on the right-hand side of this expression is a collection of weights that
integrate to the value one for all Kt . Therefore, this term does not trend over time.
Since the left-hand side is constant, though, this means that the second term on the
right-hand side must also be constant. In particular, this means that the elasticity term
must decline exponentially at the rate gN . Defining v (K ) to be this elasticity, we have

                                                   d log F¯ -1 (/Kt )
                                     v (K )  -
                                                      d log(/Kt )



and we require

                                                       t
                                                       K   gN
                                              v (K )      
                                                       Kt   



                                     t
                                     K       log 2 and therefore
   Now recall K = 2N so that         Kt    =N

                                              t
                                              K
                                              Kt   N t log 2
                                                       =
                                            log K  Nt log 2
                                                   gN
                                                  
                                                    

Combining these last two expressions means that we require


                                            v (K ) log K  1.


   Let y  /K for a fixed . Substituting this into this expression gives

                                         d log F¯ -1 ( y )
                                     -                     [- log y ]  1
                                             d log y

        - log y
since   log K      1 for a fixed .
   To finish the proof, we write this equation in terms of - log y , which is positive since
0 < y < 1. We also switch to the "" version of this equation (being sure to keep  since
   38                                     CHARLES I. JONES



the convergence is to 1 rather than to any constant) and then integrate:

                              ¯ -1 ( y )
                        d log F            1     1
                                                ·
                         d(- log y )         (- log y )

                        d log F¯ -1 ( y )  1
                                           ·
                                             d(- log y )
                                              (- log y )

                        d log F¯ -1 ( y )  1
                                           ·
                                                d(- log y )
                                                 (- log y )
                               ¯ -1 (y )  Constant + 1 log(- log y )
                           log F
                                                      


                                                                1/
                           ¯ -1 (y )  Constant elog(- log y)
                           F

                                 x  (- log y )1/



                                           - log y  x

                                  - log F  ¯ ( x)  x
                                          ¯ ( x)
                                    d log F
                                  -                x-1
                                        dx
                                          ¯ ( x)
                                    d log F
                                  -                x
                                      d log x

                              ¯ (x) and take advantage of the  notation to drop the
where we use the notation y = F
(positive) constants whenever convenient.
                                                                                        QED



References

Acemoglu, Daron and Pablo D. Azar, "Endogenous Production Networks," Econometrica, 2020,
  88 (1), 33­82.


Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt, "A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction," Econo-
  metrica, March 1992, 60 (2), 323­351.


Axtell, Robert L., "Zipf Distribution of U.S. Firm Sizes," Science, September 2001, 293, 1818­
  1820.
                             RECIPES AND ECONOMIC GROWTH                                  39


Benassy, Jean-Pascal, "Taste for Variety and Optimum Production Patterns in Monopolistic
  Competition," Economics Letters, 1996, 52 (1), 41­47.

de Haan, Laurens and Ana Ferreira, Extreme Value Theory: An Introduction (Springer Series in
  Operations Research and Financial Engineering), Springer, 2006.

                                               ¨
Embrechts, Paul, Thomas Mikosch, and Claudia Kluppelberg, Modelling Extremal Events: For
  Insurance and Finance, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 1997.

Gabaix, Xavier, "Zipf's Law for Cities: An Explanation," Quarterly Journal of Economics, August
  1999, 114 (3), 739­767.

Galambos, Janos, The Asymptotic Theory of Extreme Order Statistics, New York: John Wiley &
  Sons, 1978.

Johnson, Norman L., Samuel Kotz, and N. Balakrishnan, "Chapter 22. Extreme Value Distribu-
  tions," in "Continuous Univariate Distributions, Volume 2," Wiley Interscience, 1995.

Jones, Charles I., "R&D-Based Models of Economic Growth," Journal of Political Economy,
  August 1995, 103 (4), 759­784.

   and Jihee Kim, "A Schumpeterian Model of Top Income Inequality," Journal of Political
  Economy, October 2018, 126 (5), 1785­1826.

Kogan, Leonid, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Amit Seru, and Noah Stoffman, "Technological Innova-
  tion, Resource Allocation, and Growth," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (2),
  665­712.

Kortum, Samuel S., "Research, Patenting, and Technological Change," Econometrica, 1997, 65
  (6), 1389­1419.

Lucas, Robert E. and Benjamin Moll, "Knowledge Growth and the Allocation of Time," Journal
  of Political Economy, February 2014, 122 (1), 1­51.

Luttmer, Erzo G.J., "Selection, Growth, and the Size Distribution of Firms," Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 08 2007, 122 (3), 1103­1144.

  , "Models of Growth and Firm Heterogeneity," Annual Review Economics, 2010, 2 (1), 547­576.

  , "Four Models of Knowledge Diffusion and Growth," Technical Report 2015. Federal Reserve
  Bank of Minneapolis working paper No. 724.

Perla, Jesse and Christopher Tonetti, "Equilibrium Imitation and Growth," Journal of Political
  Economy, February 2014, 122 (1), 52­76.
   40                                    CHARLES I. JONES



Resnick, Sidney I., Extreme Values, Regular Variation, and Point Processes, Springer, 2008.

Romer, Paul M., "Endogenous Technological Change," Journal of Political Economy, October
  1990, 98 (5), S71­S102.

  , "Two Strategies for Economic Development: Using Ideas and Producing Ideas," Proceedings
  of the World Bank Annual Conference on Development Economics, 1992, 1993, pp. 63­115.

Sadler, Matthew and Natasha Regan, Game Changer, New in Chess, 2019.

The Economist, "How ASML Became Chipmaking's Biggest Monopoly," February 29 2020.

U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, "U.S. Patent Activity Calendar Years 1790 to the Present,"
  2020. https://www.uspto.gov/web/offices/ac/ido/oeip/taf/h counts.htm, accessed June 10,
  2020.

Weitzman, Martin L., "Recombinant Growth," Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1998, 113,
  331­360.
