                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         KEYNESIAN PRODUCTION NETWORKS AND THE COVID-19 CRISIS:
                         A SIMPLE BENCHMARK

                                        David Baqaee
                                       Emmanuel Farhi

                                     Working Paper 28346
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28346


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2021




Emmanuel Farhi tragically passed away in July, 2020 before this paper was written. Emmanuel
was a one-in-a-lifetime friend and collaborator. David Baqaee is responsible for any errors. We
thank our discussant Jennifer La'O for her comments. We received support from NSF grant No.
1947611. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by David Baqaee and Emmanuel Farhi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Keynesian Production Networks and the Covid-19 Crisis: A Simple Benchmark
David Baqaee and Emmanuel Farhi
NBER Working Paper No. 28346
January 2021
JEL No. E0,E24,E3,E4,E5

                                           ABSTRACT

The Covid-19 crisis is an unusual and seemingly all-encompassing economic shock. On the one
hand, it was unquestionably a negative demand shock that, for fixed prices and incomes, reduced
household spending. On the other hand, it was also unquestionably a negative supply shock that
reduced firms' ability to maintain production at pre-pandemic prices and quantities. These
negative shocks affected different industries differently: whereas some producers easily switched
to remote-work and maintained both employment and production, industries that required face-to-
face contact were forced to reduce production capacity and employment. We consider a stripped-
down version of the model presented in Baqaee and Farhi (2020). Despite its simplicity, the
model nevertheless allows for an arbitrary input-output network, complementarities in both
consumption and production, incomplete markets, downward nominal wage rigidity, and a zero-
lower bound. In this sense, it contains many of the ingredients typically considered to be
important for understanding the economic fallout from Covid-19. Nevertheless, despite allowing
for these realistic ingredients, this model has a stark property: factor income shares at the initial
equilibrium are global sufficient statistics for the input-output network. This article clarifies
clarifies what ingredients must be added to a model if the production network is to play an
important role in the propagation of shocks.


David Baqaee
Department of Economics
University of California at Los Angeles
Bunche Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and CEPR
and also NBER
baqaee@econ.ucla.edu

Emmanuel Farhi
Harvard University
Keynesian Production Networks and the Covid-19
                    Crisis:
             A Simple Benchmark

                           David Baqaee and Emmanuel Farhi

                                         January 19, 2021


    The Covid-19 crisis is an unusual and seemingly all-encompassing economic shock.
On the one hand, it was unquestionably a negative demand shock that, for fixed prices and
incomes, reduced household spending (see, e.g. Chetty et al., 2020). On the other hand,
it was also unquestionably a negative supply shock that reduced firms' ability to main-
tain production at pre-pandemic prices and quantities. These negative shocks affected
different industries differently: whereas some producers easily switched to remote-work
and maintained both employment and production, industries that required face-to-face
contact were forced to reduce production capacity and employment.
    The contrasting fates of different industries, as they were buffeted by negative demand
and supply shocks, is seen in Figure 1, which is a histogram of the percentage change in
industry-level prices from January 2020 to May 2020. Whereas some industries, like oil
and gas extraction, petroleum, and most transportation industries cut prices dramatically
by tens of percentage points, other industries like food manufacturing, ambulatory health
care services, and wholesale traders raised prices by similar magnitudes.
    Of course, negative shocks to an individual producer are undesirable, but a key concern
that emerged during the pandemic is the possibility that these negative shocks can travel
along supply chains. The worry is that production problems can spread like a virus from
    
     UCLA, Bunche Hall, 315 Portola Plaza, Los Angeles, CA, baqaee@econ.ucla.edu. Emmanuel Farhi
tragically passed away in July, 2020 before this paper was written. Emmanuel was a one-in-a-lifetime friend
and collaborator. David Baqaee is responsible for any errors. This article was prepared for the 2021 AEA
Papers and Proceedings. We thank our discussant Jennifer La'O for her comments. We received support
from NSF grant No. 1947611.


                                                    1
                                 100



                                  80




                        number
                                  60



                                  40



                                  20

                                        *                              *
                                   0
                                       -30   -20   -10   0   10   20       30



Figure 1: Percentage change in industry-level producer prices from January to May, 2020
from the BLS.


one producer to others, amplifying and broadening the impact of these negative shocks.
News articles, particularly during the initial onset of the pandemic, often highlighted
domestic and international supply chain problems that hampered and disrupted the
supply of many consumer goods and services.
    In a recent paper, Baqaee and Farhi (2020b), we study the importance of production
networks in amplifying and propagating supply and demand shocks. In this article, we
consider a stripped-down version of the model presented in Baqaee and Farhi (2020b).
Despite its simplicity, the model we present nevertheless allows for an arbitrary input-
output network, complementarities in both consumption and production, incomplete
markets, downward nominal wage rigidity, and a zero-lower bound. In this sense, the
simplified model contains many of the ingredients typically considered to be important
for understanding the economic fallout from Covid-19.
    Nevertheless, despite allowing for these realistic ingredients, this model has a very
stark property: namely, factor income shares at the initial equilibrium are global sufficient
statistics for the input-output network. More precisely, the response of welfare, inflation,
and sectoral employment to sectoral factor supply and aggregate demand shocks do not
depend on the production network conditional on initial factor income shares.
    Of course, this does not imply that production networks are therefore not important
for understanding the effects of Covid-19. Rather, this result highlights the fact that the
role played by input-output linkages is more subtle than one might at first imagine. The
mere existence of production networks, even ones with complementarities, is not enough
to magnify the effects of negative shocks. In particular, the irrelevance result in this article


                                                         2
clarifies what ingredients must be added to a model if the production network is to play
an important role in the propagation of shocks.
    In this short paper, we do not investigate how the economy responds to supply and
demand shocks, nor do we show how the network begins to matter once one deviates from
the network-irrelevant benchmark. Our goal here is limited to proving conditions under
which the network structure is irrelevant. The systematic analysis of how the economy
responds to shocks and what changes when we deviate from the conditions that imply
network-irrelevance can be found in Baqaee and Farhi (2020b).


1    Model Sketch
Consider a general equilibrium model with a set of industries N and factor markets G.
There are two periods: the present and the future. Each period, households are endowed
with some factors, and the aggregate endowment of every factor f  G is normalized to
be one in both periods. In equilibrium, the quantity of a factor that is employed may be
less than this endowment L f  1.


Households. There is a population of households with identical preferences, and each
household owns one unit of only one of the factors. We assume that all non-employment
occurs via the extensive margin, so that if some factor f is not fully employed L f < 1, this
means 1 - L f workers are completely unemployed whilst the other L f are fully employed.
Of the 1 - L f workers who are unemployed, we assume that a fraction  f can borrow
against their future income, but 1 -  f cannot borrow, and therefore, cannot consume in
the present period.
   All households have intertemporal preferences given by

                                                        1-1/
                                  y1-1/ - 1   y     -1
                                            +          ,                                  (1)
                                   1 - 1/      1 - 1/

where y represents present consumption and y future consumption,  controls time pref-
erences and  is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution. Since employed households
and households that can borrow have the same homothetic preferences, we can aggre-
gate these households into a single representative household that we call the Ricardian
household. This Ricardian household faces the following intertemporal budget constraint

                      p y
                         y                            wf Lf
                 p y+
                   y
                          =           wf Lf +                 1 - (1 - L f )(1 -  f ) ,
                      1+i                             1+i
                                f G             f G


                                                  3
                y
where p y and p are the price of consumption in the present and future, i is the nominal
interest rate, w f and wf are present and future wages, and L f and Lf are present and future
employment levels. This equation simply states that the net present value of consumption
must equal the net present value of income for the representative Ricardian agent. The
right-hand side accounts for the fact that not all of aggregate income earned in the future
goes to the representative Ricardian household, since the non-Ricardian households will
be earning income in the future.
    Preferences over final goods within the period are given by a CES aggregator

                                                               -1
                                                         -1   
                                      y=           0 j c j        ,
                                                         
                                                              
                                                                                          (2)
                                                              
                                                              
                                                              
                                              jN


where N is the set of all goods, c j is the quantity of good j consumed by the household,
0 j are household taste parameters for good j, and  is the elasticity of substitution.
    Denote aggregate real consumption in the current and future period by Y and Y . Log
differencing the consumption Euler equation for the representative Ricardian consumer
yields
                          log Y = - log p y +  log  +  log ,                           (3)

where                                                        -
                                              (1 + i)
                                       =            y            Y
                                                   p
and
                            =         wf Lf 1 - (1 - L f )(1 -  f ) .
                                  f

Equation (3) is the aggregate demand (AD) curve -- a downward sloping relationship
between output and the price level. The terms  log  and  log  are shifters of the AD
curve.


Producers. The economy features an arbitrary production network. The production of
each industry i  N is given by

                                                                         -1
                                               -1                    -1 
                             yi =          i j xi j +         i f l i f     ,
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                                                                          (4)
                                  
                                                                        
                                                                        
                                      jN                f F


where yi is the quantity of good i produced, xi j are intermediate inputs and li f are factor
inputs used by industry i. The parameters i j and i f determine the endogenous network

                                                    4
structure of production in this economy. A crucial assumption is that the elasticity of
substitution  in production is uniform across all producers and is the same as the one in
consumption


Market Equilibrium. We assume that goods markets clear with perfect competition and
flexible prices. In particular, goods-market clearing implies that the total quantity of every
good j that is produced equals the total quantity that is used:

                                       yj =          xi j + c j .
                                               iN


Unlike the goods market, we allow for the possibility that factor markets may fail to clear
due to downward wage rigidity. Denote total demand for factor f by

                                               li f = L f .
                                         iN


Factor market equilibrium is described by

                        ¯ f  w f,
                        w               ¯ f,
                                    Lf  L                           ¯ f ) = 0.
                                                        ¯ f )(L f - L
                                                 (w f - w                                  (5)

The first equation ensures that wages in factor market f cannot fall below some exogenous
lower-bound w  ¯ f . The second equation ensures that the quantity of factor f employed is
less than some exogenous upper-bound L    ¯ f . The third equation ensures that either wages
are equal to their lower-bound or quantities are equal to their upper-bound. To make
wages in a factor market flexible, we can simply set the lower-bound on wages in that
market to -. We do not need to specify equilibrium in the bond market or how the
nominal interest rate is set.


Supply and Demand Shocks. In this article, we restrict our attention to two particular
ways in which Covid-19 affected the economy.

  1. Covid-19 may have affected intertemporal preferences for consumption by reducing
     the utility value of consuming in the present relative to tomorrow. We model this via
     shocks to the aggregate demand shifter  log , and refer to such shocks as aggregate
     demand shocks. In principle, these could be shocks to the nominal interest rate,
     or changes in expectations about future output and prices. More relevant for the
     pandemic,  log  could also be a discount factor shock that causes households to
     prefer to delay consumption in anticipation of the arrival of vaccines.

                                                 5
    2. Covid-19 affected the quantity of labor that can safely be used in production. We
       model this via changes in the upper-bound of labor available in each factor market
       L ¯ f < 0. In other words, these are reductions in the quantity of each factor that can
       be employed in the absence of any nominal rigidities. For example, a reduction in
       this upper-bound can represent some of the consequences of social distancing and
       stay-at-home orders. More broadly, these shocks can represent reduced willingness
       by households to supply labor or reduced willingness by firms to employ labor. The
       former could be due to health concerns whereas the latter could be due to reduced
       capacity or legal liability concerns. We refer to these as factor supply shocks since
       these shocks contract the economy's production possibility set.

Of course, the pandemic likely had many other effects on the economy including changes
to the composition of household demand across different sectors as well as changes in
sectoral total factor productivity. Since network-irrelevance does not hold for these shocks,
we abstract from them here; for an analysis of these other shocks, see Baqaee and Farhi
(2020b).


2     Sufficient Statistics for the Network
To state our sufficient statistics result, we must define some new notation.


Notation. The input-output matrix of this economy is a (1 + N + G) × (1 + N + G) matrix
 whose i jth element is equal to i's expenditures on inputs from j as a share of its total
income/revenues. So, when i  N
                                            p j xi j
                                       i j           .                                 (6)
                                             pi yi
The first row and column of  correspond to the household sector, the next N rows and
columns correspond to the goods-producing industries, and the last G rows and columns
correspond to the factors of production. The input-output matrix  records the direct
exposures of one producer to another. We define the Leontief inverse matrix as

                                (I - )-1 = I +  + 2 + . . . .                              (7)

The Leontief inverse matrix  records instead the direct and indirect exposures through the
supply chains in the production network.
   Denote nominal household expenditures (GDP) by E, and the Domar weight i of



                                              6
producer i by
                                           pi yi
                                               i .                                                    (8)
                                            E
Denote the share of aggregate income accruing to factor f by

                                                wf Lf       wf Lf
                                      f =                 =       .
                                               gG w g L g    E

The accounting identity
                                       i E = 1i E +            ji  j E
                                                        jN

links the factor income shares to the Leontief inverse via

                                        f = 1 f =            1 j  j f ,                               (9)
                                                        jN


where 1 j = (p j c j )/E is the share of good j in household expenditure.


Global Sufficient Statistics Denote the value of any variable X at the initial equilibrium
by X ¯ . The following theorem describes the sense in which the production network is
irrelevant for the propagation of shocks in this economy.

Theorem 1. Consider an aggregate demand shock  log  and a vector of factor supply shocks
 log L
     ¯ = ( log L
               ¯ 1 , . . . ,  log L
                                  ¯ G ). Then

                     log Y( log L
                                ¯ ,  log , ¯ ) =  log Y( log L
                                                             ¯ ,  log , ¯ )                          (10)

for every ¯ and ¯ as long as

                              ¯f =
                                  ¯ 1f = ¯ = ¯ ,             for every f  G.
                                          1f  f


Furthermore, the initial factor income shares   ¯ f are also sufficient statistics for equilibrium changes
in the aggregate price index  log p y , factor wages  log w f , factor quantities  log L f , and changes
in factor income shares  log  f .

    In other words, the response of output, inflation and employment with respect to
sectoral factor supply shocks  log L¯ and aggregate demand shocks  log  do not de-
pend on the production network beyond the factor income shares in the initial pre-shock
equilibrium. In particular, an economy without intermediates is isomorphic to one with
intermediates as long as both economies have the same initial factor income shares. Fur-

                                                    7
thermore, since the lower-bound on wages can be -, Theorem 1 also applies to models
with flexible wages and prices.
    Theorem 1 clarifies what ingredients are necessary if the production network is to
matter. We need to introduce either (1) shocks that affect intermediate inputs as well as
factors, that is, TFP shocks, or (2) sector-specific demand shocks (as opposed to aggregate
demand shocks), or (3) allow elasticities of substitution to vary across producers and
consumers in the economy, or (4) allow for sticky prices.
    Intuitively, employment, and therefore output, is determined by how the production
network directs the flow spending across different factor markets. In response to changes
in relative prices, producers and consumers substitute away from some inputs and to-
wards others. When elasticities of substitution in production and consumption are all
the same, these substitutions all happen at the same rate, so that demand for each factor
ultimately depends on the factor's price relative to the consumer price index and the
details of the input-output matrix drop out.
    Theorem 1 can be proved by showing that the equilibrium conditions do not depend
on the input-output matrix     ¯ beyond the initial factor shares ¯ . To see this, use  log E =
 log p y +  log Y to rearrange (3) to get

                         log E = (1 - ) log p y +  log  +  log .                          (11)

   Next, since every good is ultimately made up of factors, changes in the CPI depend
only on changes in factor prices. That is,
                                                                       
                               1     
                                                 ¯
                                                                       
                      log p =
                           y
                                                  f exp (1 - ) log w f  .
                                                                       
                                 log                                                      (12)
                                                                       
                              1-
                                                                       
                                                                       
                                           f G


   Finally, factor demand can be shown to be isoelastic with elasticity  in the price of
each factor relative to the CPI, so that

                                  1                     -1
                      log w f =      log E -  log L f +     log p y .                     (13)
                                                        

Equilibrium in the factor market is determined by combining factor demand (13) with the
factor supply relationship (5). Taken together, these equations pin down all the relevant
variables without requiring any information about the input-output network   ¯ beyond  ¯.
This means that when the assumptions of Theorem 1 are satisfied, a multi-sector analysis
that abstracts from input-output linkages, along the lines of Guerrieri et al. (2020), is
without loss of generality.


                                                 8
3   Conclusion
We provide conditions under which the responses of sectoral employment, output, and
inflation to sectoral supply shocks or aggregate demand shocks do not depend on the
production network beyond the factor income shares in the initial pre-shock equilibrium.
This network-irrelevance result holds despite the fact that the model features comple-
mentarities in consumption and production, as well as downward nominal wage rigidity
and market incompleteness. This result clarifies the ingredients that must be added to a
model, if the production network is to matter. In this short paper, we do not analyze how
the economy responds to negative supply and demand shocks, including how the produc-
tion network plays a prominent role once the assumptions of Theorem 1 are relaxed. For
studies that analyze and quantify such comparative statics see Baqaee and Farhi (2020b)
and Baqaee and Farhi (2020a) and the references therein.


References
Baqaee, David, and Emmanuel Farhi. 2020a. "Nonlinear Production Networks with an
  Application to the Covid-19 Crisis."
Baqaee, David, and Emmanuel Farhi. 2020b. "Supply and Demand in Disaggregated
  Keynesian Economies with an Application to the Covid-19 Crisis."
Chetty, Raj, John N Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, Michael Stepner, et al. 2020. "How
  did covid-19 and stabilization policies affect spending and employment? a new real-
  time economic tracker based on private sector data." National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Guerrieri, Veronica, Guido Lorenzoni, Ludwig Straub, and Iv´       an Werning. 2020.
  "Macroeconomic Implications of COVID-19: Can Negative Supply Shocks Cause De-
  mand Shortages?" National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                           9
