                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE GLOBALIZATION OF POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION:
THE ROLE OF INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS IN THE US HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEM

                                         John Bound
                                         Breno Braga
                                        Gaurav Khanna
                                         Sarah Turner

                                     Working Paper 28342
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28342


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2021




We thank the National Science Foundation (NSF # 1735786) for generous research support. We
are grateful to Nathaniel Ruby for superb research assistance. We thank Enrico Moretti, Gordon
Hanson and Timothy Taylor for insightful comments on earlier drafts. This paper was prepared
for publication in the Journal of Economic Perspectives. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by John Bound, Breno Braga, Gaurav Khanna, and Sarah Turner. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Globalization of Postsecondary Education: The Role of International Students in the US
Higher Education System
John Bound, Breno Braga, Gaurav Khanna, and Sarah Turner
NBER Working Paper No. 28342
January 2021
JEL No. I2,J24,J6

                                         ABSTRACT

In the four decades since 1980, US colleges and universities have seen the number of students
from abroad quadruple. This rise in enrollment and degree attainment affects the global supply of
highly educated workers, the flow of talent to the US labor market, and the financing of US
higher education. Yet, the impacts are far from uniform, with significant differences evident by
level of study and type of institution. The determinants of foreign flows to US colleges and
universities reflect both changes in student demand from abroad and the variation in market
circumstances of colleges and universities, with visa policies serving a mediating role. The
consequences of these market mechanisms impact global talent development, the resources of
colleges and universities, and labor markets in the United States and countries sending students.


John Bound                                      Gaurav Khanna
Department of Economics                         University of California, San Diego
University of Michigan                          9500 Gilman Drive
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220                        La Jolla, CA 92037
and NBER                                        gakhanna@ucsd.edu
jbound@umich.edu
                                                Sarah Turner
Breno Braga                                     University of Virginia
Urban Institute                                 Department of Economics
bbraga@urban.org                                Monroe Hall, Room 237
                                                248 McCormick Rd
                                                Charlottesville, VA 22903
                                                and NBER
                                                set5h@virginia.edu
Introduction
University learning has facilitated the flow of individuals and knowledge across national borders for
centuries, but the recent scale of student flows and the magnitude of tuition revenues from foreign
students across the globe is unprecedented. The number of students pursuing higher education degrees
outside their home countries more than doubled between 2000 and 2017 to reach 5.3 million (UNESCO
2018).
        For the United States, which has a large number of colleges and universities and a
disproportionate share of the most highly ranked colleges and universities in the world, total enrollment of
foreign students more than tripled between 1980 and 2017, from 305,000 to over one million students in
2017 (National Center for Enrollment Statistics 2018). This rising population of students from abroad has
made higher education a major export sector of the US economy, generating $44 billion in export revenue
in 2019, with educational exports being about as big as the total exports of soybeans, corn, and textile
supplies combined (Bureau of Economic Analysis 2020).
          Traditionally, talented undergraduate and graduate students from abroad have engaged with
educational opportunities that exist in the United States at a time when their home countries often had
more limited high-quality university options. In addition, for students, especially those in fields related to
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics, time spent studying in the United States has
facilitated access to job opportunities, with the US visa system structured to encourage this behavior.
Unlike work visas, student visas are not subject to a cap and constitute an important pathway for the
foreign-born to enter the US labor market (Rosenzweig 2006; Bound et al. 2014). The participation of
students from abroad in US higher education affects the global production of skills and ultimately alters
the allocation of university-educated workers to labor markets in the United States and abroad. On the
supply side of higher education, US colleges and universities saw the opportunity to recruit talented
students and, in some cases, to generate revenue.
         We begin with an overview of the basic evidence of student flows to US colleges and universities
by degree level and type of institution and the visa policies which mediate these flows. We examine how
factors driving the demand for higher education--reflecting socioeconomic and demographic change
abroad, and supply-side factors, reflecting the behavior of US colleges and universities--impact these
flows. Finally, we explore the potential consequences of reductions in foreign student flows for talent
development and labor markets in the United States and abroad. Even before the COVID-19 pandemic
and accompanying recession, there was evidence that enrollment of foreign students in US higher
education was slowing dramatically, driven by some combination of improved educational and
employment opportunities in home countries and other non-US destinations as well as perceptions of
rising US hostility to immigrants. Given the formidable levels of tuition revenue generated by foreign
students, especially at the undergraduate and master's levels, any reduction in the flow of foreign students
would have a direct and negative impact on university resources that would not be easily offset by other
sources of support. While reductions in the flow of foreign students at the doctorate level would not lead
to declines in tuition revenues--given that PhD students usually receive financial support from
universities--disruptions in academic research are likely to follow, which would likely not be offset in
full by growth in doctorate study among domestic students.




                                                                                                             2
Trends in Higher Education Flows
The number of foreign students enrolled in US universities at both the under- graduate and graduate levels
has grown considerably over the last four decades: as noted earlier, total foreign enrollment rose from
305,000 in 1980 to over one million students in 2017 (National Center for Enrollment Statistics 2018).
Foreign students as a share of total enrollment increased from 2.5 to 5.1 percent over this interval.
Turning to degrees awarded by US institutions, about 5 percent of all bachelor's degrees (BAs) were
awarded to international students in 2017­18, 18 percent of master's degrees (MAs), and 13 percent of
doctorate degrees, as illustrated in Figure 1.
        While undergraduate and graduate enrollment maintain broadly similar trajectories over the past
40 years (as indicated in Figure 1), the underlying causes of enrollment growth are quite distinct, as we
discuss below. In addition, over the past two decades, the rise in master's-level enrollment has generated
most of the increase in graduate enrollment. While the number of doctorate degrees awarded to inter-
national students increased by 22 percent between 2010 and 2017 (from 18,965 to 23,199), the number of
master's degrees increased by 68 percent (from 163,827 to 184,074) over the same period.
         At the level of countries most likely to send students to the United States, economies in transition
and those with newly opened markets often lead with growth in US enrollment at the doctorate level
because these programs offer financial support in the form of fellowships, research assistantships, and
teaching assistantships (Bound, Turner, and Walsh 2009). Undergraduate enrollment at US institutions
then follows only after there is expansion in the pool of students able to afford the tuition of US
undergraduate programs; China exemplifies this pattern with doctorate-level enrollment expanding in the
1980s and 1990s, followed by undergraduate enrollment in the 2000s. Today, China is the largest source
country for enrollment at both the undergraduate and graduate levels. Other countries with substantial
student flows include India, South Korea, and Saudi Arabia. 1
         The increase in international students is not a uniquely US-centric phenomenon. Colleges and
universities in Australia, Canada, and the United Kingdom also experienced a rapid increase in the
enrollment of students from China and India since 2000, as shown in Table 1. Although the United States
remains the largest destination country for students from these countries, the US higher education system
is no longer as dominant as it was 20 years ago. As an illustration, student flows from China to the United
States were more than 10 times larger than the flows to Australia and Canada in 2000; by 2017, those
ratios fell to 2.5 to 1 and 3.3 to 1, respectively. Yet even as competition for international students has
increased, the world market for higher education remains highly concentrated with just eight countries
accounting for 58 percent of net student inflows in 2017 (UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2018)--the
United States, United Kingdom, Australia, Germany, France, Russia, Canada, and Japan--and the first
three of those countries accounting for 34 percent of all student imports.




1
  There was a substantial growth in the number of students in the United States from Saudi Arabia over the decade
from 2003 to 2013, but this is something of a special case. Much of this growth was concentrated at the
undergraduate level, increasing from 2,022 students in 2003 to 26,865 in 2013. A clear impetus behind this increase
was the introduction of the King Abdullah Scholarship Program, which stemmed from efforts to improve Saudi-US
relations post-9/11, but has since grown into a substantial program aimed at boosting Saudi human capital. However,
decreased budgets and new restrictions on approved universities have limited its growth since 2016. For discussion,
see Saudi Arabian Cultural Bureau (2014).

                                                                                                                 3
Distribution of Students across Institutions and Fields of Study
The enrollment of international students varies considerably across post- secondary institutions. In the
21st century, foreign enrollment of undergraduate students is largely concentrated at public research
universities, including large institutions like the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign and Purdue
University, which are somewhat less selective than top private research universities. The concentration of
international students at these public universities reflects their scale, but also the fact that these
universities have relied on tuition revenue from foreign students to cushion the effects of falling
appropriations in the last decade (Bound et al. 2020). Still, the reliance of US colleges and universities on
tuition revenue from abroad is not a 21st century phenomenon. In the late 1970s, the exposure of many
private colleges to risk of a foreign enrollment shock became evident when relations (and financial flows)
with Iran soured, and some colleges and universities found them- selves at financial risk when payments
from Iran ceased (Hechinger 1979).
         As shown in Table 2, foreign students studying at the undergraduate level are most numerous at
research-intensive public universities (about 32 percent of all bachelor's degrees), though they also enroll
in substantial numbers at non-doctorate and less selective private and public institutions. Declining state
support for public colleges and universities is one factor propelling the enrollment of foreign under-
graduates at public universities. Since the mid-1980s, state appropriations per student for these
institutions have fallen from about $12,000 per full-time equivalent to less than $7,000 in 2015. For
public universities, the balance between state appropriations and tuition revenues has shifted markedly
over time toward greater reliance on tuition revenues, which induced publicly funded universities to seek
tuition revenue from full-fee paying international undergraduates (Bound et al. 2020).
         The enrollment of international master's students is more difficult to characterize. For
international students, incentives for pursuing an MA degree are diverse. One is the desire to live in a
major US city like New York or Los Angeles; indeed, Columbia, New York University, and the
University of Southern California stand out as institutions that awarded more than 3,000 MA degrees to
foreign students in 2016. For some international master's students, these programs provide skills and
credentials to strengthen applications to US doctorate programs, while for others, MA-level study yields
direct access to employment options in the United States, particularly in areas where information
technology-related industries are expanding. 2 In particular, the enrollment of students from India is
typically concentrated in master's programs, with more than 90,000 Indian students enrolled in master's
programs in 2015. It is also noticeable that some less selective public universities, such as the University
of Central Missouri and the University of Texas at Dallas, have a high number of foreign master's-level
students. While lower prices than more highly ranked institutions may be part of the attraction of these
institutions for foreign students (Redden 2017), it is also the case that many of these colleges actively pay
foreign recruiters; for example, Chen and Korn (2015) report that Wichita State pays foreign agents
between $1,000 and $1,600 per student for recruiting.
        Naturally, doctorate-level students are concentrated at research universities (Table 2), with public
research universities having a somewhat higher level of foreign PhD degrees. Public research universities

2
  Focusing on MA degrees in computer science and information technology-related fields, Bound et al. (2014) note
that there is substantial heterogeneity in the programs awarding degrees to temporary residents. Institutions
awarding large numbers of master's degrees in computer science to temporary residents in 2013 include Carnegie
Mellon University (464), Illinois Institute of Technology (397), University of Southern California (377), Columbia
University in the City of New York (292), and University of Texas at Dallas (214). Ghose and Turner (2020)
demonstrate the sensitivity of MA enrollment from foreign students to labor demand variation, with much of the
MA enrollment changes concentrated among less-selective and for-profit institutions.

                                                                                                                     4
provide both greater scale and large programs in engineering, science, and technology fields, which tend
to attract foreign students.
         International students represent a higher share of students in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics programs than in any other fields at the bachelor's, master's, and PhD levels (Appendix
Figure A1). In fact, about 17 percent of all BA degrees in mathematics were awarded to temporary
residents in 2017. The concentration of international students in master's programs in the fields of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics is even more remarkable: for example, in 2017 foreign
students received about 62 percent of all master's degrees in computer science and 55 percent in
engineering. Nonetheless, the representation of foreign students was higher in 2017 than 2002 in virtually
all fields in both bachelor's and master's programs.


Visa Policy for Foreign Study in the United States
International students enter the United States on F, J, or M, student non-immigrant visas: the F-1 student
visa is the primary mode for full-time foreign students, J-1 visas are for exchange students and
researchers, and the less frequently used M-1 visa is for those attending vocational or technical education.
F-1 students must first be accepted by a US higher education institution certified by the Student and
Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP), which provides the student with a certificate of eligibility for non-
immigrant student status (the I-20 form). The student pays a SEVIS (Student and Exchange Visitor
Information System) fee to the US Citizenship and Immigration Services ($200 in 2020) and applies for a
visa at a US Embassy before entering the United States. To remain in legal status, the student must
maintain a full course load but can engage in part-time work at the college or university.
        The term of an F visa can be extended beyond formal academic enrollment through participation
in Optional Practical Training (OPT), which allows for temporary employment related to a student's
major area of study. This option provides an extended period in the United States for a foreign student to
search for employment outside the constraints of a numerical visa quota. In 2008, the duration of the OPT
was extended from 12 to 29 months for those in science, technology, engineering, or mathematics fields.
An administrative change extended the number of designated programs from about 90 to nearly 400 in
June 2012, and another change extended the term to 36 months in 2016.
        Student visas differ from work visas in that they are largely unconstrained in quantity. The
primary work visa for those with a college degree is the H-1B, which requires that the employee be in a
specialty occupation, defined as one that requires "theoretical and practical application of a body of
highly specialized knowledge and attainment of a Bachelor's or higher, or its equivalent." H-1B visas
require an employer application and sponsorship, and their use in the private sector is subject to a cap
(currently binding at 65,000 per year with some additional allowances) for all foreign workers except
those from five exempt countries (Canada, Mexico, Chile, Singapore, and Australia). 3 While binding in
the private sector, higher education institutions, non-profit research organizations, and government
agencies are exempt from the H-1B visa cap, providing an additional pathway to the labor market for
individuals studying in the United States on F visas. As a result, students from H-1B-dependent countries

3
 Although the original H-1 visa did not have a numerical cap, the Immigration Act of 1990 imposed an annual cap
of 65,000 visas. This total was not reached during the early 1990s, but the cap became binding in the mid-1990s. In
1999 and 2000, the cap was raised to 115,000, and then to 195,000 in 2001. This limit held until 2004, when the H-
1B cap reverted to 65,000 once again. In 2004, Congress authorized, through the Visa Reform Act, that an extra
20,000 H1-B visas could be issued to foreign workers holding advanced degrees from US universities.

                                                                                                                      5
became more likely to work in academic institutions when the H-1B cap became binding in 2004
(Amuedo-Dorantes and Furtado 2019).
        In Figure 2, panel A presents the different types of high-skill visas and the transitions between
them. Panel B shows the number of visas for each category issued between 1997 and 2018. It
demonstrates the lack of numerical constraints on student visas--since the mid-2000s, student visas have
increased sharply, even as the numbers dwarf the frequently debated H-1B visa program. Student visas
are an important pathway into the US labor market. Yet, as the figure shows, the transition rates from
student visas to work visas have steadily declined over time because even as student visas have increased,
the number of new H-1B visas has stayed roughly constant. 4
        After graduating from US higher education institutions, foreign students have three primary
options. First, they may enroll in a different degree program with a new F-visa, such as when continuing
from a bachelor's to a master's program or from a master's to a PhD program. Second, they may start
working for a US employer either through an OPT extension on the same F-visa or through a work visa,
such as an H-1B. Their third option is to leave the country. Alternative options include a direct path to
permanent residency as a spouse/relation of a US citizen.
         Because student visas are an important stepping-stone for participating in the US labor market,
changes to visa policy and the availability of H-1B opportunities will affect decisions to study in the
United States (Kato and Sparber 2013). Indeed, policy adjustments such as the extension of the OPT
period for F-1 degree recipients in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics fields and a rule-
making change favoring US advanced degree recipients in the allocation of H-1B visas potentially affect
both foreign educational investments and persistence in the US labor market (Radnofsky 2019; Amuedo-
Dorantes, Furtado, and Xu 2019). In effect, growth in the student visa reservoir and the pool of students
persisting with OPTs increases the supply of foreign-born college-educated workers in the United States
and effectively lengthens the queue for employment visas such as the H-1B and employment-based
permanent residency.
         In recent years, other countries have begun competing with the United States for high-skilled
immigrants by offering policies that provide somewhat flexible options for transitions to employment.
Both Canada and Australia have programs which allow foreign-born graduates to stay in the country after
they finish their studies. They also use these programs to feed their permanent residency point-based
selection program (Moltaji 2017; Crown, Faggian, and Corcoran 2020). For example, obtaining a
Canadian post-secondary educational credential generates extra points in the Express Entry system used
by Canada to select economic migrants (Canada Express Entry 2020). Applicants are also awarded extra
points in the Australian Skilled Immigration Points Requirements if they completed their education from
an Australian educational institution (Australian Department of Home Affairs 2020). Such competing
immigration policies may, in turn, diminish the US advantage in attracting global talent.




4
  Since 2016, there has been a drop in new student visas, perhaps reflecting a change in the visa renewal
requirements of Chinese students as well as other global trends in the demand for higher education from abroad. In
2014, Chinese students were given an extension for their F-1 student visas, making them valid for five years instead
of one.

                                                                                                                   6
The Demand for US Higher Education from Abroad
Demand for admission to US degree programs--like programs in other foreign countries--depends on the
number of individuals academically prepared for post- secondary study, the availability of home country
university options, individuals' capacity to pay for education abroad, and the extent to which enrollment
provides a pathway to the US labor market. Because the home country supply of university opportunities
tends to be fairly inelastic in the short term (particularly in the research-intensive sectors), enrollment in
US degree programs is one way to satisfy demand for university education that cannot be immediately
accommodated by expansion in home countries. These forces generate predictable patterns in which
economic growth in a developing country fuels increases in US enrollment, with doctorate enrollment
often leading undergraduate enrollment. Eventually, the country's enrollment flow to the United States
(or other countries) will stabilize or decline as home-country capacity increases.
         For many developing countries, the opening of education markets to the United States is a first
step in a transition that includes improved diplomatic relations and the broader opening of markets to
international trade. For instance, the establishment of diplomatic relations between China and the United
States in 1979 dramatically increased the level of educational exchange between these two countries,
particularly at the doctorate level, with similar patterns evident in the post-Cold War era for students from
Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union in the late 1980s and early 1990s tied to political changes in
those countries (Blanchard, Bound, and Turner 2009). Conversely, political developments have also
sometimes worked to close down foreign student enrollment (and trade more generally), as happened for
students from China in the early 1950s, Hungary in the mid-1950s, and Iran after the 1979 Iranian
Revolution.
        Changes in educational attainment and personal incomes in developing countries have been a
major driver in the overall growth in demand from abroad for US post-secondary education. For countries
like South Korea, Singapore, Taiwan, China and India, the upward trend in secondary and post-secondary
attainment in recent decades has been remarkable. China experienced an increase of 15 million in the
number of students enrolled in secondary education between 1997 and 2017 (from about 68 million
students) and an increase of 38 million in students enrolled in post-secondary education (from about 6
million) during the same period (UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2018). In 2017, India had 61 million
more students enrolled in secondary education and 27 million more students enrolled in a post-secondary
education than in 1997.
         These dramatic growth trajectories were not matched by immediate expansion in home country
university capacity, at a time in the 1980s and 1990s when opportunities for study at home country
research universities comparable to highly ranked North American or European research universities were
very limited. In 2003, no universities from China were among the 50 most highly ranked universities in
the world, while universities from the United States occupied 39 of the top 50 spots. Today, two
universities from China have entered this elite group, while US universities represent 31 of the 50 most
highly ranked universities in the world (Shanghai Ranking 2020). Massive Chinese government
investments in research and university education in the last two decades have produced expansion of
home-country capacity for both undergraduate and graduate education: specifically, Project 985 promotes
the 39 top universities in China, while Project 211 targets the top 112 universities.
        At the undergraduate level, enrollment demand for US institutions from foreign students reflects
the presence of types of programs rarely available in other countries, including liberal arts colleges and
other broad-based programs of study, along with a greater supply of selective and resource-intensive
options. Even as China and India have developed highly competitive elite universities, and their capacity

                                                                                                             7
has grown in the last two decades, seats are so scarce at these institutions that admission to top-ranked US
colleges may be no more difficult; indeed, Najar (2011) provides evidence that some of the most qualified
students in India are being crowded out of top Indian colleges.
         For countries like China, enrollment in US and other foreign doctorate programs increased before
the growth in enrollment in undergraduate and masters-level programs charging tuition. The upward
trajectory in doctorate enrollment started in the 1980s even as the growth in undergraduate enrollment did
not escalate until the 21st century (Bound, Turner, and Walsh 2009). In the 1980s and 1990s, US
universities awarded more PhDs to students from China than did Chinese universities. Because foreign
doctoral students commonly receive full support in the form of fellowships and teaching assistantships,
their enrollment is often less sensitive to home country income.
         Over the past 20 years, a substantial number of households in developing countries have
experienced increasing income levels, which provide them with the capacity to pay for US higher
education (Bird and Turner 2014). For instance, Bound et al. (2020) estimate that the fraction of Chinese
families with incomes greater than the average amount charged by US public universities for out-of-state
tuition and room and board grew from 0.005 percent in the year 2000 to more than 2 percent by 2013.
This growth in the ability of Chinese families to pay for a US education in the first part of the 21st
century allowed US universities to enroll increasing numbers of qualified full-fare paying students from
abroad, particularly at the undergraduate and master's levels.
         Chinese cities experiencing the largest income growth induced by increased goods exports were
among those with the greatest outflow of international students to US universities (Khanna et al. 2020). In
effect, Chinese families in locally booming economies used some of their new trade-liberalization driven
wealth to send students abroad. This response of flows to income growth was strong for students at the
undergraduate and master's level and not detectable at the doctorate level. Accordingly, the response was
also strongest among self-funded students. This is not only a demonstration of the effects of income
growth on US enrollment but also demonstrates how the US trade deficit in goods with China partially
cycled back as an export surplus in higher education services.
        Beyond (potential) access to post-secondary options unavailable in their home countries,
obtaining a US degree provides the advantage of potentially easier access to US employment options
 (Rosenzweig 2006; Bound et al. 2014). 5 Because most students graduating from a US university are
eligible for an extension of their visas with the pursuit of OPT, they are able to gain employment in the
US labor market without needing an H-1B visa in the supply-constrained lottery. In addition, obtaining a
degree from a US college or university may provide advantages for foreign students searching for jobs
over those educated abroad, to the extent that US employers have more information on skills acquired at
familiar educational institutions, and employers might find it more straightforward to interview
candidates on site. Moreover, the likelihood that foreign students stay in the United States after finishing
their studies is also a function of economic conditions in their home countries. Generally, students from
higher-income nations are less likely to convert their student status to OPT than students from lower-
income countries, as shown in Figure 3. For example, about 65 percent of all US bachelor's graduates
from India switched to OPT in 2015, while only 28 percent of Canadian graduates switched to OPT over
the same period.


5
  Amuedo-Dorantes, Furtado, and Xu (2019) find evidence that when the OPT policy was changed in 2008 to extend
the time for science, technology, engineering, and mathematics graduates to stay in the United States after
graduation, it induced an increasing number of foreign students to major in these fields.

                                                                                                               8
          In turn, as the option value of pursuing employment in the US changes, we would expect
enrollment demand from abroad to adjust. Using the number of takers of the Graduate Record
Examination (GRE) as a measure of students' willingness to come to the United States for graduate
education, for most of the past two decades, the demand from Indian students for a US education has been
higher when US unemployment rates are low. Nonetheless, there is a significant drop in the number of
Indians taking the GRE since 2016, a period of low unemployment rates. One potential explanation for
this is a perception of less willingness of the United States to welcome immigrants after the 2016 election,
which makes the United States less attractive to international students (Anderson and Svrluga 2018).


The Supply Side: How US Colleges and Universities Benefit from Foreign Students
US colleges and universities seek talent and resources from international students. The relative
importance of academic skills and capacity to pay varies markedly by degree level and type of university.
        For most doctoral students, capacity to pay is secondary (and often irrelevant), as admission to
many PhD programs is accompanied by full tuition waivers and guaranteed living expenses for multiple
years. At the other extreme, many masters' degree and undergraduate programs have quite modest
academic requirements and can attract foreign students who are able to pay tuition levels that relatively
few US students are willing to pay in full. Occupying a middle ground are selective colleges and
universities that face excess demand for undergraduate programs along with professional programs like
the MBA. These institutions, often competing on quality, see both academic talent and capacity to pay
undiscounted or out-of- state prices among foreign students as inputs in their objective functions.
         University admission offices typically employ a variety of recruitment strategies to attract
international students, ranging from utilizing social media, to traveling abroad to meet with students,
parents, counselors, and alumni at schools and education fairs. In addition, several institutions started
experimenting with commission-based recruitment agents in the past years. If contracted by colleges,
these commissioned agents are paid on a per capita basis. As of 2017, 38.5 percent of US colleges and
universities reported using commission-based recruitment agents--up from 30 percent in 2010 (National
Association for College Admission Counseling 2018).
Revenue Implications
It would be naïve to understate the revenue implications of foreign students for US colleges and
universities. In 2019, foreign students poured nearly $44 billion into the US education system (Bureau of
Economic Analysis 2020). The revenue implications from tuition differ markedly by degree level, as
shown in Table 2. BA and MA students rarely have a "free ride," while it is quite common for doctorate-
level students to have university resources cover tuition and fees. International under- graduate students
pay nearly 96 percent of tuition costs from personal or home country sources at public research
universities.
         Among undergraduate students at private universities, the share of tuition paid by individuals is
somewhat smaller but the levels are higher, reflecting the higher tuition prices at private institutions. Two
different factors yield a modest wedge between the sticker price and what students pay for foreign
students at the undergraduate level: first, a modest number of very wealthy private institutions like
Princeton University provide some financial aid for foreign undergraduates, and second, somewhat less
selective private universities regularly engage in "discounting," which refers to offering need-based
financial aid to increase enrollment (Bowen and Breneman 1993)


                                                                                                             9
         Foreign students studying at the MA level represent a significant source of revenue in both the
public and private sectors of higher education, representing $3 billion and $4.3 billion in revenues
respectively. Although top research universities have the largest numbers of master's students and are
able to extract the highest prices (net tuition revenue of $39,858 on a posted tuition and fee level
averaging $45,512), there are also many full-pay foreign students outside this tier in the public and private
sectors.
         The importance of MA-level training for foreign students as a revenue source for universities has
increased markedly in recent years, with a number of universities adding revenue-generating programs
precisely to cater to foreign students. For example, the number of master's programs in the United States
where 80 percent or more of the graduates were foreign rose slowly, from 354 in 2000 to 512 by 2012. 6
But with declining state appropriations and stagnant federal funding for science over the last decade
(National Science Board 2020, Figure 5B-4), the number of such programs leaped, reaching nearly 1,000
by 2016 (Education Data Portal 2020). The growth has primarily been in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics programs, where demand from full-pay students from abroad may cross-
subsidize doctorate programs.
         In an accounting sense, doctoral programs are cost drivers, not sources of revenue generation, and
this pattern evidently holds true for foreign students as well as domestic students. Using data on total cost
of attendance (which includes living expenses), universities in the private and public sectors make a
substantial investment in foreign doctoral students. For 2015, average total expenses (tuition and living
expenses) for doctorate students at top private research universities were nearly $62,000, with funds from
universities averaging $55,572 (about 90 percent of the total); at public research universities, the
comparable numbers are $39,803 in total expenses, with $34,396 funded from universities (although
some of what appears as university funding may reflect grant funding from federal or private sources
allocated at the university level). Foreign doctorate students contribute not just to the research and
teaching enterprise but also to university prestige, particularly at universities looking to establish their
competitive research credentials. Moreover, the presence of doctorate programs may help recruit and
retain research-active faculty who are likely to gain from the capacity to teach small courses tied to
research specialties (Courant and Turner 2019).


Consequences of International Student Flows
Dramatic increases (or decreases) in foreign student flows may have implications not only for the
university sector, but also for labor markets and the broader economy in both the sending and receiving
countries. A body of work examines such consequences, most notably focused on the consequences on
the native-born, innovation, and higher-education institutions in the United States.
One obvious question is whether the spillovers of international flows of students on native students is
beneficial. On the negative side, there is some indication that foreign PhD students "crowd out" domestic
students (Borjas 2007), presumably in contexts where there are capacity constraints on enrollment along
with an excess demand for slots among domestic students. In addition, there is some indication that at the
undergraduate level, the concentration of international students in certain majors like business,
economics, or science and engineering may dilute per- student resources or lead local students to
concentrate in other fields (Anelli, Shih, and Williams 2017). Some suggest that growth in foreign


6
    These calculations are restricted to programs with at least five students.

                                                                                                          10
students may have generated institution-level administrative challenges, while others have questioned
how well foreign students are integrated at US universities (Jordan 2015; Redden 2014; Gareis 2012).
         Yet much evidence also points to the potential cross-subsidization of native students.
International students are an important source of revenue for public research universities facing declining
state appropriations (Bound et al. 2020). Without a ready supply of foreign students, such universities
would have had to navigate reductions in instructional resources per student or substantially raise in-state
tuition. Such cross-subsidization may also be present in graduate programs, specifically in terms of
revenue from master's programs (Shih 2017). Revenue-generating master's programs are not only more
likely to charge full sticker price than subsidized PhDs, but they are also relatively more elastic in their
supply. Many large research institutions now draw as much as 20 percent of their tuition revenue from
foreign students (Larmer 2019). Universities may invest in programs and centers better aligned with the
demands of foreign, rather than al, students. Yet, the revenue from international students may also help
institutions better cater to the preferences of local students. Of course, this pattern also makes these
institutions more dependent on foreign flows, which will fluctuate in response to global political crises,
home-country economies, growth in home-country institutional quality, and competition from other
developed economies like Canada, the United Kingdom, and Australia.
        International student flows also help generate a ready supply of high-skill foreign workers for the
US labor market. The OPT program mentioned earlier allows students between one and two years of
additional labor market experience in the United States post-graduation, and the stringently capped high-
skill H-1B program has a separate category of 20,000 visas that makes it easier for foreign citizens who
have a graduate degree from US universities. Such features help facilitate the transition to the US
workforce. In turn, the pool of foreign students considering US employment facilitates matches and
reduces the monopsony power employers have over their foreign workers. 7
        Foreign students looking for work in the United States are likely to have spillover effects on US
students for a combination of reasons. For example, the presence of foreign students who may be willing
to accept a lower wage may disadvantage US-born students. There is reason to believe that had firms not
been able to hire H-1B workers, the wages of US computer scientists would be even higher than they are
(Bound et al. 2015; Bound et al. 2013). As a result of constrained wages, fewer Americans may decide to
pursue fields likely dominated by foreign graduates.
        Additionally, some limited and anecdotal evidence exists that the expansion of OPT combined
with the potential for limited employment while enrolled has contributed to the rise of fraudulent post-
secondary institutions. One such example is the case of Tri-Valley University in California, which
appeared to have nearly 1,000 students enrolled on F-1 visas in May 2010, with 185 listed as pursuing a
doctorate degree in Computer Science. The institution was shut down in 2011 by Immigration and
Customs Enforcement with the founder charged with fraud and money laundering. 8 While cases of
outright fraud are likely to represent a very small share of the utilization of OPT and the extended

7
  Much of the criticism leveled at the H-1B program involves the limited mobility H-1B workers have. Similarly, to
be eligible for the OPT extensions, foreign students need to find jobs within two months of finishing their degree.
8
  A report in the Chronicle of Higher Education suggests, "Tri-Valley is only the beginning. Other colleges-- most
of them unaccredited--exploit byzantine federal regulations, enrolling almost exclusively foreign students and
charging them upward of $3,000 for a chance to work legally in the United States. They flourish in California and
Virginia, where regulations are lax, and many of their practices--for instance, holding some classes on only three
weekends per semester--are unconventional, to say the least. These colleges usher in thousands of foreign students
and generate millions of dollars in profits because they have the power, bestowed by the US government, to help
students get visas" (Bartlett, Fischer, and Keller 2011).

                                                                                                                 11
provisions associated with degrees in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics, there is a
legitimate question of how the extension of the OPT from 12 to 29 months in 2008 for recipients in these
fields affected outcomes in the United States. Demirci (2015) finds increases in the incidence and
duration of persistence in the United States for F-1 visa recipients at least in the immediate period after
degree completion, with these effects particularly marked for master's degree recipients.
         While the rates at which foreign students stay in the United States after receiving their degrees are
difficult to measure at the undergraduate and masters level, the five-year stay rate for doctorate recipients
exceeds 70 percent and is higher for those from China (84 percent) and India (86 percent) than from other
countries (authors' calculations using the Survey of Earned Doctorates). Similarly, at the PhD level, Finn
and Pennington (2018) find that 10-year stay rates (2002­03 to 2013) were highest among students from
China and India (85 percent), with students from South Korea, Europe, and the Americas less likely to
stay. Yet stay- rates for doctoral students are unlikely to translate to other levels of degree receipt; as
Figure 2 showed earlier, given the capped nature of work visas and the rising number of international
students, the transition rates from F-1 student to H-1B work visas have been steadily declining.
         Transitions to the US workforce are often concentrated in high-skill sectors, such as information
technology and health care (Bound et al. 2014). Foreign workers may help facilitate innovation and
production by allowing firms to draw from a large pool of global talent abroad (Kerr 2018). Indeed, a
number of studies have identified the outsized role played by immigrants in science and engineering
innovation, including elite settings like membership in the National Academy of Sciences, Nobel prize
receipt, and authorship of very highly cited papers (for example, Chellaraj, Maskus, and Mattoo 2008;
Black and Stephan 2010; Stuen, Mobarak, and Maskus 2012; Gaulé and Piacentini 2013). Immigrants
have also played prominent roles in tech entrepreneurship (Anderson and Platzer 2006; Saxenian 2000;
Wadhwa et al. 2007). But not all immigration in the tech field is concentrated in the tail end of the
distribution of innovation and productivity; for example, using patent data, Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle
(2010) find that, conditional on occupation, immigrants are equally likely to innovate as US-born
workers.
          Although it is relatively straightforward to enumerate the contributions of skilled immigrants
educated in the United States, assessing their overall effects on the US economy involves evaluating
counterfactuals. If there is some crowd-out of US-born workers, then enumerating the contributions of
skilled immigrants will exaggerate their net contributions. On the other hand, if the crowd out is less than
total, as would seem likely in most cases, then the net contribution will be positive. Outside specific
contexts, accurately gauging magnitudes is probably not possible.
          Labor market opportunities may also have substantial impacts on home economies. Sending
countries may experience "brain drain" as bright minds move abroad. On the other hand, the potential to
migrate abroad may encourage the foreign-born to acquire skills (such as undergraduate engineering
degrees) that are valued abroad. Such a "brain gain," combined with return migration at a later time, may
facilitate the shifting of knowledge and production to home countries (Khanna and Morales 2019).
Indeed, PhDs trained in the United States and other western countries may have fostered the growth of
tertiary education and scientific research in a range of counties (Kahn and MacGarvie 2016).
        Evaluating the effect that the availability of foreign students interested in and capable of attending
US universities has on these institutions and the US economy more generally will often involve important
feedback effects between the educational sector and the rest of the economy, as we have emphasized. For
instance, changes in the US H-1B program are likely to have significant effects on the demand for
education by both foreign and domestic students. Further, US immigration policy interacts with other

                                                                                                           12
features of the US economy including, for example, state higher education funding decisions. Evaluating
the relevant counterfactuals essentially involves working implicitly or explicitly with general equilibrium
models.


Moving Forward: The Future of the Higher Education Sector
The flow of foreign student revenues and talent from abroad has had a substantial impact on US higher
education in recent decades. As such, market forces, political crises and the COVID-19 pandemic that can
destabilize these flows are likely to result in reduced resources for US higher education institutions, with
such shocks reverberating to the economy more broadly. To that end, universities have started taking
precautionary measures like consciously diversifying their portfolio of origin countries, and even taking
out insurance policies to cover themselves against losses to foreign-student revenue (Bothwell 2018).
         Political concerns following the escalation of US-China trade relations in 2018, along with the
handling of the pandemic that erupted in 2020, may curb the flow of foreign students from abroad.
Khanna et al. (2020) estimate that if the US-China trade war continues, it could cost US universities about
30,000 Chinese students or $1.15 billion in revenue over the next 10 years. This loss, which would be
about 8 percent of educational service exports to China, is likely an underestimate of overall economic
losses for the US economy as it does not account for broader effects on local economies surrounding
universities. More generally, changes to the likelihood of obtaining a US work visa may discourage many
students who were looking at US education as a stepping-stone to the labor market. For the first time in
many decades, new foreign undergraduate enrollment has declined.
        At the same time, universities in other parts of the world have become global players in this
market and threaten the dominance of the US position in attracting foreign students. In particular, the
expansion of home-country higher education capacity may keep students back in China or India. In India,
the expansion of numerous Institutes of National Importance may stem the outflow of bachelor's students.
These Institutes are primarily teaching-based, but do produce a stream of high-quality students ready for
graduate programs. 9
         China has recently increased investments in both the instructional and research capacity of their
higher education institutions. One of the most prominent global rankings for universities is the Academic
Ranking of World Universities run by China's Shanghai Jiao Tong University and thus commonly known
as the Shanghai rankings. According to these rankings, the US share of the world's top 500 research
universities fell about 7 percentage points from 2004 to 2018, from 35 to 28 percent, while the share of
Chinese research universities in the top 500 accounted for most of this change by rising 8 percentage
points from 2 to 10 percent (Appendix Figure A2). On the margin of the top 500, Chinese universities are
"overtaking" some lower mid-tier US institutions. Such changes may affect the future flow of students
from abroad. This, in turn, would affect the size of the science and technology workforce produced by and
working in the United States, and the corresponding location of innovation and economic activity.
         US universities are experiencing drastic revenue shortfalls in the second half of 2020 and beyond
as a result of the COVID-19 crisis. For instance, these near-term losses are projected to be $250 million at
the University of Delaware (as reported in Flaherty 2020), $300 million at the University of North
Carolina Chapel Hill (Murphy 2020), and $500 million for university system in Maryland (Condon 2020).

9
  Institutes of National Importance specialize in both undergraduate and post-graduate education in technical fields
like medicine, information technology, sciences, engineering, architecture or business.

                                                                                                                   13
Possible in-person enrollment reductions in the summer and fall, and tightening visa and mobility
restrictions tend to exacerbate these shortfalls. As such, universities most reliant on foreign enrollment
may be most adversely affected. These include schools in the University of California system, and large
Midwestern universities, such as Purdue, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and Michigan
State, all of which enroll a relatively large number of their incoming first-year undergraduates from China
(Bound et al. 2020).
        Visas for the academic year are usually granted between March (when admissions decisions are
made) and September (when semesters begin). Between 2017 and 2019, about 290,000 visas were granted
each year over these seven months (United States Department of State 2020). Between March and
September 2020, only 37,680 visas were granted--an extraordinary drop of 87 percent. Visas for students
from China dropped from about 90,000 down to only 943 visas between March and September 2020. A
fall 2020 survey of 700 higher education institutions found that one in five international students were
studying online from abroad in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Overall, new international
enrollment (including those online) decreased by 43 percent, with at least 40,000 students deferring
enrollment (Baer and Martel 2020). Not only does the absence of international students from campuses in
the 2020-21 academic year impact college-town economies and university dorm revenues, but the
disruption in the flow of new international enrollment may have lasting impacts on university finances
and academic outcomes.




                                                                                                        14
References
Amuedo-Dorantes, Catalina, Delia Furtado, and Huanan Xu. 2019. "OPT Policy Changes and Foreign
Born STEM Talent in the US." Labour Economics 61.
Anderson, Nick, and Susan Svrluga. 2018. "What's the Trump Effect on International Enrollment? Report
Finds New Foreign Students Are Dwindling." The Washington Post, November 13.
Anderson, Stuart, and Michaela Platzer. 2006. "American Made: The Impact of Immigrant Entrepreneurs
and Professionals on US Competitiveness." Washington, DC: National Venture Capital Association.
Anelli, Massimo, Kevin Shih, and Kevin Williams. 2017. "Foreign Peer Effects and STEM Major
Choice." IZA Discussion Paper 10743.
Australian Department of Home Affairs. 2020. Points Table for Skilled Independent Visa (Subclass 189).
Canberra: Government of Australia.
Baer, Julie and Martel, Mirka. 2020. "Fall 2020 International Student Enrollment Snapshot." Institute of
International Education. November 2020.
Bartlett, Tom, Karin Fischer, and Josh Keller. 2011. "Little-Known Colleges Exploit Visa Loopholes to
Make Millions Off Foreign Students." The Chronicle of Higher Education, March 20. https://www.
chronicle.com/article/Little-Known-Colleges-Make/126822.
Bird, Kelli, and Sarah Turner. 2014. "College in the States: Foreign Student Demand and Higher
Education Supply in the U.S." https://curry.virginia.edu/sites/default/files/uploads/
resourceLibrary/23_Bird_Foreign_Student_Demand.pdf.
Black, Grant C., and Paula E. Stephan. 2010. "The Economics of University Science and the Role of
Foreign Graduate Students and Postdoctoral Scholars." In American Universities in a Global Market,
edited by Charles T. Clotfelter, 129­61. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Blanchard, Emily, John Bound, and Sarah Turner. 2009. "Opening (and Closing) Doors: Country-Specific
Shocks in U.S. Doctorate Education." Population Studies Center Report 09-674.
Borjas, George J. 2007. "Do Foreign Students Crowd Out Native Students from Graduate Programs?" In
Science and the University, edited by Paula E. Stephan, and Ronald G. Ehrenberg. Madison: University
of Wisconsin Press.
Bothwell, Ellie. 2018. "Insuring Against Drop in Chinese Students" Inside Higher Ed, November 29.
https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2018/11/29/university-illinois-insures-itself-against- possible-
drop-chinese-enrollments.
Bound, John, Breno Braga, Joseph M. Golden, and Gaurav Khanna. 2015. "Recruitment of Foreigners in
the Market for Computer Scientists in the United States." Journal of Labor Economics 33 (S): S197­223.
Bound, John, Breno Braga, Joseph M. Golden, and Sarah Turner. 2013. "Pathways to Adjustment: The
Case of Information Technology Workers." American Economic Review 103 (3): 203­07.
Bound, John, Breno Braga, Gaurav Khanna, and Sarah Turner. 2020. "A Passage to America: University
Funding and International Students." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 12 (1): 97­126.




                                                                                                        15
Bound, John, Murat Demirci, Gaurav Khanna, and Sarah Turner. 2014. "Finishing Degrees and Finding
Jobs: U.S. Higher Education and the Flow of Foreign IT Workers" Innovation Policy and The Economy
15 (2015).
Bound, John, Sarah Turner, and Patrick Walsh. 2009. "Internationalization of U.S. Doctorate Education."
In Science and Engineering Careers in the United States: An Analysis of Markets and Employment,
edited by R. B. Freeman and D. L. Goroff, 59­98. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bowen, William G., and Breneman, David W. 1993. "Student Aid: Price Discount or Educational Invest-
ment?" The Brookings Review 11 (1).
Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2020. "International Transactions, International Services, and Interna-
tional Investment Position Tables." International Data. https://apps.bea.gov/iTable/iTable.cfm?r
eqid=62&step=6&isuri=1&tablelist=245&product=4. (accessed November 1, 2020).
Canada Express Entry. 2020. Canada Express Entry Eligibility. https://www.canadaexpressentry.org/
eligibility.php. (accessed November 1, 2020).
Chellaraj, Gnanaraj, Keith E. Maskus, and Aaditya Mattoo. 2008. "The Contribution of International
Graduate Students to US Innovation." Review of International Economics 16 (3): 444­62.
Chen, Te-Ping, and Melissa Korn. 2015. "American Colleges Pay Agents to Woo Foreigners, Despite
Fraud Risk" Wall Street Journal, September 30. https://www.wsj.com/articles/american-colleges-pay-
agents-to-woo-foreigners-despite-fraud-risk-1443665884.
Condon, Christine. 2020. "University System of Maryland chancellor takes pay cut, warns employees
could `share in the pain' of pandemic" The Baltimore Sun, September 9. https://www.
baltimoresun.com/education/bs-md-university-system-losses-chancellor-pay-cut-20200909-
fmqwssllkncvjer22m37e3niiq-story.html.
Courant, Paul N., and Sarah Turner. 2019. "Faculty Deployment in Research Universities." In
Productivity in Higher Education, edited by Caroline M. Hoxby and Kevin Stange, 177­208. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Crown, Daniel, Alessandra Faggian, and Jonathan Corcoran. 2020. "Foreign-Born Graduates and Innova-
tion: Evidence from an Australian Skilled Visa Program." Research Policy 49 (9).
Demirci, Murat. 2015. "OPT and The Impact of High Skill Immigration on Career Decisions of College-
Educated Natives." Unpublished.
Education Data Portal. 2020. "Version 0.9.0, Urban Institute, Center on Education Data and Policy."
https://educationdata.urban.org/documentation/. (accessed April 1, 2020).
Finn, Michael, and Leigh Ann Pennington. 2018. Stay Rates of Foreign Doctorate Recipients from U.S.
Univer- sities, 2013. Oak Ridge, TN: Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education.
Flaherty, Darryl. 2020. "The Cost of COVID-19 for the University of Delaware" Delaware Online,
October3. https://www.delawareonline.com/story/opinion/2020/10/03/cost-covid-19-university-
delaware/5893911002/.
Gareis, Elisabeth. 2012. "Intercultural Friendship: Effects of Home Region and Sojourn Location."
Journal of International and Intercultural Communication 5: 309­28.


                                                                                                       16
Gaulé, Patrick, and Mario Piacentini. 2013. "Chinese Graduate Students and US Scientific Productivity."
Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (2): 698­701.
Ghose, Devaki, and Sarah Turner. 2020. "Enrollment as Access to Employment: Evidence from Foreign
Student Enrollment in CS." Unpublished.
Hechinger, Fred M.. 1979. "Iranians' Plight Puts a Spotlight on U.S. Colleges." New York Times,
February 20. Section C, Page 4.
Hunt, Jennifer, and Marjolaine Gauthier-Loiselle. 2010. "How Much Does Immigration Boost Innova-
tion?" American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (2): 31­56.
Jordan, Miriam. 2015. "International Students Stream into U.S. Colleges." Wall Street Journal, March 24.
http://www.wsj.com/articles/international-students-stream-into-u-s-colleges-1427248801.
Kahn, Shulamit, and Megan MacGarvie. 2016. "Do Return Requirements Increase International Knowl-
edge Diffusion? Evidence from the Fulbright Program." Research Policy 45 (6): 1304­22.
Kato, Takao, and Chad Sparber. 2013. "Quotas and Quality: The effect of H-1B Visa Restrictions on the
Pool of Prospective Undergraduate Students from Abroad." The Review of Economics and Statistics 95
(1): 109­26.
Kerr, William. 2018. "The Gift of Global Talent: How Migration Shaped Business, Economy, &
Society." Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Khanna, Gaurav, and Nicolas Morales. 2019. "The IT Boom and Other Unintended Consequences of
Chasing the American Dream." http://www-personal.umich.edu/~moralesn/Khanna%20 Morales.pdf.
Khanna, Gaurav, Kevin Shih, Ariel Weinberg, Mingzhi Xu, and Miaojie Yu. 2020. "Trade Liberalization
and Chinese Students in US Higher Education." Unpublished.
Larmer, Brook. 2019. "One of America's Most Vital Exports, Education, Never Goes Abroad, but It Still
Faces Threats." The New York Times, January 3. https://www.nytimes.com/2019/01/03/magazine/ one-
of-americas-most-vital-exports-education-never-goes-abroad-but-it-still-faces-threats.html.
Moltaji, Golbon. 2017 "Exploring the Sensory Terrain of Mobility among Graduates Who Immigrate to
Canada via Post Graduate Work Permit Program" PhD diss. proposal. University of Ottawa.
Murphy, Kate. 2020. "More Employees See Cuts as NC Universities Face Sharp Financial Losses Due to
COVID-19." The News & Observer, September 24. https://www.newsobserver.com/news/local/
education/article245916490.html.
Najar, Nida. 2011. "Squeezed Out in India, Students Turn to U.S." New York Times, October 13. https://
www.nytimes.com/2011/10/14/world/asia/squeezed-out-in-india-students-turn-to-united-states.html.
National Association for College Admission Counseling. 2018. "Trends in Commission-Based
International Student Recruitment." https://www.nacacnet.org/globalassets/documents/knowledge-center/
international/agent-series-_part-1-cr.pdf.
 National Center for Education Statistics. 2018. Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System Enroll-
ment. "Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System Enrollment." https://nces.ed.gov/ ipeds/.
(accessed April 1, 2020).



                                                                                                     17
National Science Board. 2020. National Science Foundation, Science & Engineering Indicators. https://
ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsb20202/. (accessed April 1, 2020).
Radnofsky, Louise. 2019. "U.S. Changes Visa Process for High-Skilled Workers." Wall Street Journal,
January 31.    https://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-changes-visa-process-for-high-skilled-workers-
11548879868.
Redden, Elizabeth. 2014. "Integrating International Students, So You Have X Number of International
Students on Your Campus. So What?" Inside Higher Ed, February 20. https://www.insidehighered.
com/news/2014/02/20/gathering-senior-international-educators-integration-international- students-was.
Redden, Elizabeth. 2017. "Boom in Indian Enrollments, Followed by Bust." Inside Higher Ed, October
30. https://www.insidehighered.com/admissions/article/2017/10/30/after-huge-surge-enrollment- india-
central-missouri-sees-substantial.
Rosenzweig, Mark. 2006. "Global Wage Differences and International Student Flows." Brookings Trade
Forum 57­86.
Saudi Arabian Cultural Bureau. 2014. "KASP Scholarship Program." https://www.saudibureau.org/en/
inside.php?ID=16. (accessed April 1, 2020).
Saxenian, AnnaLee. 2000. Silicon Valley's New Immigrant Entrepreneurs. Santa Clara, CA: Public
Policy Institute of California.
Shanghai Ranking, Consultancy. 2020. "Academic Ranking of World Universities 2018." http://www.
shanghairanking.com/ARWU2018.html. (accessed April 1, 2020).
Shih, Kevin. 2017. "Do International Students Crowd-out or Cross-subsidize Americans in Higher Educa-
tion?" Journal of Public Economics 156: 170­84.
Stuen, Eric T., Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak, and Keith E. Maskus. 2012. "Skilled Immigration and Innova-
tion: Evidence from Enrolment Fluctuations in US doctoral Programmes." The Economic Journal
122(565): 1143­76.
UNESCO Institute for Statistics. 2018. "Education Data." UIS database. http://data.uis.unesco.org/.
(accessed April 1, 2020).
United States Department of State. 2020. Monthly Non-Immigrant Visa Issuances. Washington, DC:
United States Department of State.
United States Citizenship and Immigration Services. 2015. "F-1 visa recipients (2004­2015)." obtained
through a Freedom of Information request.
Wadhwa, Vivek, AnnaLee Saxenian, Ben Rissing, and Gary Gereff. 2007. "America's New Immigrant
Entrepreneurs." https://www.immigrationresearch.org/report/duke-university/americas-new- immigrant-
entrepreneurs-part-i.
World Bank. 2020. "GDP per capita, PPP (current international $)." World Development Indicators
database. The World Bank Group. https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.PP.CD (accessed
April 1, 2020




                                                                                                        18
Figures
                                            Figure 1- Total and Share of Non-Resident Degrees by Academic Level

                                      0.2                                                                       160,000
                                                                                                    18%
                                     0.18
                                                                                                                140,000
                                     0.16
                                                                                                                120,000




                                                                                                                          Number of students (lines)
          Share of students (bars)




                                     0.14                                   13%                           13%
                                                                                          12%12%                100,000
                                     0.12                     11%             11%
                                                                 10%
                                      0.1                                                                       80,000

                                     0.08          7%
                                                                                                                60,000
                                     0.06               5%                                         5%
                                                                                                                40,000
                                     0.04                              3%             3%
                                              2%             3%
                                                                                                                20,000
                                     0.02

                                       0                                                                        0
                                               1980-81       1990-91    2000-01       2010-11      2017-18

                                                                       BA    MA     PhD


Source: IPEDS Degrees Awarded (1980­2017).

Note: BA is all undergraduate degrees, MA is all master's degrees, and PhD is all doctoral degrees granted to non-
resident students. Left axis shows the share of total (resident plus non-resident) degrees, and the right axis shows the
number of degrees granted to non-residents.




                                                                                                                                                       19
Figure 2- Transitions from Student to Work Visas
Panel A: Description of transition paths out of the Student Visa




Panel B: Description of transition paths out of the Student Visa

                                     700,000                                                             1

                                                                                                         0.9
                                     600,000
                                                                                                         0.8




                                                                                                                F-1 to H-1B Transition Rate
                                                       Right Axis
                                     500,000
               Number of New Visas




                                                                                                         0.7

                                                                                                         0.6
                                     400,000
                                                                                                         0.5
                                     300,000
                                                                                                         0.4

                                     200,000                                                             0.3

                                                                                                         0.2
                                     100,000
                                                                                                         0.1

                                          0                                                              0
                                                 1997
                                                 1998
                                                 1999
                                                 2000
                                                 2001
                                                 2002
                                                 2003
                                                 2004
                                                 2005
                                                 2006
                                                 2007
                                                 2008
                                                 2009
                                                 2010
                                                 2011
                                                 2012
                                                 2013
                                                 2014
                                                 2015
                                                 2016
                                                 2017
                                                 2018




                                               F-1   H-1B           J-1   L-1     F-1 to H-1B Transition rate


Source: United States Department of State (1997­2015)

Note: Panel A shows the transition paths for F-1 visa recipients. Panel B shows the trends over time in visas granted and
transition rates from F-1 to H-1B visas. The F-1 visa is the student visa applicable to most students at certified US
universities. OPT is Optional Practical Training which allows those on an F-1 visa to work for a US-based employer post-
graduation. The J-1 visa is for exchange students, researchers, and physicians undergoing training (including international
medical graduates for medical residencies). The L-1 visa is for intra-company transfers of executives and managers. The
H-1B visa is for high-skill workers in specialty occupations. PERM is applications for immigration status (green cards).
The sizes of the boxes in Panel A crudely, but not accurately, depict the size of the visas granted. In Panel B, the right-axis
uses USCIS data to estimate the fraction of F-1 visas that converted to a (new, initial employment) H-1B visa each year.
For the transition rates we use the 2000 -2018 Characteristics of H-1B Specialty Workers Reports of the USCIS, and the
1999 -2018 Completion Surveys by Race from the Integrated Post-Secondary Data System. The ratio of initial H-1B
petitions processed to aliens in the United States to the number of foreign graduates of US universities in that class of
graduation is an approximation of the transition rate from F-1 visas to H-1B for each year of graduation. We omit the F-1
visa data after 2015 because of the change of visa regime in visa renewals for Chinese students.



                                                                                                                                              20
Figure 3 - Share of F1 Visas Converted to Optional Practical Training by Country's per Capita GDP
                  Panel A: Bachelor's Degree




                                    80%
                  Share of F1 Visas Converted to OPT

                                                                            India
                                 40%        60%




                                                                                              China     Korea

                                                                                                           Canada
                    20%




                                                                                                                Saudi Arabia
                                    0%




                                                       $1,000   $3,500              $12,250           $42,000                  $147,000
                                                                     GDP per capita, PPP (Log Scale)


                  Panel B: Master's Degree
                                    100%




                                                                            India
                  Share of F1 Visas Converted to OPT
                                                80%




                                                                                              China
                                      60%




                                                                                                        Korea
                            40%




                                                                                                           Canada
                   20%




                                                                                                                Saudi Arabia
                                    0%




                                                       $1,000   $3,500              $12,250           $42,000                  $147,000
                                                                     GDP per capita, PPP (Log Scale)


Source: 2015 F-1 visa administrative data from United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (2015) and
World Development Indicators database, World Bank (2020).

Note: Size of each bubble is proportional to the number of foreign graduates in 2015. Sample is restricted to
countries with more than 50 graduates in 2015.

                                                                                                                                          21
Tables
Table 1 - International Students Enrolled in Post-Secondary Institutions by Destination Country
                     Panel A: Students from China
                     Year                       2000             2010               2017

                     Australia                  5,008           87,588            128,498
                     Canada                     4,701           26,298             66,161
                     United Kingdom             6,158           55,496             96,543
                     United States            50,281           126,498            321,625



                     Panel B: Students from India
                     Year                       2000             2010               2017

                     Australia                  4,578           20,429             51,976
                     Canada                     969             5,868              32,616
                     United Kingdom             3,962           38,205             16,421
                     United States            39,084           103,968            142,618



                     Panel C: Students from South Korea
                     Year                       2000             2010               2017

                     Australia                  2,361           7,311              8,316
                     Canada                     1,116           4,320              5,277
                     United Kingdom             2,165           4,347              5,157
                     United States            38,026            71,514             56,186


Source: UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2018.

Note: Numbers depict total number of international students enrolled across all degree statuses (undergraduate and
graduate) in 2000, 2010, and 2017.




                                                                                                                 22
Table 2 - Distribution of Foreign Students at Public and Non-Profit Universities and Tuition Status, 2015

        Panel A: Private, Non-Profit Universities
       Degree                               # of Degrees           Tuition &       Expected          Fully
                 Institution Type
       Type                                                           Fee         Contribution      Funded

       BA          Non-Doctorate                     16,518         $31,138         $20,355          13%
       BA          Other Doctorate                   5,930          $37,526         $30,486          5%
                   Very High Research
       BA                                                           $45,266         $38,466          11%
                   Doctorate                         7,332

       MA          Non-Doctorate                     20,452         $20,358         $17,748           3%
       MA          Other Doctorate                   14,102         $26,564         $24,313           3%
                   Very High Research
       MA                                                           $45,512         $39,858           5%
                   Doctorate                         30,096

       PhD         Non-Doctorate                      348           $27,353         $20,589          20%
       PhD         Other Doctorate                    908           $25,667         $10,645          51%
                   Very High Research
       PhD                                                          $38,451          $4,394          87%
                   Doctorate                         4,116

        Panel B: Public Universities
       Degree                                       # of         Tuition &       Expected           Fully
                  Institution Type
       Type                                        Degrees          Fee         Contribution       Funded

       BA           Non-Doctorate                  15,435         $15,324          $13,099            6%
       BA           Other Doctorate                10,549         $20,313          $18,321            6%
                    Very High Research
       BA                                                         $29,245          $28,249            2%
                    Doctorate                      26,187

       MA           Non-Doctorate                  15,128         $13,899          $12,918           5%
       MA           Other Doctorate                21,649         $18,020          $15,517           10%
                    Very High Research
       MA                                                         $27,410          $23,709           11%
                    Doctorate                      32,423

       PhD          Non-Doctorate                    414          $14,613           $4,857           73%
       PhD          Other Doctorate                 2,936         $16,217           $4,498           72%
                    Very High Research
       PhD                                                        $22,238           $4,504           79%
                    Doctorate                       9,771
Source: IPEDS Degrees for the number of degrees and F-1 visa administrative data, from United States Citizenship
and Immigration Services (USCIS) for the other statistics.

Note: "Very High Research Doctorate" are universities classified as having very high research activity by the
Carnegie 2010 classifications. "Other Doctorate" includes universities in the remaining doctorate-awarding
categories in the Carnegie 2010 taxonomy. "Non-Doctorate" are all other four-year degree-granting post- secondary
institutions. "Tuition & Fees" are the average tuition and fees charged to foreign students. "Expected student
payment" is the average tuition and fee not funded by the post-secondary institution. "Fully funded" is the share of
students who are fully funded by the post-secondary institution.


                                                                                                                  23
Appendix
Figure A1--Share Degrees Awarded to Foreign Student by Field in 2002­17
Panel A: Bachelor's Degrees




Panel B: Master's Degrees




                                                                          24
Panel C: PhD Degrees




Note: The size of each bubble is proportional to the number of foreign graduates in 2002 (green bubbles)
and 2017 (orange bubbles). The location of each bubble (across axes) corresponds to share foreign born in
2002 (x-axis) and 2017 (y-axis). Sample is restricted to fields awarding more than 100 degrees to
temporary residents in 2017.
Source: IPEDS Degrees 2002­03 and 2017­18.




                                                                                                      25
Figure A2 - Share of Universities among the Top 500 rank




Note: The graph shows the share of universities among the 500 top ranked research universities according
to the Shanghai's Academic Ranking of World Universities (ARWU). Left y-axis is for China, South
Korea, and India Universities. Right y-axis is for American Universities.
Source: Shanghai Ranking, 2003­18.




                                                                                                     26
