                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




NO-FAULT DEFAULT, CHAPTER 11 BANKRUPTCY, AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

                                       Robert C. Merton
                                       Richard T. Thakor

                                      Working Paper 28341
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28341


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2021




The authors have no relevant disclosures. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Robert C. Merton and Richard T. Thakor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
No-fault Default, Chapter 11 Bankruptcy, and Financial Institutions
Robert C. Merton and Richard T. Thakor
NBER Working Paper No. 28341
January 2021
JEL No. D21,G21,G23,G32,G33,G38,K12,L22

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes the costs and benefits of a no-fault-default debt structure as an alternative to
the typical bankruptcy process. We show that the deadweight costs of bankruptcy can be avoided
or substantially reduced through no-fault-default debt, which permits a relatively seamless
transfer of ownership from shareholders to bondholders in certain states of the world. We show
that potential costs introduced by this scheme due to risk shifting can be attenuated via
convertible debt, and we discuss the relationship of this to bail-in debt and contingent convertible
(CoCo) debt for financial institutions. We then explore how, despite the advantages of no-fault-
default debt, there may still be a functional role for the bankruptcy process to efficiently allow the
renegotiation of labor contracts in certain cases. In sharp contrast to the human-capital-based
theories of optimal capital structure in which the renegotiation of labor contract in bankruptcy is a
cost associated with leverage, we show that it is a benefit. The normative implication of our
analysis is that no-fault-default debt, when combined with specific features of the bankruptcy
process, may reduce the deadweight costs associated with bankruptcy. We discuss how an orderly
process for transfer of control and a predetermined admissibility of renegotiation of labor
contracts can be a useful tool for resolving financial institution failure without harming financial
stability.


Robert C. Merton
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-634
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
rmerton@mit.edu

Richard T. Thakor
University of Minnesota,
321 19th Avenue South, 3-255
Minneapolis, MN 5545
rthakor@umn.edu
1         Introduction

Chapter 11 bankruptcy is a costly process for firms. On average, it is time-consuming and
dissipates a significant fraction of firm value.1 Moreover, a significant fraction of firms that
enter Chapter 11 experience such a significant impairment to their value that they end up
liquidating eventually (see Morrison (2007), for example). This means that the purported
benefits of corporate leverage in reducing agency costs (e.g. Hart and Moore (1995), Jensen
(1986), and John and Senbet (1988)) and generating tax shield benefits carry with them
significant private and social costs.2 These costs are potentially even more significant for
financial institutions and have ramifications for financial stability. For example, the collapse
of Lehman Brothers and its bankruptcy in 2008 sent shock waves through global financial
markets (see, e.g., Brunnermeier (2009)). These costs are observed for financial and non-
financial firms despite the fact that, although higher leverage elevates the probability of
default, there is no a priori reason for defaults by themselves to impose any social costs.3
        Absent a resource-consuming process like Chapter 11, default would--in principle--
simply transfer control of the firm from shareholders to bondholders (see Merton (1990,
1992)). However, numerous real-world complications make the transfer of control in bankrupt-
cies not as seamless. In part due to violation of the absolute priority rule (APR) and other
"me-first" rules (e.g. Franks and Torous (1989) and Weiss (1990)) and in part due to coor-
dination problems among creditors with heterogeneous preferences over restructuring plans,
there is considerable room for bargaining among different stakeholders. Such bargaining and
    1
     Franks and Torous (1999) document that the average bankruptcy takes 2.7 years, whereas Weiss (1996)
estimates it to be 2.5 years. Bris, Welch, and Zhu (2006) examine smaller firms and find that the average
Chapter 11 proceeding takes 2.3 years. Bharath, Panchapegesan, and Werner (2007) show that the average
time for Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings declined to 16 months during 2000-2005. Estimates of value
dissipation leading up to and during bankruptcy proceedings also vary. Branch (2002) estimates it at 25-30%
of firm value. Altman (1984) estimates that the combined direct and indirect costs of bankruptcy are on
average 17% of firm value. Andrade and Kaplan (1998) estimate that the net costs of financial distress range
from 10% to 20% of firm value. See Hotchkiss et al. (2008) for a review.
   2
     This assumes that some firms that liquidate mainly because of the value impairment in Chapter 11
would have viably created socially valuable goods like output and employment had they not suffered this
impairment.
   3
     Bankruptcies and liquidations also impose social costs through adverse spillover effects on other firms in
the geographical vicinity of the failing firms. See Bernstein et al. (2019) for empirical evidence.


                                                      2
the possibly inefficient outcomes that result from it generate a variety of deadweight losses.4
       Merton (1990, 1992) proposed the idea of "no-fault default" on debt as a possible way
to achieve the benefits of high leverage without the deadweight costs of bankruptcy. The
proposal was in the form of an example. The goals of this paper are threefold. First, we
formalize the no-fault default debt idea in a simple model to highlight the conditions under
which the proposed solution works. We also add an agency problem between shareholders
and bondholders and show that the no-fault default debt solution without bankruptcy still
works if a convertible feature is added to the debt. We connect this feature to existing
practices and proposals for dealing with distressed financial institutions. Second, we ask:
under what conditions might Chapter 11 bankruptcy still serve a useful economic role? Third,
we discuss the overall implications of our analysis for financial institutions, regulation and
financial stability.
       In terms of the first goal, we develop a simple model in which we use the analogy of
a covered call option to show how bankruptcy costs can be avoided with no-fault-default
debt. This model is based on Merton (1992), and is then extended to show how risk-shifting
moral hazard associated with debt (e.g. Jensen and Meckling (1976)) can be attenuated by
adding a convertible feature as in Green (1984). We then discuss how this solution can be
used in the context of bail-in debt and contingent convertible (CoCo) bonds for financial
institutions.5 The basic idea is that while CoCos convert to equity only when the financial
institution is distressed, the convertible option for bondholders in our model also kicks in
when the institution is doing well. This serves the dual purpose of attenuating risk-shifting
moral hazard and infusing equity in a distressed financial institution in some states as with
CoCos.
   4
      See Wruck (1990), Gilson, John, and Lang (1990), and Gertner and Scharfstein (1991) for a discussion
of these disruptions.
    5
      See Lewrick, Serena-Garralda, and Turner (2019) for empirical evidence on the pricing effect of bail-in
debt. In a banking context, bail-in debt gives regulators the power to impose losses on creditors during times
of stress, so as to reduce the taxpayer losses associated with bailouts. A related concept is that of securities
called contingent convertibles (CoCos). This is convertible debt that converts to equity at predetermined
terms when the bank is in distress. See, for example, Fiordelisi, Pennacchi, and Ricci (2020) for evidence on
how CoCos impact downside risk measures.


                                                       3
       In terms of the second goal, to address the question of the conditions under which Chapter
11 serves a useful role, we use a feature of Chapter 11 that is not directly related to ex post
bargaining among financiers or violations of APR. This feature permits the invalidation
of previously-negotiated labor contracts in bankruptcy.6 We provide sufficient conditions
under which it is ex post efficient to renegotiate the manager's contract to provide better
incentives in the state of nature the firm finds itself in. However, the manager may prefer to
not renegotiate, even though the new contract satisfies the manager's participation constraint
and leads to higher firm value. Thus, if the contract cannot be legally invalidated, the firm
is stuck with an inefficiency. Chapter 11 provides a way out--it allows the financiers who
are in control to invalidate the previous contract and offer the manager a new one that leads
to higher firm value.
       While this shows that there are conditions under which Chapter 11 can serve a useful
role even with no-fault-default debt, it also shows that the deadweight costs of bankruptcy
in Chapter 11 are unnecessary. Rather, having a simple feature that transfers control from
shareholders to bondholders always invalidates or permits renegotiation of labor contracts,
with none of the other features of Chapter 11, would deliver the efficiency we highlight. That
is, while our analysis has the positive flavor of justifying an institutional feature of Chapter
11, it also has the normative message that the main benefit of Chapter 11 highlighted by
our analysis can be had without the bankruptcy costs of leverage associated with the other
features of Chapter 11 (as practiced).
       Finally, in terms of our third goal, we discuss the implications of our analysis for financial
institution regulation and financial stability. The issues of convertible debt and labor contract
renegotiability are relevant not only for bankruptcy redesign for financial institutions in
   6
     Indeed, this feature can even be used strategically by firms as a way to reduce labor costs (e.g. Jaggia
and Thakor (1994)). For bankruptcy purposes, employment contracts become part of the property that is
the bankruptcy estate. Once the firm files for bankruptcy, the trustee (the debtor in possession in Chapter
11) gains control of the bankruptcy estate and may either assume or reject the firm's previously-negotiated
bankruptcy contracts via "ipso facto" clauses. While there is some legal dispute over how labor contracts
can be invalidated, a recent court ruling reaffirmed that the Bankruptcy Code permits an employer to escape
collective bargaining agreements under some circumstances. See Dietrich (2016).



                                                     4
general, but also for the resolution of failed deposit-insured banks by the FDIC and the
design of deposit insurance pricing schemes.
   Our paper is related to the literature on the costs and benefits of bankruptcy. Many pa-
pers view restructuring and bankruptcy as synonymous (e.g. Asquith, Gertner, and Scharf-
stein (1994) and Becker and Josephson (2016)), some papers view these as distinct and
complementary (e.g. Donaldson et al. (2020)). Other papers posit improving the design of
the corporate bankruptcy process by altering priority rules (e.g. Ayotte and Ellias (2020),
Bebchuk and Fried (1996), and Casey (2011)).
   In our paper, disagreement over restructuring plans and coordination failures among
multiple creditors are absent. Moreover, rather than focusing on how to improve Chapter
11 in terms of altering priority rules pertaining to restructuring plans and investments, we
highlight an alternative to Chapter 11 that uses one specific feature of Chapter 11 that could
simply be incorporated into all contracts and then used in conjunction with no-fault-default
debt to avoid the deadweight costs of bankruptcy.
   Our paper provides a novel perspective on the role of labor contract renegotiability in
bankruptcy. In the literature on human capital concerns in optimal capital structure theory,
the fact that labor contracts can be invalidated in bankruptcy is a cost of leverage that
is traded off against some benefit of leverage like debt tax shields to arrive at an optimal
capital structure. See Jaggia and Thakor (1994) and Berk, Stanton, and Zechner (2010).
The basic idea in Jaggia and Thakor (1994), for example, is that firms are attempting
to incentivize managers to not only work hard but also allocate their total effort across
marketable human capital development and firm-specific human capital development in a
particular way. Managers have an incentive to underinvest in firm-specific human capital
because it can be lost at a future date if the manager is fired for a low output that reveals
low ability. To counter this, the firm writes long-term contracts that protect managers
against firing and provide downward-rigid wages. However, the bondholders' (or the firm's)
ability to invalidate these contracts in bankruptcy weakens the value of a long-term contract


                                               5
to the manager, and thus lowers investment in firm-specific human capital. The consequent
reduction in firm value is a cost of leverage. What we show is that this contract renegotiability
feature of Chapter 11 also has a benefit in terms of achieving a better ex post realignment
of managerial incentives when control transfers from shareholders to bondholders. This does
not negate the ex ante cost of leverage modeled in the human-capital-based capital structure
theories. Rather, it highlights a previously-unrecognized but potentially offsetting ex post
benefit.
    Our paper is also related to the issue of the role of contingent convertible debt and
resolution of failing financial institutions. See, for example, Fiordelisi, Pennacchi, and Ricci
(2020), Kim (2020), and Lewrick, Serena-Garralda and Turner (2019). It is also related to
deposit insurance pricing and moral hazard (e.g. Merton (1977)).
    The rest of this paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we present a simple example
of no-fault-default debt with a highly stylized model to show how bankruptcy can be avoided.
This section also includes an analysis of convertible debt and a discussion of bail-in debt and
CoCos. In Section 3, we add a further complication to the model which leads to an efficiency
need for labor contract renegotiation and circumstances under which the manager may refuse.
This provides an economic rationale for the labor contract renegotiability feature of Chapter
11. Section 4 discusses the implications of the analysis for financial stability and financial
institution regulation. Section 5 concludes.



2     A Simple Model of No-fault-default Debt

This section has three parts. In the first part, we present a modified version of an example
from Merton (1992) to motivate the idea of no-fault-default debt. In the second part, we add
moral hazard and explain how convertible no-fault-default debt--which provides options to
both shareholders and bondholders--can resolve this moral hazard. In the third part, we
discuss the connection of our proposed scheme to bail-in debt and CoCos for banks.



                                               6
2.1    No-fault-default Debt: An Example

The purpose of the no-fault default structure is to provide the tax and corporate-control
advantages of high-leverage financing while minimizing the cost of financial distress to the
operating company.
   Rather than analyze general debt structures, we focus here on the specific case of a firm
that has equity and a single class of zero-coupon debt. As is well known (e.g. Merton
(1974)), in a frictionless, perfect market with perfect me-first rules, the equity of the firm
is isomorphic to a call option on the assets of the levered firm. Default corresponds to
allowing the (equity) call option to expire unexercised at the "expiration" date, which is
the maturity date of the debt. This isomorphic relation points to how default could occur
without affecting the firm's operations. That is, exchange-traded options routinely expire
unexercised, with no disruptions in the operations of the firms. This suggests the possibility
of debt and equity contracts that permit default to occur with a similar minimal impact on
the business operations of the firm.
   The following example illustrates how such securities can be structured to present the
tax-treatment of the debt under U.S. tax laws. At t = 0, company Sub is an operating
                                           ~ at t = T and a single share of stock and no
company with assets that have random value A
debt. It is wholly owned by a parent company, call it company Hold. The only real asset in
company Hold is its ownership of the equity in Sub. Hold issues two classes of securities,
debt and equity (that consists of one share of stock).
   The firm has a single bond that is entitled at maturity (t = T ) to either a payment of DR
or one share of Hold. That is, when the bondholder demands payment at maturity, Hold
can choose to satisfy the demand by a payment of DR or by surrendering its equity in Sub.
The bondholder's demand is applicable only on the maturity date, unless Hold defaults or
otherwise seeks Chapter 11 bankruptcy, in which case, the payment of DR becomes due.
It may be useful to impose other covenant restrictions that could also trigger bondholder's
payment demand early, such as large dividend or asset distributions to shareholders of Hold.


                                              7
This provision, plus shortening of debt maturity, can provide substantial protections to bond-
holders. Indeed, with this, it may be possible to extend debt maturities without increasing
agency costs. The bond is callable at DR at any time at the option of the management of
Hold. Refunding to call the debt is permitted. In a later part of the analysis, we will deal
explicitly with unobservable risk-shifting moral hazard that, unlike large dividends or asset
distributions, may be too subtle and hence difficult to prevent through covenant restrictions.
   One share of Hold is issued, where the share is entitled to elect directors of Hold. Fur-
thermore, just before date T , the share is entitled to choose either: 1) to exchange the share
plus DR for one share of Sub, or 2) to exchange the share plus 1 bond of Hold for one share
of Sub.
   Let P denote the (implied) market value of one share of Sub; E denote the price of one
Hold share; and D denote the price of the bond of Hold. If on (or near) the maturity date,
P > DR , then the shareholders of Hold will surely choose to pay DR to Hold to enable it to
pay the bondholders of Hold their promised repayment DR . If D < DR (which will happen
when P < DR ), the shareholder of Hold can buy the bond for D and then receive equity
ownership in Sub by turning in this bond. The former gives Hold the necessary cash to call
outstanding bonds. The latter extinguishes the bonds without requiring a cash payment by
Hold. Thus, on the maturity of the debt,


                                           ~ = P > DR
                                       for A                                                (1)


                                        E  P - DR ,                                         (2)

                                           D = DR .                                         (3)

In practice, Hold should be able to just "roll over" the debt to whatever target level is chosen
with a new T -year maturity date. As long as solvency is assured, E  P - DR . Indeed, the
structure is designed to minimize basis risk between the values of Hold and Sub. That is,
at all times, we expect that E + D  P .

                                               8
   If, on (or near) the maturity date, P is less than DR , then the shareholders of Hold
surely will not exercise their right to pay DR for a share of Sub. Consequently, Hold will
be unable to pay DR to the bondholder. The bondholder could go to bankruptcy, but it
is more efficient to simply convert the bond to receive the share in Sub (a transaction not
requiring bankruptcy). Thus, D = P and E = 0 (since there are no other assets in Hold).
Of course, if D sells for (less than or equal to) P , then the equityholders in Hold would have
an incentive to buy the debt and exercise their option to acquire a share of Sub.
   Again, in practice, Hold would issue new T -year debt and equity shares in exchange
for old debt. The correspondence with options is that the covered-options writer just sells
a new call option against the underlying stock (instead of liquidating the stock) after the
old option expires. If the optionholders want to renew/continue their position, then they
buy the new options. Similarly, if the current shareholders want to maintain corporate
control, they need only put up the additional cash needed to buy the new equity. No
formal bankruptcy proceedings are required. The trade (and other high-grade) debt of the
operating company is not jeopardized by the leverage of the holding company. That is, this
holding company structure was stipulated precisely to illustrate how financial restructuring
can proceed without interfering with business operations. Even if corporate control of the
holding company were to change (as a result of conversion), this change is no different in
impact on the operating company than a change in owners if it were all-equity financed. The
event of "default" (in the economic-payoff sense) need not disrupt the operating business,
and therefore does not increase the likelihood of liquidation.
   Figure 1 illustrates how the payoffs to these structures are like writing and buying covered
call options.




                                              9
                                 Figure 1: Payoffs to Structures




2.2       Stylized Model with Moral Hazard

2.2.1      Model Setup

To simplify, think of a firm with two dates: t = 0 and t = T , with no events occurring
between the dates, and t = T corresponding to the maturity date of the firm's debt. The
                                                        ~ at t = T , and the firm has zero-coupon
firm's only asset is a (good) project that will pay off A
debt worth Dt at t and equity worth Et at t. The debt specifies a bullet payment of DR at
t = T . Since we do not focus on trading between t = 0 and t = T , we can set Dt = D and
Et = E without confusion for all t < T .
      The sequence of events is that the firm issues securities and then makes a project choice.
Project choice by the firm cannot be observed or contracted upon with financiers. The
terminal payoff is observable by all. The firm makes decisions to maximize shareholders
value. All agents are risk neutral.7 If the bondholders are indifferent between converting
their debt into equity and receiving DR on their debt, they will not convert. That is,
  7
      The assumption can be easily relaxed.



                                                10
conversion will occur only when bondholders strictly prefer to convert.
                                                                    ~. Let A
   For concreteness, we now specify the probability distribution of A      ~ = Ah with
                          ~ = Al with probability 1 - p, where Ah > DR and Al < DR . This
probability p  (0, 1) and A
                               ~ = Ah , DT = DR . If A
means that debt is "risky". If A                     ~ = Al , DT = Al . In the context of
                                           ~ corresponds to the value of its wholly-owned
the previous example, the firm is Hold and A
subsidiary Sub.
   Now suppose the manager of this firm (Hold) has an opportunity to unobservably switch
from the good project to a risky, lower-valued project that will change the terminal distribu-
                        ~ to B
tion of firm value from A    ~ , where B
                                       ~=A
                                         ^h > Ah with probability q  (0, 1) and B
                                                                                ~ = Al

with probability 1 - q , such that q < p and


                              ^h + [1 - q ]Al < pAh + [1 - p]Al .
                             qA                                                           (4)


By doing this, the manager reduces the value of the debt to


                                      ^ = qDR + [1 - q ]Al
                                      D

                                        < pDR + [1 - p]Al

                                        = D.                                              (5)


The value of the equity changes to:


                                       ^=q A
                                       E   ^h - DR .                                      (6)


   Suppose we assume that
                                                       ^h .
                                  [p - q ]DR > pAh - q A                                  (7)

The left-hand side (LHS) of (7) is the wealth transfer from bondholders to shareholders
due to risk shifting. The right-hand side (RHS) is the loss of (total) firm value due to risk



                                               11
shifting. Thus, (7) says that shareholders benefit more from ex post risk shifting for a given
debt repayment DR than what they lose due to a lower total firm value. Combining (4) and
(7) yields:
                                                       ^h < [p - q ]DR .
                                  [p - q ]Al < pAh - q A                                       (8)

For (8) to hold, DR must be high enough, i.e. the firm is relatively highly leveraged.


2.2.2      Summary of Assumptions

The firm makes decisions to maximize shareholder value. All agents are risk neutral.8 Project
choice by the firm cannot be observed or contracted upon with financiers. The terminal payoff
is observable by all. If the bondholders are indifferent between converting their debt into
equity and receiving DR for their debt, they will not convert. That is, conversion will occur
only when bondholders strictly prefer to convert.


2.2.3      Results

We now have the following result.


Lemma 1:          Suppose DR satisfies (8) and that the firm's decisions seek to maximize share-
holder value. Then after issuing debt and equity, the firm will choose the risky project with
    ~ payoff.
the B

      Since this risk shifting leads to lower total firm value, the shareholders suffer the cost of
engaging in it ex ante through the pricing of debt. That is, although we have not explicitly
introduced taxes, if the motivation for leverage is the debt tax shield, then this risk shifting
lowers the value of this tax shield to shareholders due to rational anticipation of it by
bondholders.
      To prevent this well-known problem--which is difficult to prevent through covenant re-
strictions due to lack of observability and contractable verifiability--the firm can credibly
  8
      This assumption can be easily relaxed.

                                                   12
pre-commit to not do risk shifting by adding a convertible feature to the debt. The feature
allows bondholders to exchange their promised debt repayment DR for a share   [0, 1] of
the firm's total equity. Bondholders can force this exchange even if shareholders are willing
and able to pay DR . We now have:


Proposition 1:      Suppose the firm sets  = DR /Ah . Then there will be no risk shifting
                                                                          ~ terminal payoff.
and the firm will always select the (higher-valued) good project with the A
Moreover, bondholders will not convert their debt into equity.

   The reason why the bondholders do not convert is that the terms of conversion are set
                                                   ~ = Ah . Recall that when A
to make them indifferent when the firm's payoff is A                         ~ = Al , the

shareholders do not exercise their option to repay the bondholders and let them take over
the firm. The reason why there is no risk shifting is that if the firm chooses the project
         ~ payoff, then the bondholders strictly prefer to convert when B = A
with the B                                                                  ^h , since
^h > Ah = DR . Given this, the benefit to the shareholders from risk shifting disappears.
A
This analysis is in the spirit of Green (1984).


2.3    Safety Nets, Bailouts, and CoCos

A well-known feature of financial institutions is that they are protected by both explicit
safety nets like deposit insurance, as well as implicit safety nets if they are non-depository
institutions whose failure is deemed to be harmful to financial stability. Merton and Thakor
(2019) provide a theoretical rationale for such safety nets based on the argument that many of
these institutions raise a significant amount of their financing from customers--depositors in
banks are an example--and these customers do not wish to be exposed to the (idiosyncratic)
credit risk of the institution. In this sense, they are different from "pure" financiers like
shareholders and bondholders who are willing to bear risk in exchange for an adequate
return. Thus, it is welfare enhancing for the government to provide deposit insurance even
if the probability of a bank run is zero.

                                              13
   However, we also know from Merton (1977) that deposit insurance creates moral hazard,
inducing banks to keep too little capital and take too much risk. This then leads to bank
failures that require bailouts that are costly to the taxpayers.
   Merton (1978) had suggested an insurance-based solution that would work even for banks
that are not funded by institutions that have government-insured deposits, like shadow banks.
The idea is that the bank can pay up front for insuring deposits (or short-term debt) for a
substantial term (even a perpetuity in the limit) in exchange for a premium. Moral hazard
is ameliorated via random auditing by the insurer. The benefit to the bank is that as long as
it is solvent when randomly audited, it retains the insurance and can borrow money cheaper
than market prices of uninsured borrowing due to the insurance guarantee. If the bank is
insolvent when audited, it loses the guarantee. Thus, staying solvent is beneficial to the
bank and this deters moral hazard.
   While effective auditing by the liability insurer can reduce the moral hazard the comes
with the elevation of (idiosyncratic) risk associated with risk shifting, banks may still fail
due to the adverse realization of systemic risk, as during a major financial risk. Taxpayers
are thus exposed to the risk of costly bailouts of failing institutions, both those with explicit
deposit insurance (i.e. depositories) and those with implicit insurance (like large shadow
banks).
   Since the financial crisis, there have been many proposals for reducing the burden on
taxpayers in resolving bank failures. One such proposal is bail-in debt, wherein losses are
imposed on the bank's creditors rather than taxpayers when the bank is in financial distress.
This is done by requiring bail-in debt to absorb losses during resolution. Lewrick, Serena-
Garralda, and Turner (2019) study the pricing of senior bail-in bonds and conclude that the
holders of bail-in bonds price the additional risk they bear and also exert market discipline
on these banks. Investors demand a higher premium for holding bail-in bonds issued by
riskier banks.
   Another proposal is CoCos. These are debt instruments that either convert to new equity


                                               14
or are written down prior to failure while the bank is a going-concern. Fiordelisi, Pennachi,
and Ricci (2020) examine CoCos issued by European banks during 2011-2017 and find that
equity-conversion CoCos reduce stock return variance and other measures of downside risk.
       Our proposal of convertible debt that gives bondholders the option to convert to equity
differs from both proposals in that the conversion occurs in the good states of the world when
the bank's equity is highly valued. Thus, the purpose of this conversion is not to infuse equity
in the bank at a time of need, but rather to attenuate risk-shifting moral hazard. In the bad
state, when the bank is in distress and equityholders choose not to exercise their option to
"purchase" the bank from the bondholders by giving them a repayment equal to the option
strike price, bondholders will be sole owners (shareholders) and this is functionally equivalent
to a "full equity-conversion" CoCo. That is, once the bondholders own the bank, all the
non-deposit debt becomes equity, and the FDIC must cover the claims of the depositors if
the value of the bank is below the total amount of deposits. If the value of the bank exceeds
its deposit obligations, then the new owners (bondholders) can cover the depositors' claims
without involving the FDIC. As a practical matter, given the statutory authority of the
FDIC--under current law--to take over a bank when its book equity hits a low of 2% of its
assets, if all non-deposit debt is converted to equity, the bank's value will exceed its deposit
liabilities.9
       This approach appears to us to be superior to (taxpayer-funded) bailouts, since theory
has shown that bailouts generate potentially significant distortions.10 Moreover, empirical
evidence that bailouts are also associated with stigma for the institutions receiving this
assistance. See, for example, Kim (2020). What we propose can be implemented for banks
by the FDIC without any resource-dissipating bankruptcy process like Chapter 11. We
believe there should be transparency about the details of such a resolution process, so that
all investors can price the bank's securities without an "opacity premium". The simplicity
   9
    This assumes that the bank's assets have been appropriately marked to market.
  10
    For example, Acharya and Thakor (2016) develop a theory in which government bailouts can prevent
contagious creditor-initiated liquidations of banks but can destroy any market discipline of debt and present
informational challenges to the lender-of-last-resort about when to intervene.


                                                     15
of this arrangement can also enable regulators to use fewer regulatory instruments, thereby
reducing regulatory arbitrage (see Boyer and Kempf (2020) for a theoretical analysis of
constraints on the capacity of regulators to use multiple regulatory instruments).



3       An Economic Rationale for Some Aspects of Chapter

        11

The above analysis indicates that no-fault default convertible debt can achieve a transfer
of control without the deadweight costs of Chapter 11, and also avoid value-reducing risk
shifting at the expense of the bondholders. Moreover, it may be useful in thinking about
better ways to resolve the failures of financial institutions. While these insights may be
intuitive, they raise an important unanswered question: why then do so many companies
suffer the value dissipation of Chapter 11 bankruptcy?


3.1       Extension of No-Default Debt Analysis to Multiple Classes of

          Debt

Some of the existing answers to this question take Chapter 11 as a given and then explain
the value dissipation on the basis of coordination problems among multiple creditors with
heterogeneous restructuring preferences, violations of the Absolute Priority Rule, and so
on.11 However, these explanations do not apply to the case we analyzed in Section 2.2.
      In particular, if there are multiple classes of bondholders, say, 1, 2, . . . , n, then it is possi-
ble to proceed in a manner similar to how we proceeded in Section 2.2 and solve for conversion
ratios i , i  {1, . . . , n}, such that: (i) there will be no risk shifting by shareholders; (ii)
shareholders will exercise the option to keep ownership of the firm when the value of the firm
                                                              i
is Ah and pay off all the bondholders their promised amounts DR , i  {1, . . . , n}, with none
of the bondholders choosing to convert their debt to equity; (iii) shareholders will choose to
 11
      See, for example, Donaldson et al. (2020) and Greenbaum, Thakor, and Boot (2019).

                                                    16
let their option expire unexercised when firm value is Al and all debt converts to equity at
pre-determined conversion rates l                                                   l
                                i , with the contract design flexibility to set the i in this

case as being different from the i when firm value is Ah . Note that l
                                                                     i has no impact on

the firm's risk-shifting incentives. Moreover, when all debt converts to equity, coordination
problems among multiple classes of bondholders also vanish.
   While we do not provide the formal details of the analysis that leads to the observations
above, it follows the same structure as the analysis of the simpler case in Section 2.2. The
upshot of this is that we are still left with a puzzle: why do we have a costly Chapter 11
bankruptcy process when, in principle, a far less costly alternative is available?


3.2    A Model to Develop a Rationale for Chapter 11 Labor Re-

       contracting

We will now extend the model to show that there are circumstances in which it is efficient
to redo labor contracts--in the case of our model, the contract between the manager and
the firm--but at least one party to the contract has an incentive to refuse. This can block
efficient re-contracting. Thus, having the legal ability to invalidate previously-negotiated
contracts in some states of the world may be valuable.
   So far, we have not had to deal with a contract between the firm and the manager because
we assumed that all decisions were made in the shareholders' interests. To have a meaningful
role for a managerial contract, we now introduce a potential divergence of interests between
the manager and the shareholders.
   We modify the model to introduce privately-costly managerial effort as well as an interim
point in time between dates t = 0 and t = T . We also assume that the manager maximizes
her own expected utility over effort and compensation.




                                              17
3.3     Sequence of Events

At t = 0, the firm has debt and equity outstanding, with the (zero-coupon) debt promising a
bullet payment of DR at t = T . Also at t = 0, a wage contract is offered to the manager and it
is accepted by the manager if it yields an expected utility equal to the manager's reservation
utility, which is normalized to be zero. The firm is solvent at t = 0, so the contract is
offered by the shareholders and presumed binding on both sides as long as shareholders are
in control.
   The manager chooses effort at at two dates: t = 0 and t = 1. The firm's payoff distribu-
tion at t = T depends on the manager's effort choice. We will say more about the manager's
effort choice shortly.
   The firm's payoff at t = T depends on managerial effort as well as the realization of an
exogenous state of nature   {l , h }. The manager's effort choice has two dimensions: level
and "type". The level of effort refers to whether at is 0 or 1, with manager's effort disutility
being at , where  > 0 is a scalar. That is, at  {0, 1}  t  {0, 1}. The "type" of the effort
has to do with whether the effort is suitable for enhancing the payoff in the  = h state or
the  = l state. A shorthand way to think about these states is that h is a "prosperity"
state in which the firm enjoys a high payoff distribution, and l is a "downturn" state in
which the firm experiences a low payoff distribution. Thus, the manager can either work
hard to enhance the payoff in the prosperity state by choosing "state-matched" effort at
                                                                                       h

or to minimize losses in the downturn state by choosing "state-matched" effort at
                                                                                l , but she

cannot do both. Viewed at t = 0, the probability of h is g0  (0, 1) and the probability of
l is 1 - g0 .
   Conditional on  = h , the distribution of the firm's payoff at t = T is:
                         
                          a0  1           0    1
                         
                           h ah Ah + eh [ah + ah ] h   with probability p  (0, 1)
                ~h =
                A                                                                           (9)
                         
                         0
                                                       with probability 1 - p




                                                 18
where eh  (0, 1) is a probability, and at
                                        h is the type of effort that enhances the firm's payoff

when  = h . Here at
                  h  {0, 1} for t  {0, 1}, and h > 0 is a scalar.

   Conditional on  = l , the distribution of the firm's payoff at t = T is:
                        
                         a0  1           0    1
                        
                          l al Al + el [al + al ] l   with probability p  (0, 1)
                 ~l =
                 A                                                                        (10)
                        
                        0
                                                      with probability 1 - p


where at                                                                                t
       l  {0, 1} for t  {0, 1}, el  (0, 1) is a probability, and l > 0 is a scalar. So al is

the type of effort that is suitable for minimizing losses in the downturn state. The positive
payoff when  = h exceeds the positive payoff when  = l , as the parametric restrictions
discussed next make clear.


3.4    Parametric Restrictions

We make the following parametric restrictions:


                               min Ah , eh h > max {DR , 2 } ,                            (11)


                                        Ah + 2el l < DR ,                                 (12)

                                            pel l > .                                     (13)

   Restriction (11) says that when  = h , the firm's payoff in the successful state is high
enough to pay off the debt, so shareholders will exercise their option to pay the bondholders
DR and keep the firm. Moreover, this payoff is high enough to make it worthwhile having the
manager choose a0    1
                h = ah = 1. Restriction (12) says that when  = l , the firm's maximum

possible payoff falls short of the promised repayment on debt, DR , so shareholders will let
their call option on the firm's assets expire unexercised and let the bondholders take the
firm. Restriction (13) simply says that even when  = l , it is (socially) productive for the
manager to choose a1
                   l = 1 at t = 1.


                                                 19
   Now, at t = 1, a signal s is observed that is informative about the realization of  at
t = T . The probability distribution of s is:


                       Pr (s = h | h ) = Pr (s = l | l ) =   (0.5, 1).                     (14)


We will assume that this s signal is noisy but very informative, i.e.,  is very close to 1. We
can think of this signal as some financial performance indicator that is informative about
                                                                               ~j , j  {h, l} at
the firm's terminal payoff. It is publicly observed, as is the terminal payoff A
t = T . Since s is publicly observed, this can be contracted upon between the shareholders and
the bondholders. For example, s may imply a covenant violation that triggers bankruptcy.


3.5    Manager's Utility

The manager maximizes:


                               U w, at        t
                                     i = w - ai  for i  {h, l }                            (15)


where w is wealth and  > 0 the manager's effort disutility. The manager's wage is con-
strained to be non-negative.
   Note that, given a wage contract at t = 0, the manager makes two effort choices, one at
t = 0 and one at t = 1. The effort choice at t = 1 is made after observing s (but before
knowing ).


3.6    Observability Assumptions

The manager's effort choices--both the type of effort and the level--are privately observed
only by the manager. The financiers in control of the firm write the wage contract, but they
cannot observe the manager's choice
   It is useful to consider the timeline in this model that summarizes the sequence of events.



                                                20
            Figure 2: Timeline of Events in Model
    t=0                     t=1                     t=2


 Firm has equity        Signal s is            Either A~h or A
                                                             ~l
 worth E and            observed.              is observed.
 debt worth D
 that promises a        Control may            Manager,
 bullet payment         transfer from          shareholders,
 of DR at t = T .       the shareholders       and
                        to the                 bondholders
 Manager is             bondholders.           collect their
 offered a wage                                payments.
 contract by            Manager
 shareholders,          chooses a1
                                 i,

 who control the        i  {h, l}.
 firm.

 Manager
 chooses effort
 type (h or l)
 and level (0 or
 1), i.e. manager
 chooses a0i,
 i  {h, l}

 The manager
 can choose
 either at      t
          h or al
 at each t, but
 not both. Given
 the choice of h
 or l, the
 manager
 chooses at i = 1
 or ati = 0,
 i  {h, l}




                             21
3.7       Analysis of Extended Model

We begin by noting that the shareholder will always design the wage contract to induce the
manager to choose at
                   h  t, since the value of equity is zero even under the best of circumstances

with at
      l . As usual, we will solve the model backward starting with t = 1, the last decision

point in time. The posterior beliefs after observing s are:


                                                h                  g0
                           Pr ( = h | s = h )  g1 =                                       (16)
                                                           g0 + [1 -  ] [1 - g0 ]


                                                l                [1 -  ]g0
                           Pr ( = h | s = l )  g1 =                                       (17)
                                                           [1 -  ]g0 +  [1 - g0 ]
                    h                         l
Given  close to 1, g1 will be close to 1 and g1 will be close to zero.
      Now, to motivate the manager to choose the type of effort they like (h) and to also work
hard (at
       h = 1), the shareholders will find it optimal to offer the manager a share of the firm's

equity. This will align the manager's interests more closely with those of the shareholders
than if the manager was paid a fixed wage or some fraction of total firm value. Let   (0, 1)
be the fraction of equity given to the manager. It is clear that paying the risk neutral
manager a fixed wage is inefficient with effort-aversion moral hazard. The manager cannot
trade his equity ownership until t = T , when she is paid.12


Proposition 2:          At t = 0 the shareholders offer the manager a contract that gives the
manager a fraction  of equity, where

                                                        
                                          =       h
                                                                                          (18)
                                                pg1   Ah + eh h

Given this contract, the manager chooses effort of type h at t = 0, i.e. a0
                                                                          h = 1. The manager

chooses a1                   1
         h = 1 if s = h and ah = 0 if s = l . If there is no provision for transfer of control

from shareholders to bondholders, then, given  high enough, shareholders will continue with
 12
      This is a standard assumption in principal-agent contracting models.



                                                      22
this contract at t = 1 regardless of s. The manager earns a rent with this contract.

   The intuition is as follows. Since the value of equity is always zero if the shareholders
design a contract to induce the manager to choose at
                                                   l , they always prefer the manager to

choose at
        h . By giving the manager a fraction of equity, they achieve this. It is clear that at

t = 0, the shareholders want the manager to choose a0            0
                                                    h = 1 since ah ensures that Ah will be

                   1
lost regardless of h ; the cost of incentivizing a0
                                                  h = 1 is  , which is less than Ah . At t = 1, if

s = h , then the  in (18) satisfies the manager's incentive compatibility condition to choose
a1                                                                              1
 h = 1. However, if s = l , then the  in (18) will cause the manager to choose ah = 0.

The shareholders are willing to accept this since the probability of  = h is very low in this
case with a sufficiently high  . Hence, it is too costly to incentivize the manager to choose
a1
 h = 1.

   The manager earns a rent because the manager had already chosen a0
                                                                    h = 1 at t = 0, and

                                                             h
this assures the manager of receiving an expected payoff of g1 peh h when s = h even if
she chooses a1                                                          1
             h = 0. Thus, a rent must be offered to induce a choice of ah = 1. Because of

the zero lower bound on the manager's wage, this rent cannot be offset through a negative
payment in the state in which equity is worthless. As we will see next, this rent plays a role
in the analysis.


Proposition 3:      It is socially optimal (firm value maximizing) for the manager to choose
a1
 l = 1 if s = l is observed at t = 1. However, if there is no provision that explicitly permits

an invalidation of the manager's wage contract at t = 1 in some (prespecified) state of
nature, the manager will refuse to give up her existing contract and will choose a1        1
                                                                                  h = 0 = al .

If there is a provision that transfers control from the shareholders to the bondholders at t = 1
conditional upon s = l , then the bondholders will invalidate the manager's previous contract
and offer her a new contract that pays

                                                  
                                        w=                  ,                                (19)
                                             [1 - gl1 ] pel

                                               23
if the firm's payoff at t = T is l and 0 otherwise. This contract induces the manager to
choose a1
        l = 1 and satisfies her participation constraint, but gives her no rent.



   The intuition is that when s = l , it is highly likely that  = l , so having the manager
choose a1                                       1        1
        l = 1 is better than having her choose ah = 0 = al from the standpoint of total

firm value. However, because shareholders designed the manager's contract at t = 0, the
manager was incentivized to choose a0             0                  0 1
                                    h = 1, i.e., al = 0. This means al al Al = 0 regardless

of a1
    l , implying that the manager's contract can now be designed by bondholders to induce

a choice of a1
             l = 1 without surrendering any rent to the manager. On the other hand, the

contract originally offered to the manager by the shareholders gives her a rent.
   Thus, the manager never voluntarily wants to give up the existing contract, and the only
way to replace that contract is to have an explicit provision permitting that. This is exactly
what Chapter 11 bankruptcy allows, as discussed in the Introduction. Thus, this analysis
provides an economic rationale for invalidating existing labor contracts to permit them to
be renegotiated when the firm enters Chapter 11.
   Our analysis implies the possible (constrained) efficiency of preserving Chapter 11 for
operations contracts with non-investors (labor contracts with employees, suppliers trade
credit, pre-paid service contracts with customers) in the operating company. But for investor-
held debt, the no-fault-default approach still facilitates considerable pure financial leverage
in the holding company without the dysfunctional bankruptcy costs documented with the
existing system.
   As discussed in the Introduction, our analysis provides a new perspective on the benefit
of being able to invalidate labor contracts in bankruptcy. This is in contrast to optimal
capital structure theories based on contracting over inalienable human capital development.
In these theories, most notably Jaggia and Thakor (1994) and Berk, Stanton, and Zechner
(2010), this feature of Chapter 11 is a cost associated with leverage.
   Our result that labor contract renegotiation in bankruptcy lowers the manager's rent
is consistent with the empirical evidence in Gilson and Vetsuypens (1993) that managerial

                                              24
compensation declines in firms that file for bankruptcy.
       While the analysis above has not modeled risk shifting by the shareholders, it can be
easily added to the model along the same lines as Section 2. Convertible debt that enables
the bondholders to convert their debt to equity when  = h and the high payoff on the risky
project is observed can then prevent the risk shifting.13



4        Implications for Bank Regulation and Financial Sta-

         bility

As we discussed in Section 2, the no-fault default structure, in combination with convertible
debt and invalidation of labor contracts when shareholders lose control, can be used for both
non-depository and depository financial institutions as effective tools for improving ex ante
incentives as well as achieving efficient ex post resolutions of failing institutions. Here we
take up two related issues. One is the pricing of deposit insurance and the other is financial
stability.
       On deposit insurance pricing, our analysis has a provocative implication. Since the risk-
shifting moral hazard issue for deposit insurance is qualitatively similar to the risk-shifting
moral hazard issue with risky debt (e.g. Merton (1977)), our analysis implies that the FDIC
should also have a call option on the bank's stock; this will be feasible for banks with traded
equity. Thus, if the bank takes excessive risk to exploit the deposit insurance put option
and its stock price rises, the FDIC can exercise its call option just the way the holders of
convertible debt can exercise their option to convert debt into equity. This will not only
enable the deposit insurance premium to be lowered, but also attenuate the risk-shifting
moral hazard of deposit insurance first highlighted by Merton (1977).
       This proposal also has implications for financial stability. Thakor (2014) argues that
  13
    We left this feature out of the analysis in this section to avoid cluttering the model with a component
that would add no insight beyond the analysis in Section 2.




                                                    25
financial stability can be enhanced by increasing capital ratios in banks and that imple-
menting higher capital requirements will not impose high private costs on banks or high
social costs. Nonetheless, bankers are resistant to higher capital requirements. Moreover,
during times of distress, they point out that raising equity to recapitalize the bank is pro-
hibitively expensive. The problem is exacerbated by the practical issue that bail-in debt and
CoCos have not be adopted very widely.14 Our analysis points to an alternative--with our
proposal, risk-shifting moral hazard is attenuated, so it may be possible to allow banks to
operate with lower levels of capital without sacrificing financial stability. Future research
could theoretically model this conjecture.
       We can also view no-fault-default debt as a substitute for CoCos. Merton and Thakor
(2019) argue that customer-supplied debt (e.g. bank deposits) should be insulated from the
bank's credit risk, whereas financier-supplied debt (e.g. subordinated debt in a bank) should
be exposed to that risk. Our proposed scheme achieves the desired bifurcation between
investor-held debt that is exposed to default risk with minimal transactions costs--since it
is no-fault-default debt--and customer/supplier debt that is essentially default-free (due to
insurance, for example).15



5        Discussion and Conclusion

This paper has analyzed risky no-fault-default debt in an options framework, and showed
that the deadweight costs of bankruptcy can be avoided or at least substantially reduced
by permitting a relatively seamless transfer of ownership from shareholders to bondholders
in states of the world in which shareholders do not wish to exercise their call option on
the assets of the levered firm. Although this option generates a cost due to risk shifting
emanating from moral hazard, convertible debt can attenuate this problem. This raises the
  14
    The use of CoCos by banks has been mainly in Europe, not in the U.S.
  15
    And the moral hazard generated by this insurance is dealt with through auditing by the insurer as in
Merton (1978) and call option for the insurer, as discussed above. See also Merton (1997), who proposes
a model of contract guarantees for credit-sensitive and opaque financial intermediaries, that also serves to
mitigate moral hazard.

                                                    26
question of why so many firms incur the substantial costs of Chapter 11 bankruptcy.
   We have shown that an economic rationale for Chapter 11 can be retrieved by emphasizing
a feature of bankruptcy, namely the ability to invalidate and renegotiate labor contracts.
In our model, as long as shareholders are in control, they design managerial contracts to
incentivize the manager to maximize shareholder value, even when this is no longer ex post
efficient from a firm-value-maximization standpoint. Moreover, even if bondholders take
control, the manager will refuse to renegotiate her contract because the contract negotiated
with shareholders gives the manager a rent, whereas the bondholders are able to offer a
contract with no managerial rents. Firm value is increased when bondholders have the
ability to invalidate the previous contract, and offer a no-rent contract to the manager that
satisfies her participation constraint. This is what Chapter 11 permits.
   While this analysis can provide a rationale for Chapter 11, it also raise the possibility
of only taking this specific feature of Chapter 11 without the other costly features. That
is, a normative implication of our analysis is that whenever there is a transfer of control
from shareholders to bondholders, the new financiers in charge should have the ability to
suspend all labor contracts and renegotiate them, without have to go through a formal
bankruptcy proceeding. This would be a marriage of our no-fault-default debt approach
with the beneficial aspects of Chapter 11, without the costly baggage associated with the
other aspects of bankruptcy.
   We have also used our analysis to discuss how it could be used to reduce risk-shifting
moral hazard in financial institutions, providing additional tools to the FDIC for resolving
bank failures, and improving financial stability.




                                              27
References

 [1] Acharya, Viral V., and Anjan V. Thakor. "The dark side of liquidity creation: Leverage
     and systemic risk." Journal of Financial Intermediation 28 (2016): 4-21.

 [2] Altman, Edward I. "A further empirical investigation of the bankruptcy cost question."
     The Journal of Finance 39, no. 4 (1984): 1067-1089.

 [3] Andrade, Gregor, and Steven N. Kaplan. "How costly is financial (not economic) dis-
     tress? Evidence from highly leveraged transactions that became distressed." The Jour-
     nal of Finance 53, no. 5 (1998): 1443-1493.

 [4] Asquith, Paul, Robert Gertner, and David Scharfstein. "Anatomy of financial distress:
     An examination of junk-bond issuers." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, no. 3
     (1994): 625-658.

 [5] Ayotte, Kenneth, and Jared A. Ellias. "Bankruptcy Process for Sale." Available at
     SSRN 3611350 (2020).

 [6] Bebchuk, Lucian Arye, and Jesse M. Fried. "The uneasy case for the priority of secured
     claims in bankruptcy." Yale Lj 105 (1995): 857.

 [7] Becker, Bo, and Jens Josephson. "Insolvency resolution and the missing high-yield bond
     markets." The Review of Financial Studies 29, no. 10 (2016): 2814-2849.

 [8] Berk, Jonathan B., Richard Stanton, and Josef Zechner. "Human capital, bankruptcy,
     and capital structure." The Journal of Finance 65, no. 3 (2010): 891-926.

 [9] Bernstein, Shai, Emanuele Colonnelli, Xavier Giroud, and Benjamin Iverson.
     "Bankruptcy spillovers." Journal of Financial Economics 133, no. 3 (2019): 608-633.

[10] Bharath, Sreedhar T., Venky Panchapegesan, and Ingrid Werner. The Changing Nature
     of Chapter 11. No. 2008-4. 2007.

[11] Black, Fischer, and Myron Scholes. "The pricing of options and corporate liabilities."
     Journal of Political Economy 81, no. 3 (1973): 637-654.

[12] Boyer, Pierre C., and Hubert Kempf. "Regulatory arbitrage and the efficiency of banking
     regulation." Journal of Financial Intermediation 41 (2020): 100765.

[13] Branch, Ben. "The costs of bankruptcy: A review." International Review of Financial
     Analysis 11, no. 1 (2002): 39-57.

[14] Bris, Arturo, Ivo Welch, and Ning Zhu. "The costs of bankruptcy: Chapter 7 liquidation
     versus Chapter 11 reorganization." The Journal of Finance 61, no. 3 (2006): 1253-1303.

[15] Brunnermeier, Markus K. "Deciphering the liquidity and credit crunch 2007-2008."
     Journal of Economic Perspectives 23, no. 1 (2009): 77-100.

                                            28
[16] Casey, Anthony J. "The Creditors' Bargain and Option-Preservation Priority in Chapter
     11." The University of Chicago Law Review (2011): 759-807.

[17] Dietrich, Timothy, G. "Bankruptcy Trumps Collective Bargaining Agreement". New &
     Events, Barley Snyder, February 8, 2016.

[18] Donaldson, Jason Roderick, Edward R. Morrison, Giorgia Piacentino, and Xiaobo Yu.
     "Restructuring vs. Bankruptcy." (2020).

[19] Fiordelisi, Franco, George Pennacchi, and Ornella Ricci. "Are contingent convertibles
     going-concern capital?." Journal of Financial Intermediation 43 (2020): 100822.

[20] Franks, Julian R., and Walter N. Torous. "An empirical investigation of US firms in
     reorganization." The Journal of Finance 44, no. 3 (1989): 747-769.

[21] Franks, Julian R., and Walter N. Torous. "A comparison of financial recontracting in
     distressed exchanges and Chapter 11 reorganizations." Journal of Financial Economics
     35, no. 3 (1994): 349-370.

[22] Gertner, Robert, and David Scharfstein. "A theory of workouts and the effects of reor-
     ganization law." The Journal of Finance 46, no. 4 (1991): 1189-1222.

[23] Gilson, Stuart C., Kose John, and Larry HP Lang. "Troubled debt restructurings: An
     empirical study of private reorganization of firms in default." Journal of Financial Eco-
     nomics 27, no. 2 (1990): 315-353.

[24] Gilson, Stuart C., and Michael R. Vetsuypens. "CEO compensation in financially dis-
     tressed firms: An empirical analysis." The Journal of Finance 48, no. 2 (1993): 425-458.

[25] Green, Richard C. "Investment incentives, debt, and warrants." Journal of Financial
     Economics 13, no. 1 (1984): 115-136.

[26] Greenbaum, Stuart I., Anjan V. Thakor, and Arnoud WA Boot. Contemporary Finan-
     cial Intermediation. Academic Press, 2019.

[27] Hart, Oliver, and John Moore. "Debt and Seniority: An Analysis of the Role of Hard
     Claims in Constraining Management." The American Economic Review 85, no. 3 (1995):
     567.

[28] Hotchkiss, Edith S., Kose John, Robert M. Mooradian, and Karin S. Thorburn.
     "Bankruptcy and the resolution of financial distress." In Handbook of Empirical Corpo-
     rate Finance, pp. 235-287. Elsevier, 2008.

[29] Jaggia, Priscilla Butt, and Anjan V. Thakor. "Firm-specific human capital and optimal
     capital structure." International Economic Review (1994): 283-308.

[30] Jensen, Michael C. "Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers."
     The American Economic Review 76, no. 2 (1986): 323-329.



                                             29
[31] Jensen, Michael C., and William H. Meckling. "Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior,
     agency costs and ownership structure." Journal of Financial Economics 3, no. 4 (1976):
     305-360.
[32] John, Kose, and Lemma W. Senbet. Limited liability, corporate leverage, and public
     policy. Graduate School of Business, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1988.
[33] Kim, Hugh Hoikwang. "Information spillover of bailouts." Journal of Financial Inter-
     mediation 43 (2020): 100807.
[34] Lewrick, Ulf, Jos´e Maria Serena, and Grant Turner. "Believing in bail-in? Market
     discipline and the pricing of bail-in bonds." (2019).
[35] Merton, Robert C. "On the pricing of corporate debt: The risk structure of interest
     rates." The Journal of Finance 29, no. 2 (1974): 449-470.
[36] Merton, Robert C. "An analytic derivation of the cost of deposit insurance and loan
     guarantees an application of modern option pricing theory." Journal of Banking &
     Finance 1, no. 1 (1977): 3-11.
[37] Merton, Robert C. "On the Cost of Deposit Insurance When There Are Surveillance
     Costs." Journal of Business 51, no. 3 (July 1978): 439-452. (Chapter 20 in Continuous-
     Time Finance.)
[38] Merton, Robert C. "The financial system and economic performance." Journal of Fi-
     nancial Services Research 4, no. 4 (1990): 263-300.
[39] Merton, Robert C. "No-Fault Default: A Possible Remedy for Certain Dysfunctional
     Consequences of Corporate Leverage." In American Finance Association Meetings. 1992.
[40] Merton, Robert C. "A model of contract guarantees for credit-sensitive, opaque financial
     intermediaries." European Finance Revie w 1 (1997): 1-13.
[41] Merton, Robert C., and Richard T. Thakor. "Customers and investors: a framework for
     understanding the evolution of financial institutions." Journal of Financial Intermedi-
     ation 39 (2019): 4-18.
[42] Morrison, Edward R. "Bankruptcy decision making: an empirical study of continuation
     bias in small-business bankruptcies." The Journal of Law and Economics 50, no. 2
     (2007): 381-419.
[43] Thakor, Anjan V. "Bank capital and financial stability: An economic trade-off or a
     Faustian bargain?." Annu. Rev. Financ. Econ. 6, no. 1 (2014): 185-223.
[44] Weiss, Lawrence A. "Bankruptcy resolution: Direct costs and violation of priority of
     claims." Journal of Financial Economics 27, no. 2 (1990): 285-314.
[45] Wruck, Karen Hopper. "Financial distress, reorganization, and organizational effi-
     ciency." Journal of Financial Economics 27, no. 2 (1990): 419-444.


                                             30
Appendix

Proof of Lemma 1: If the firm invests in the good project at t = 0, shareholders will
exercise their call option to "buy" the firm from the bondholders for DR and the value of
equity at that time is:
                                        p [Ah - DR ] ,                                   (A.1)

                            ~ = Al , shareholders will choose to let their option expire
since in the state in which A
unexercised and the value of equity is 0. Similarly, if the firm chooses the risky project, the
value of its equity is:
                                          ^h - DR .
                                        q A                                              (A.2)

Given (8), it follows that the expression in (A.2) exceeds that in (A.1).


Proof of Proposition 1: If the firm chooses the good project, then, as argued in the
text, bondholders will not convert in any state and the value of equity is given by (A.1). If
                                                                 ~=A
the firm chooses the risky project, the bondholders convert when B ^h and the value of

equity is:
                                        ^h = q 1 - DR A
                                q [1 - ]A             ^h .                               (A.3)
                                                   Ah

Comparing (A.1) and (A.3), we see that

                                                         DR ^
                               p [Ah - DR ] > q 1 -         Ah ,                         (A.4)
                                                         Ah

since Ah > DR . Thus, there will be no risk shifting.


Proof of Proposition 2: Consider first what happens at t = 1 when s = h is observed.
The incentive compatibility (IC) constraint for the manager to choose a1
                                                                       h = 1, conditional




                                              31
on a0
    h = 1 having been chosen at t = 0, is



                      h                        h
                     g1 p Ah + 2eh h - DR -   g1 p [eh h - DR ] .                        (A.5)


In equilibrium, this IC constraint is binding, so treating it as an equality yields (18). The
manager's expected utility is:
                                        [eh h - DR ] 
                                                      ,                                  (A.6)
                                          Ah + eh h

which is positive, given (11). This proves the manager earns a rent. Now, if s = l , then in
                        h       l          l    h
(A.5) we would replace g1 with g1 . Since g1 < g1 , it is clear that the IC constraint will be
violated.
   Next we show that the shareholders would prefer the manager chooe a1
                                                                      h = 0 when s = l .

If the manager chooses a1
                        h = 0 with the contract in (18), the value of shareholders' equity

after paying the manager is
                                     l
                                    g1 p[1 - ] [eh h - DR ] ,                            (A.7)

which is positive. If shareholders change the contract to incentivize the manager to choose
a1                          ~
 h = 1 when  = l , then let  be the equity ownership fraction they give the manager. It

is straightforward to verify that


                                     ~=         
                                            l
                                                        ,                                (A.8)
                                          pg1 Ah + eh h

and the value of shareholders' equity after paying the manager is:


                                  l
                                 g1 p[1 - ~] Ah + 2eh h - DR .                           (A.9)


Substituting for  and ~, we see that the expression in (A.7) exceeds that in (A.9) if


                        [eh h - DR ]    1    1
                                         1
                                           - 1      +1    > p Ah + eh h ,               (A.10)
                         Ah + eh h      gl  gh


                                               32
which obviously holds for gl1 close enough to 0, or equivalently for  high enough. Thus,
shareholders will not change the contract from  to ~.

   Now if bondholders take control and want to offer a contract that induces a choice a1
                                                                                       l = 1

after they observe s = l , they will design a contract that pays a wage w > 0 if the firm's
payoff at t = T is l and nothing otherwise. The w that satisfies the IC constraint is:


                                     1 - gl1 pel w -   0.                                (A.11)


Solving this as an equality yields w. It is clear that this contract yields the manager no rent.
   Finally, we prove that with the  contract, the manager will choose a0
                                                                       h = 1. The IC

constraint is:


                  g0  p Ah + 2eh h - DR -   g0  {p [eh h - DR ]} ,                       (A.12)


which means we need
                                  p Ah + eh h - DR  .                                    (A.13)

Now using (18), we see that to satisfy (A.13), we need


                                           1
                             p Ah + eh h  gh p Ah + eh h ,                               (A.14)


which is clearly true.


Proof of Proposition 3: Solving (A.11) as an equality yields (19). It is clear that it
satisfies the manager's participation constraint and yields the manager no rent. Thus, the
manager strictly prefers the existing positive-rent contract in place.
   Now, the value of the firm with the transfer of control to the bondholders when s = l




                                              33
(and the manager chooses a1
                          l = 1) is




                                      p 1 - gl1 el l - .                               (A.15)


The value of the firm if shareholders retain control after s = l is observed (and thus the
manager chooses a1    1
                 h = al = 0) is:

                                          gl1 peh h .                                  (A.16)

It is clear that for gl1 small enough, the expression in (A.15) exceeds that in (A.16) as long
as pel l >  , which is guaranteed by (12).




                                             34
