                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   COMMON OWNERSHIP AND COMPETITION IN THE
                       READY-TO-EAT CEREAL INDUSTRY

                                        Matthew Backus
                                       Christopher Conlon
                                       Michael Sinkinson

                                       Working Paper 28350
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28350


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2021




Thanks to conference and seminar attendees and especially Steven Berry, Jeremy Fox, Amit
Gandhi, Philip Haile, Jean-Francois Houde, Robin Lee, Aviv Nevo, and Ariel Pakes for
thoughtful comments. We thank Jett Pettus and Alphonse Simon for excellent research assistance.
All remaining errors are our own. The authors own analyses calculated (or derived) based in part
on data from The Nielsen Company (US), LLC and marketing databases provided through the
Nielsen Datasets at the Kilts Center for Marketing Data Center at The University of Chicago
Booth School of Business. The conclusions drawn from the Nielsen data are those of the
researchers and do not reflect the views of Nielsen. Nielsen is not responsible for, had no role in,
and was not involved in analyzing and preparing the results reported herein. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Matthew Backus, Christopher Conlon, and Michael Sinkinson. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Common Ownership and Competition in the Ready-to-Eat Cereal Industry
Matthew Backus, Christopher Conlon, and Michael Sinkinson
NBER Working Paper No. 28350
January 2021
JEL No. C52,L13,L21,L41

                                         ABSTRACT

Models of firm conduct are the cornerstone of both theoretical and empirical work in industrial
organization. A recent contribution (Berry and Haile, 2014) has suggested the use of exclusion
restrictions to test alternative conduct models. We propose a pairwise testing procedure based on
this idea and show that the power of the test to discriminate between models is tied to the
formulation of those restrictions as moments and how they reflect the nonlinearity of equilibrium
markups. We apply this test to the ready-to-eat cereal market using detailed scanner and
consumer data to evaluate the "common ownership" hypothesis, which has received significant
attention. Although we show that the potential magnitude of common ownership effects would be
large, our test finds that standard own-firm profit maximization is more consistent with the data.


Matthew Backus                                  Michael Sinkinson
Graduate School of Business                     Yale School of Management
Columbia University                             165 Whitney Ave, Suite 3473
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 619                    New Haven, CT 06511
New York, NY 10027                              and NBER
and NBER                                        michael.sinkinson@yale.edu
matthew.backus@columbia.edu

Christopher Conlon
Department of Economics
New York University
Stern School of Business
Henry Kaufman Management Center
44 W. Fourth St
New York, NY 10012
cconlon@stern.nyu.edu
1. Introduction
The strategic behavior of firms is central to the study of industrial organization. Going back to
at least Bresnahan (1982), economists have tried to determine which models of firm conduct are
consistent with observed market outcomes. These models of conduct often have very different
implications for consumer welfare, market efficiency, antitrust policy, and regulation, and therefore
being able to distinguish between them is vital to the science of economics.
   One particular model of conduct, the "common ownership" hypothesis, says that as firms are
increasingly owned by overlapping shareholders, the best way to maximize the value of sharehold-
ers' entire portfolios might be for firms to unilaterally relax competition in product markets. If
manifested in firm conduct as the theory predicts ­ an open question ­ the implications of this
observation would be vast, affecting prices in almost every sector of the US economy. By 2017, the
three largest institutional asset managers (Vanguard, Blackrock, and State Street) held a combined
21% of the average S&P 500 firm (Backus et al., 2021). However, most attempts at measuring
price effects of common ownership have relied on regressions of prices on (augmented) concen-
tration indices using market level data, reminiscent of the Structure-Conduct-Performance (SCP)
literature in industrial organization (Schmalensee, 1989). The challenges of these regressions are
well-documented, and have led them to fall out of favor with most economists studying strategic
interactions among firms (Berry et al., 2019).
   In this paper, we develop a testing procedure for comparing non-nested models of conduct
that predict different markups in equilibrium, such as own-profit maximization or the common
ownership hypothesis. We follow the identification argument of Berry and Haile (2014) and build
our test on exclusion restrictions, exploiting variables that affect markups but not marginal costs.
We use a moment-based version of the Rivers and Vuong (2002) test statistic to detect violation
of these restrictions: under the true conduct assumption, recovered marginal cost shocks should
not be correlated with those variables but under an incorrect conduct assumption they will be.
The challenge is that the relationship between the excluded variables and the difference between
the markups under the two models is likely to be nonlinear. We propose a simple scalar moment
condition that uses the model to capture that nonlinearity.
   Our testing procedure has several advantages. By estimating the nonlinear relationship between
the excluded variables and the difference in markups, we are able to generate a more powerful test.
This idea is motivated by the Chamberlain (1987) optimal instruments for nonlinear GMM, an
analogy that guides us at several points in the analysis. Moreover, since our formulation of the
exclusion restrictions reduces to a scalar moment condition, we avoid many of the problems associ-
ated with weighting matrices in moment-based non-nested model comparisons (Hall and Pelletier,
2011).
   We apply this test to alternative models of conduct in the ready-to-eat (RTE) cereal market.
The chosen industry is an ideal one for examining the "common ownership" hypothesis as it exhibits


                                                 1
variation in ownership concentration across firms, as well as over time, in addition to a high level of
product market concentration to begin with (C4 is approximately 85%). For example, The Kellogg
Foundation is a major (undiversified) shareholder of Kellogg's, Inc, although its share has fallen
over time from over 30% in 2000 to just under 20% in 2017. We also observe that the products
sold under the Post brand changed hands several times, from being a part of Kraft foods, to being
a part of Ralcorp, and finally to being an independent firm, all of which affect the extent to which
its shares are commonly owned. This variation generates meaningful differences both in the cross-
section and in the time series between pricing and markups under common ownership and pricing
under own-firm profit maximization.
   We first estimate demand in a standard random coefficients logit model using detailed scanner
data from 2007­2017. We supplement this with demographic data of shoppers collected from pan-
elist data on individual consumers and micro-moments of covariances between purchased product
characteristics and consumer demographics. We find that category demand is inelastic while the
median product faces an own-price elasticity of -2.67. We simulate price increases under a set of
hypothetical mergers to understand the magnitudes implied by the substitution patterns identified
in the demand data.
   With demand in hand, we compute markups under a variety of conduct models including
perfect competition, own-profit maximization, common ownership pricing, and monopoly pricing.
We apply our testing procedure using a variety of alternative exclusion restrictions. The results
strongly favor own-firm profit maximization. However, we show that capturing the nonlinearity of
the model using our formulation of the exclusion restriction is critical. Alternative specifications
that are predicated on functional form restrictions ­ linearity of the marginal cost function and
linearity of the relationship between the exclusion restrictions and the difference in markups ­ offer
inconsistent results across different sets of excluded instruments. Alternatively, when specified as
we propose, the different sets of exclusion restrictions agree, satisfying the specification test critique
of Hausman (1978).
   Finally, we consider an "internalization parameter" approach that posits that some fraction 
of the common ownership incentives are transmitted to managers. We compute our test statistic
comparing own-profit maximization to variations of the common ownership incentives at different
levels of  . We show that our test is able to reject that 30% or more of the common ownership
incentives are reflected in firm pricing decisions. At lower levels of internalization, markups between
the two models become indistinguishable.
   Our contribution is both methodological and empirical. In terms of methodology, we describe a
method for testing conduct with a number of advantages over previous approaches. Our approach
uses the (known) nonlinearity of the model of equilibrium markups to improve power. Moreover,
it frees the researcher from specifying a weighting matrix and allows for fully flexible functional
forms in the testing procedure. Empirically, we provide evidence in the ongoing debate around the



                                                    2
common ownership hypothesis. Our analysis is one of few in a differentiated product setting and
the first to our knowledge to undertake a pairwise model comparison test of the common ownership
conduct model. We show how to evaluate the common ownership hypothesis in a conduct testing
approach, but our framework is quite general and it can be used to test other models or hypotheses
that predict equilibrium markups. We hope that others will find this a fruitful approach in new
empirical contexts going forward.

1.1. Related Literature
Empirical testing of firm conduct is an endeavor with a storied history in industrial organization
(IO) going back to at least Bresnahan (1982). Examples of conduct testing and estimation include
Bresnahan (1987), Nevo (2001), Miller and Weinberg (2017), and Duarte et al. (2020).1 Berry and
Haile (2014) show nonparametric identification of conduct and suggest that models of conduct are
testable in the presence of appropriate exclusion restrictions. With respect to this literature, we
pose the common ownership hypothesis as an alternative model of conduct, and employ some of
the same identification results that have been used to test for collusion and portfolio pricing.
       The theoretical foundations of the common ownership hypothesis are not new. Rotemberg
(1984) offered the earliest model in which diversification of shareholders affects the character of im-
perfect competition in product markets. Bresnahan and Salop (1986) and O'Brien and Salop (2000)
treat the same question, characterizing "partial mergers," where diversified ownership by sharehold-
ers and cross-ownership among firms can have anticompetitive effects. In particular, Bresnahan and
Salop (1986) introduced the modified Herfindahl-Hirschman index (MHHI) concentration measure
to capture such partial control.
       The recent revival of interest in the common ownership hypothesis follows from a handful of
empirical studies that appear to show large effects on pricing in product markets. The most notable
are Azar et al. (2016), which studied the effects of common ownership on bank fees, and Azar et al.
(2018a), which uses the BlackRock acquisition of Barclays as an instrument to study the effect of
common ownership on airfares. Neither of the above papers addresses the question of finding a
mechanism ­ precisely how do large common investors affect prices? Ant´
                                                                      on et al. (2020) propose
that it is through executive compensation schemes with respect to firm performance. They exploit
index-entry events that change common ownership and show that they are correlated with attributes
of corporate compensation in a way that is consistent with reduced competition in product markets.
       This literature has not been without criticism, in particular for its descriptive approach. The
explanatory variables of interest are concentration indices such as MHHI. Besides the obvious con-
cerns for identification (since this puts quantity sold on the right-hand side), these concentration
   1
    Nevo (2001) also studies ready-to-eat cereal to test models of conduct and is the most proximate point of departure
for our endeavor. We iterate on that seminal work by using an updated sample (1990­1996 vs 2007­2017), more
stores (6 versus thousands), more detailed characteristics data, store-specific measurement of market size and, most
importantly, an alternative conduct hypothesis.



                                                          3
measures have no monotonic relationship to the main outcome of interest, product market prices
(O'Brien, 2017). Notwithstanding these concerns about the empirical results, this burgeoning liter-
ature has attracted the interest of the legal community (Elhauge, 2016) and antitrust authorities,2
and there is already interest in regulatory remedies (Posner et al., 2017). The literature is further
reviewed in Backus et al. (2019). It is a pressing concern then to develop a structural approach
that can guide antitrust and regulatory authorities in evaluating both the problem and potential
remedies. To our knowledge, the only other papers that endeavor a structural analysis of the
common ownership hypothesis are Kennedy et al. (2017) and Park and Seo (2019), which take a
different, nested approach using an internalization parameter (discussed later) and study the airline
industry.3

2. A Test of Conduct
Throughout this article, we use j  JT to denote products, t  T to denote markets, and n to
denote all products and markets suitably stacked. We also use bold typeface to denote all of the
products within a particular market (e.g.: pt denotes the prices of all products in market t). We
index by -j to indicate exclusion of product j ; for example, p-j,t denotes the prices of all products
in market t except for product j .

2.1. Setup and Testing Environment
Conduct testing is a classic problem in empirical industrial organization and antitrust economics.
The idea, stemming from Bresnahan (1982), was to exploit "rotations of demand" to distin-
guish among different models of price-setting behavior (perfect competition, monopoly, Cournot,
Bertrand). Later work followed Bresnahan (1987) in developing statistical tests for additional
price-setting behavior such as double marginalization and two-part tariffs (Bonnet and Dubois,
2010; Villas-Boas, 2007). Much of this work relies on instruments excluded from a known para-
metric specification for marginal costs and compares the fit of the marginal cost specification in a
likelihood ratio testing framework.
    More recent work by Berry and Haile (2014) shows how a combination of conditions on ex-
cluded instruments (much broader than "rotations of demand") and a set of reasonable technical
restrictions can be used to non-parametrically identify marginal costs, and thus discriminate among
    2
      The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) held a hearing on the topic in December 2018 and a joint FTC and
Department of Justice (DOJ) request for comments on proposed amendments to regulations around disclosure of
minority stakes in firms was released in September of 2020."FTC and DOJ Seek Comments on Proposed Amend-
ments to HSR Rules and Advanced Notice of Proposed HSR Rulemaking." https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/press-
releases/2020/09/ftc-doj-seek-comments-proposed-amendments-hsr-rules-advanced
    3
      The papers are quite different in approach and, given the gravity of the question, we view this heterogeneity in
method as complementary. In particular, they study airlines, mirroring Azar et al. (2018b), while we have deliberately
chosen an industry with simpler pricing practices; they estimate a nested logit model of demand while ours is a random
coefficient logit; and finally they estimate a conduct parameter where we follow the "menu" approach of Nevo (2000)
and study discrete, fully specified, conduct models.



                                                          4
alternative models of price setting behavior. Under some additional simplifying assumptions, we
show how to take these ideas to data in a way that is computationally tractable while making as
few parametric assumptions as possible.
       In their analysis of marginal costs and firm conduct, Berry and Haile (2014) start with an as-
sumption (Assumption 7a) which equates marginal costs to (generalized residual) marginal revenue
j (·), the idea being that given prices pt , market shares st , and a (known) demand system D(zt ),
where zt is the full set of exogenous product characteristics, marginal cost can be recovered from
the (known) first-order conditions of firms' price-setting behavior:4

                                         mcjt = j (st , pt , D(zt ))                                              (1)
                                                       m
                                               = pjt - j (st , pt , D(zt )).

We modify this slightly and equate, in the second line, the generalized marginal revenue j (·) with
                                                                  m   m (s , p , D (z )) which are
the difference between observed prices pjt and an additive markup jt j    t   t      t
subscripted by m to denote a particular model of conduct (such as Cournot, Bertrand, monopoly,
                                                                    m without an argument,
perfect competition, fixed markups, or others). We use the notation jt
                                                                              m is also known
because given a conduct assumption and the fact that demand is assumed known, jt
and may be treated as data.5
       We also need to characterize the marginal cost specification. At this point it is helpful to
partition the set of exogenous product characteristics zt into xt , variables that affect both demand
and marginal costs; vt , variables that affect demand but are excluded from marginal costs, and wt ,
variables that affect marginal costs but are excluded from demand. Now,

                mcjt = cj (xjt , wjt , Qt , jt ) = hs (xjt , wjt ) + jt ,   where     E[jt |zt ] = 0.             (2)

Here we have made two additional assumptions: the first is that there are no returns to scale or
scope so that the vector of sales (in levels) Qt does not impact the marginal cost; the second is that
the unobservable cost term jt is additively separable. Though it is unlikely to be important in
our empirical study of RTE cereal, we can extend our approach to account for economies of scale,
although it would require additional instruments to address the endogeneity of Qt .6
       What we have not done is restricted the functional form regarding how observable cost compo-
nents (xjt , wjt ) affect the marginal cost through hs (·). This is in contrast with nearly all of the prior
   4
      There are many examples of this in the literature including Nevo (2000) who shows that for multi-product
oligopoly price-setting pt - mct = t (st , pt )-1 st  t (st , pt ) where t is the matrix of demand derivatives (j,k) =
qj
pk
      for products with the same owner.
    5
      In practice, demand must be estimated from data. Our empirical example follows the standard approach in Berry
et al. (1995) or Nevo (2001). Bresnahan (1987) is somewhat of an exception and estimates demand and marginal
costs simultaneously when testing conduct models, while more recent work mostly follows the "menu" approach of
Nevo (1998) and estimates demand prior to marginal costs.
    6
      The substance of both restrictions are explained in Sections 4 and 6 of Berry and Haile (2014).



                                                           5
literature which generally treats hs (·) as linear in covariates, or exponential (so that log(mcjt ) is
linear in the covariates).7 Maintaining this flexibility is an important contribution of our approach.
       If one combines (1) and (2) with a particular conduct assumption m, we get:

                                               m                      m
                                         pjt - jt = hs (xjt , wjt ) + jt .                                        (3)

As in (2), the model is defined by the conditional moment restriction (CMR) E[jt |zt ] = 0. The
boldfaced zt indicates that the unobservable cost term jt is conditionally mean independent not
only of j 's own characteristics (xjt , wjt ) in hs (·) but of the characteristics of other products in
the same market.8 In practice, most researchers don't work with the conditional moment restric-
tion directly, but rather with (weaker) unconditional moment restrictions implied by the CMR:
E[jt |zt ] = 0  E[jt A(zt )] = 0 where A(·) denotes some matrix-valued function of zt . A sub-
stantial literature in econometrics is concerned with choosing A(·) in order to preserve the largest
amount of information from the CMR (Newey, 1990; Ai and Chen, 2003; Imbens et al., 2003)
including the seminal work by Chamberlain (1987) on "optimal instruments" in a nonlinear IV
setting, which guides us at several points.9 In that literature, the choice of A(zt ) is largely about
efficiency, while in our setting the choice of A(zt ) is largely about the power of a test statistic to
distinguish among alternative models of markups.
       Consistent with much of the prior literature, we consider a non-nested testing framework where
the null hypothesis is that both markup assumptions satisfy the moment restrictions equally well
against the two-sided alternative where either model 1 ( 1 ) satisfies the restrictions better or model
2 ( 2 ) satisfies the restrictions better. The model is non-nested in the sense that both markups
are not included in (3) at the same time. In the event of a rejection in favor of  1 or  2 we say
                                             m A(z )] = 0 better is "preferred" rather than "true"
that the model that satisfies restrictions E[jt   t
because it is likely that both markups are mis-specified. The non-nested testing framework under
mis-specification is formalized in Vuong (1989) for likelihood ratio tests, and extended to a broad
class of objective functions (including GMM) in Rivers and Vuong (2002).
       Formally, the null hypothesis of a Vuong-type test is that both models are equally far from
the truth, taking as a distance metric a criterion function, Q(·) such as the GMM objective. The
Rivers-Vuong test statistic is given by:
                                                
                                                   n(Q1 ( 1 ) - Q2 ( 2 ))
                                          T =                             ,                                       (4)
                                                            
       
where / n is the asymptotic (in n) standard error of the difference (Q1 ( 1 ) - Q2 ( 2 )). Rivers
and Vuong (2002) show that, for a broad class of specifications of the criterion function including
   7
    See for example Michel and Weiergraeber (2018); Bonnet and Dubois (2010); Villas-Boas (2007).
   8
    This is the foundation of the well-known "BLP instruments" for demand E[jt |zt ] = 0.
  9
    The only case in which E[jt zt ] = 0 contains the relevant information from the CMR is if the relationship between
markups and zt is exactly linear.


                                                          6
moment-based objective functions, T has a standard normal distribution. For  = 0.05, this means
that we can reject the null hypothesis in favor of model 1 if T is smaller than -1.96, and we can
reject the null hypothesis in favor of model 2 if T is larger than 1.96.
       This test has some advantages. First, it does not require that either model is the truth (as is
necessary in the alternative Cox framework).10 This is particularly appealing for model-dependent
exercises like ours, as all models are, at best, an approximation. Second, recent work by Duarte
et al. (2020) explored the performance of the Rivers-Vuong test statistic in Monte Carlo simulations
of a conduct testing procedure. Their results suggest that it performs better than alternative testing
procedures, particularly when the underlying demand model is misspecified.11

2.2. Choosing Moment Restrictions
Given a pair of candidate models that predict different markups, how can we choose a function
                                                                 1,2  1 -  2 , we propose the
A(zt ) that will allow us to discriminate between them? Defining jt   jt  jt
                1,2
form A(zt ) = E[jt  |zt ]. There are several reasons we believe that this is a sensible choice. The
simplest justification is that if we difference (3) for models 1 and 2 we obtain:

                             1    2     2    1
                             jt - jt = (jt - jt ) + (h2                 1
                                                      s (xjt , wjt ) - hs (xjt , wjt )).
                                1,2
                               =jt


The intuition is that any discrepancy between two models of conduct should arise from the dif-
ferences in the implied markups (ignoring differences in the estimates for the observed portion
of marginal costs hs (·)). The challenge is that the markup difference is endogenous and directly
depends on both the observed characteristics of all products zt and the unobservable costs t .
Therefore we suggest replacing it with its expectation conditional on the exogenous variables:
E[jt |zt ]. We provide a corresponding formal result in Proposition 1.

  10
       The analogous Cox test would consider H0 :  = [1, 0] vs Ha :  = [0, 1] using:
                                                                          1    2 T
                                      pjt = hs (xjt , wjt ) + [1 , 2 ] · [jt , jt ] + jt .

This is useful because it highlights the problems caused by the endogeneity of the markup jt and how moving it to
the left hand side in (3) avoids the endogeneity problem via the Anderson-Rubin approach (imposing m = 1 rather
than estimating the parameter). See Duarte et al. (2020) for a more thorough discussion.
  11
     The Vuong and Rivers-Vuong testing approach has been applied in prior work including Gasmi et al. (1992),
Bonnet and Dubois (2010), and Duarte et al. (2020). The alternative, Cox-based tests, are employed in Bresnahan
(1987) in an MLE context, and are extended to moment-based objective functions by Smith (1992), and employed by
Villas-Boas (2007). Both test statistics were developed in a MLE framework (Cox, 1962; Vuong, 1989), and in both
cases took the form of a likelihood ratio statistic. The main difference is the formulation of the null hypothesis. For
a Cox test, one model is taken to be the null, and the other the alternative. This can lead to difficulties in testing
using multiple moment restrictions because the weighting matrix now depends on which model is taken to be the
null, generating an asymmetry in the test. Both in principle and in practice, this can lead to the scenario in which
the researcher rejects model 1 (null) against model 2 (alternative), and model 2 (null) against model 1 (alternative).
This problem does not arise for Rivers-Vuong tests, which are always symmetric, although Hall and Pelletier (2011)
raise other issues with weighting matrices in that setting when the researcher uses multiple moment restrictions.



                                                               7
Proposition 1. Under the following assumptions:
(i) A fixed k × k positive semi-definite weighting matrix W ;
(ii) A (n × k ) matrix of instruments Z of full column rank k ;
(iii) A vector of n unobservable cost components  m = p - h(z ) -  m and moment restrictions such
that E [ m Z ] = 0  Rk is satisfied at the true  0 and not at  m =  0 , and
(iv) The function h(z ) is known (rather than estimated).

(a) As n   and under standard regularity conditions, the difference in GMM objective functions
(QW ( )  R+ ) under weighting matrix W , for any two markup models ( 1 ,  2 ), can be expressed
as:

                         p
 QW ( 1 ) - QW ( 2 )  -E[Z  1 ] W E[Z  1,2 ] - E[Z  2 ] W E[Z  1,2 ] where  1,2 =  1 -  2 .

With an additional assumption, a stronger result obtains.
                                                                    a.s
(v) Model 1 is the correctly specified model, i.e. E[Z 1 ]  0.
(b) Under the additional condition (v), then:

                                                     p
                             QW ( 1 ) - QW ( 2 )  -E[Z  1,2 ] W E[Z  1,2 ].


Proof in Appendix A.1

      The numerator of the Rivers-Vuong test statistic in (4) depends on the difference between GMM
objective functions under the assumed markups ( 1 ,  2 ). Proposition 1(a) highlights two features of
this difference. First, it makes precise the relevance of instruments A(zt ). If we choose instruments
                                                       1,2                 1 ,2
for each market Zt = A(zt ) that are uncorrelated with jt  , then E[A(zt ) jt   ] = 0 and the
                                    p
difference QW (1 ) - QW (2 )  0 under both (a) and (b). For two competing models of markups to
be testable, we require that they generate different objective functions, and therefore require that
         1,2
E[A(zt ) jt  ] = 0.12
      Second, given a set of markups ( 1 ,  2 ), a more powerful test will generate larger differences in
QW ( 1 ) - QW ( 2 ). Since both expressions in (a) are post-multiplied by E[Z  1,2 ], this suggests
                                            1,2
choosing A(zt ) in such a way that E[A(zt ) jt  ] is large. This alone isn't sufficient, because we
would still need to know how the k moment restrictions in E[Z  m ] covary with those in E[Z  1,2 ]
(under some weighting matrix W ). This motivates Proposition 1(b) which says that, under the
                              a.s
true model, E[A(zt ) 1 ]  0, and the difference in the objective functions reduces to a quadratic
form in E[Z  1,2 ]. This suggests, in order to maximize the power of the test, we choose A(zt ) to
               1,2
be as close to t   as possible.13
  12                                                              1     2
     Likewise, if the markups themselves are indistinguishable jt    jt    it will become impossible to tell the models
apart.
  13               1,2
     Although jt       itself would be powered, it is not typically a valid exclusion restriction because markups are


                                                          8
                                     1,2
    A second argument for A(zt ) = E[jt  |zt ] is that, for local comparisons, it appears organically
as the (feasible approximation to the) optimal instrument for estimation of so-called "internalization
parameters." Internalization parameters are a way to nest a family of objective functions of the
firm. In this framework, markups can be written ~jt ( ), which we assume to be a continuous,
but potentially nonlinear function of  . Model selection amounts to estimating ^ and testing the
hypotheses: H0 :  = 1 against Ha :  = 2 .14 Consider estimating  in:

                           pjt = hs (xjt , wjt ) + ~jt ( ) + jt           where   E[jt |zt ] = 0.                   (5)

The Chamberlain (1987) optimal instrument for the corresponding nonlinear GMM exercise is
    jt                 ~jt ( )
E    |zt       = E       |zt           . Holding that in mind for a moment, next consider the non-nested
                                                                                1 ,2
model comparison of two models, at  and  + . Our proposed instrument A(zt ) = E[jt   |zt ] is
                      1,2
                    E[jt  |z t ]         jt ( + )-
                                       E[~        ~jt ( )|zt ]                                              ~jt ( )
proportional to                    =                             . This expression converges, as  0, to E     |zt          ,
which is the (feasible approximation to the) optimal instrument for nonlinear GMM exercise de-
scribed above.15 In this sense we think of our instrument as a discrete analogue, in a non-nested
model comparison exercise, of the Chamberlain (1987) optimal instrument for the corresponding
estimation exercise. Moreover, this equivalence can be extended to non-local comparisons if ~jt ( )
is linear in  .16
    The third and final argument is that, since k = 1 for A(zt ) = E[ 1,2 |zt ], i.e. we test using a
single moment, so the need for a weighting matrix is obviated and we can write Q      ~ ( ) in place of
QW ( ). Hall and Pelletier (2011) have shown how choice of a weighting matrix can be determinative
in moment-based implementations of the Rivers and Vuong (2002) testing environment like our own.
Moreover, the use of a scalar moment allows us to focus our computational efforts on the flexibility
of our fit of the supply function hs (·) from (3) as well as flexibility in the estimation of E[ 1,2 |zt ],
which we detail next. Flexibility in the former is important because conduct tests based on (3)
always jointly test both the exclusion restriction E[jt A(zt )]=0 with the functional form of the cost
function hs (xjt , wjt ). Flexibility in the latter is important because the relationship between zt and
usually modeled as endogenous functions of everything in the model, in particular jt , and would violate the original
                           1,2
moment restriction E[jt        jt ] = 0.
   14
      A number of recent papers have adopted this approach. In Miller and Weinberg (2017), that parameter captures
the internalization of strategic externalities in pricing across Miller-Coors and ABI. Alternatively, in Crawford et al.
(2018), the parameter characterizes the extent to which firms internalize the strategic consequences of their choices
across divisions. Closer to our own question, Kennedy et al. (2017) and Park and Seo (2019) have estimate internaliza-
tion parameters that convexify the space between own-profit maximization and common ownership incentives. Nevo
(1998) offers a discussion of the contrast between conduct parameter estimation and our approach here, pairwise,
non-nested model comparisons.
   15
      The optimal but infeasible instrument for  would require knowledge of the true parameter values including 0
itself.
   16                                                                               1                  2
      Consider a parameterized model of markups        ~jt ( ) such that ~jt (1 ) = jt and ~jt (2 ) = jt . The simplest
                                            1               2
parameterization would be      ~jt ( ) =  · jt + (1 -  ) · jt . The approximation to the nonlinear optimal IV would be
    jt             ~jt ( )           1    2
E   
       |z t   =E    
                           |zt   = E jt - jt |zt , which corresponds exactly to our choice of A(zt ).



                                                                   9
Algorithm 1 Testing Procedure

                                                                                             1      2
  (a) Estimate the marginal cost function from (3), under models 1 and 2 to obtain residuals jt and jt :
                                                    m                      m
                                              pjt - jt = hs (xjt , wjt ) + jt .

                                                                                             1,2
  (b) Estimate the "first stage" regression, and compute the fitted values  jt = g
                                                                                 ^(zt ) of:
                                                     1,2
                                                     jt  = g (zt ) + jt .

  (c) For each candidate model, compute the value of the scalar moment:17
                                                                                     2
                                            ~ ( m ) =
                                            Q             n-1         ^ jt
                                                                        m
                                                                           ·g
                                                                            ^(zt )       .                       (6)
                                                                j,t

                                                                                                           ~ ( 1 ) -
  (d) Repeat steps (a)-(c) on bootstrapped samples and estimate ^ / n the standard error of the difference Q
      ~  2
      Q( ).
  (e) Compute the test statistic
                                                      ~ ( 1 ) - Q
                                                                ~ ( 2 ))
                                                    n(Q
                                           T =                            N (0, 1).                              (7)
                                                            
      Note: Steps (a) and (b) can be done in any order via non-parametric regression. Our preferred method is
      random forest regression (Breiman, 2001) which scales well as n becomes large and is well-suited to capturing
      nonlinear relationships.



 1,2 will often be nonlinear.
    All three of these arguments hinge on the unifying observation that the power of conduct
tests based on Berry and Haile (2014) depends on capturing the nonlinear relationship between zt
    1 ,2
and jt   . So far, it's a theoretical observation. In our application to competition and common
ownership in the ready-to-eat cereal market below, we will show that it has significant practical
importance. Results from using forms of A(zt ) which do not exploit the difference in markups
suffer a loss of power relative to our proposed single moment. Examining this loss across different
choices of zt , some of which better capture the nonlinearity of the model than others, the results
confirm our observation. For now, however, we turn to the implementation of the test.

2.3. Our Testing Procedure
Our testing procedure is described in Algorithm 1. We adapt the non-nested test of Rivers and
                                                                            1,2
Vuong (2002) from (4) and use the expected difference in markups A(zt ) = E[jt  |zt ] to formulate
the sole moment restriction: E[jt A(zt )] = 0.
    An advantage of our procedure, which we discussed in Section 2.1 above, is that it allows
  17
     At this step the researcher has some freedom; for instance, here we implement the criterion function directly
as computation of the desired moment, but we might also have implemented it as the empirical likelihood that the
moment holds. Our choice is informed mostly practical concerns for applied work which are likely to involve both
weighting and clustering (as ours does below).



                                                          10
substantial flexibility in the estimation of hs (·) and g (·). One note, however: since (xjt , wjt ) are
elements of zt and appear in both equations, it is important to be as flexible in the way they enter
g (·) as in the way they enter hs (·). Not doing so may introduce implicit exclusion restrictions
based on functional form. For instance, if xjt enters hs (·) linearly but with both a linear and a
quadratic term in g (·), then the quadratic part of xjt effectively behaves as an additional exclusion
restriction.18
       In our application, we use a random forest to fit both (Breiman, 2001). The main advantage
of random forests over other flexible semi-parametric estimators is that they scale well when n is
large, and they are good at capturing nonlinear relationships.
       At this point we can highlight a second point of comparison with the recent proposal of Duarte
                                      1,2
et al. (2020). In place of A(zt ) = E[jt  |zt ], they propose to take A(zt ) to be a flexible sieve.
Asymptotically, as the sieve becomes flexible, they show that their test statistic is equivalent to ours.
This insight is analogous to Proposition 2 of Chamberlain (1987), which showed that for nonlinear
GMM problems, taking A(·) to be a sufficiently flexible sieve allows the researcher to approximate
the optimal instrument. Nonetheless, in applied exercises, when taking a sieve expansion of many
instruments may prove infeasible,19 we posit that it may be useful to exploit the known structure
                                                        1,2
of the model and compute the conditional expectation of j,  given zt .
                                                                         1,2
       Continuing that analogy, observe that the problem of estimating E[jt  |zt ] mirrors the problem
of estimating the infeasible Chamberlain (1987) optimal instruments. Relative to that literature,
our approach follows most closely the suggestion of Newey (1990), who shows that the optimal
instruments can be approximated by a first-stage nonparametric regression. An alternative ap-
proach, suggested in the appendix to Berry et al. (1999), would be to compute the expectation by
simulating the entire model and integrating out over the unobserved cost and demand shocks. This
is prohibitive for us because estimating and simulating from the marginal cost function requires us
to take a stand, ex ante, on the correct conduct model, which begs the question we are trying to
answer.20
       As a final note, we have not said anything about how to choose the broader set of potential
instruments zt other than that they must include (xjt , wjt ). This will depend both on the models
of conduct being considered and the specification of the demand system. In Section 6 we offer some
comments on the full set of potential instruments when the researcher has estimated a demand
system like the one we write down in Section 5.
  18
      See Hartford et al. (2017) for further discussion on this point.
  19
      For example, if there are many instruments in zt (as when we use the BLP instruments in our exercise in Section
6, of which there are 143).
   20
      A third approach, would be to extend the idea of Reynaert and Verboven (2014) where the authors assume perfect
competition and predict E[pjt |xjt , wjt ] using a linear regression on the variables in the marginal cost relationship (3)
and plug this into the model st (p^t ) to derive markups. As they suggest, we can also predict E[pjt |zt ] nonparametrically
using the full set of potential instruments in zt to more flexibly account for oligopoly behavior. The interested reader
will find we use this method to estimate the optimal instruments for the demand estimation exercise below in Section 5,
and we discuss the alternative approaches to approximating them for testing further in Appendix A.3.



                                                            11
3. Theory of Common Ownership
The theoretical literature on common ownership has its early origins in Rotemberg (1984) and
Bresnahan and Salop (1986). It offers a model of the objective function of the firm in terms
of shareholder interests. Our derivation follows O'Brien and Salop (2000), beginning with the
assumptions from Backus et al. (2020a):

Assumption 1. Shareholder portfolio values are given by: vs                       s f s f .

Assumption 2. (Rotemberg, 1984) Managers maximize a f s -weighted average of shareholder
portfolio values: Qf        s f s vs .

       Each shareholder s receives some share f s of firm f 's profits f . Assumption 1 says that
investors hold portfolios made up of investments of many firms. In strategic games, firms may
exert externalities upon each other's payoffs. Because different investors hold different portfolios,
they have different objectives for the firm. In order to aggregate across investors with different
interests, Assumption 2 states that the manager of f places some Pareto weight f s on the profits
of each shareholder and maximizes a weighted sum of their payoffs.
       Now if we consider a strategic action xf taken by firm f which affects their profits and the
profits of rival firms f (xf , x-f ), we can write the objective function of the firm Qf (xf , x-f ), with
some rearrangement, as:

                                                                    s f s gs
                       Qf (xf , x-f )  f (xf , x-f ) +                          g (xf , x-f ).             (8)
                                                           g =f     s f s f s
                                                                  co
                                                                  f g (f , )



Therefore each firm f will act as if it places a non-negative weight co
                                                                     f g on the profits of rival firms.
By construction, co                   co
                 f f = 1, so that all f g are defined relative to the weight that firm f places on
its own profits.21
       This model is quite flexible. For example, the objective can include the manager's private
investment portfolio and have them place a high  weight on their private returns. Alternatively,
the manager can place a weight of f s = 0 on particular shareholders (including passive or index
investors, investors below some minimal blockholder threshold, etc.). The problem for empirical
work is that even if we observed co
                                 f g for every pair of firms within an industry, it is unlikely we would
be able to recover f s without additional (parametric) assumptions, because while there might be
ten firms within an industry (one-hundred pairwise interactions), there are often thousands of
investors in each firm.
       The researcher must make an assumption on f s , since they do not have a directly observable
empirical counterpart. This is akin to specifying a particular model of corporate governance or
  21
    To avoid dividing by zero, we need that f · f > 0, which is guaranteed, for instance, if  ( ) is a strictly
increasing monotone function and  (0) = 0.


                                                      12
corporate control. The most common choice for empirical work is the so-called "proportional
control" assumption that sets f s = f s . This is intuitively appealing as "one-share, one-vote"
though is not necessarily consistent with a particular model of social choice. Backus et al. (2021)
demonstrate that the proportional control assumption yields average values for co
                                                                               f g around 0.7 for
large publicly-traded firms given the current distribution of ownership, implying a large degree of
potential "cooperation."
       Another way to interpret the proportional control assumption is as a specific frictionless bench-
mark. Absent agency conflicts, managers are perfect agents for shareholders and investment man-
agers are perfect agents for investors. One way to interpret critiques of the common ownership
hypothesis is that the "true" model of corporate governance specifies some alternative form for f s .
Another interpretation of a "lack of cooperation" in the data is that agency conflicts distort the
manager's objective away from (8).

Application to Cournot:           Much attention in the common ownership literature has been paid to
the Modified Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (MHHI) concentration measure, which is derived from
a Cournot oligopoly model of competition. MHHI extends the traditional Herfindahl-Hirschman
index (HHI) to incorporate common ownership, and is defined from the following firm objective
function:

                                 max f (qf , q-f ) +              f g g (qf , q-f ).
                                  qf
                                                          g


We let f (qf , q-f ) = qf · (p(Q) - cf ) where cf , qf denote the marginal cost and output for firm f
respectively and p(Q) denotes the inverse demand (at total output Q =                                f   qf ). After taking the
                                                                                                                       qf
FOC (where       d   represents the elasticity of demand and the market share is given by sf =                         Q)   and
aggregating across firms in the market, we get the share-weighted average markup in the market:22

                                            pf - cf           1
                                       sf             =                     f g sg sf                                       (9)
                                               pf             d         g
                                   f                                f

                                                                        M HHI

                               ­ where M HHI =                     s2
                                                                    f   +              f g sf sg .
                                                              f             f   g =f

                                                              HHI               M HHID

Following this decomposition of MHHI, MHHID is sometimes interpreted as the additional pressure
of common ownership, over and above market concentration measured by HHI.
       This equation, which relates share-weighted average markups to MHHID, was used as moti-
vation for regressions of market-level prices on MHHID to evaluate whether common ownership
  22
    This follows Bresnahan and Salop (1986) which in turn generalizes the well-known result by Cowling and Waterson
(1976).


                                                          13
incentives could be detected in prices. However, such regressions faced a number of criticisms:
first, since share-weighted average markups are not observed, prices were used in their place, al-
though that would require that markups and costs be uniform across firms to maintain the above
relationship. Second, outside of Cournot, one might expect to find spurious relationships between
an object such as M HHID, since it interacts a measure of common ownership with (endogenous)
market shares. Third, price and M HHID are both simultaneously determined equilibrium out-
comes and so a causal interpretation of an "effect" of one on the other is problematic. Section 4.5
replicates the M HHI regressions in our empirical setting and finds negative and statistically sig-
nificant effects of common ownership on prices; Appendix E discusses the issue further and shows
simulation evidence of the spurious correlations that can result from such regressions.


Application to differentiated Bertrand: A similar, if less parsimonious, result follows in the
differentiated multi-product Bertrand setting. We define pf as a vector of prices {pj }j Jf for the
products produced by firm f , Jf , and p as the vector of prices for all products and all firms. Firms
solve:
                                 max f (pf , p-f ) +        f g g (pf , p-f ).
                                  pf
                                                        g

Product-level profits for product j are given by j (p) = Dj (p) · (pj - cj ). This yields a set of |Jf |
first-order conditions for firm f :
                                                                                         
                                      Dj                                           Dk
                Dj (p) + (pj - cj )      (p) +       f g ·         (pk - ck )         (p) = 0.     (10)
                                      pj         g
                                                                                   pj
                                                            k Jg
                     single product FOC
                                                               portfolio effects


The second term generalizes the multi-product portfolio effects to allow for common ownership.
Absent common ownership effects, when g = f , f f = 1 and the single product first-order condition
is augmented by recaptured substitution to other products in f 's portfolio. In the presence of
common ownership f g > 0 for g = f , and for products k  Jg that f does not control. This
highlights the connection between multi-product pricing and common ownership. For the firm
selling multiple substitute products, in addition to the marginal cost of each sale, they consider
the opportunity cost of foregone sales of their other products. Common ownership introduces yet
another opportunity cost: that of foregone sales at competing firms, which are weighted by f g ,
the profit weight firm f places on firm g . This leads to different predicted markups under common
ownership compared to own-profit maximization.

4. Ready-to-Eat Cereal
We focus our empirical exercise on the Ready-To-Eat (RTE) cereal industry for the period 2007­
2016. We chose this industry for a number of reasons. The first reason is that the industry is


                                                      14
highly concentrated with four major players: Kellogg's, General Mills, Quaker Oats, and Post are
responsible for approximately 85% of the overall market share. The second reason is that there are
substantial differences in ownership patterns across firms. For historic reasons, Kellogg's has large
undiversified shareholders while the other firms generally do not. In addition there are a substantial
number of transactions both in the ownership space and the product space, particularly involving
Post Brands which at various times is a component of the S&P 500 Index, the S&P 400 Midcap
Index, and no index at all. The final reason is that there is substantial prior work on the RTE
cereal industry which indicates that static Bertrand-Nash in differentiated products appears to be
a reasonable empirical framework at least during the 1990's (Nevo, 2000, 2001).

4.1. The Big Four
Kellogg's:   Over our sample period the holdings of Kellogg's are relatively stable, however there
is one feature that differentiates them from the other three: approximately 20-30% of Kellogg's
shares are held by the (entirely undiversified) W.K. Kellogg Foundation Trust. The second largest
shareholder is the Gund family which acquired its stake in Kellogg's after selling the decaffeinated
coffee brand Sanka to Kellogg's in 1927.
   Kellogg's was a member of the S&P 500 over our entire sample and has around 30% market
share. Well-known products include Kellogg's Corn Flakes, Fruit Loops, Rice Krispies, Raisin
Bran, and Special K. In addition to RTE cereals, Kellogg's also sells other morning foods (e.g.,
Eggo Waffles, Pop Tarts) and snack foods (e.g., Pringles, Cheez­Its).

General Mills:     Holdings of General Mills are stable over our sample period, but they did acquire
Annie's, a health-conscious brand, in October of 2014. They were included in the S&P 500 for the
duration of our sample and have around 30% market share. Well-known products include Cheerios,
Chex, Lucky Charms, Total, and Wheaties. Outside of morning foods, they also own Betty Crocker
brands, Pillsbury, Nature Valley, Hamburger Helper, Yoplait, and a variety of other food products.

Post:   Post underwent three major ownership changes during our sample. First, on March 31,
2007, Kraft (which held Post) was spun off from Altria. Next, announced in November 2007, Kraft
spun off Post Cereals and the resulting company was sold to Ralcorp Holdings on August 4 of
2008. This transition meant that Post left an S&P 500 company and was now owned by a non-S&P
500 company. Ralcorp Holdings is also a major producer of private label cereals as well as other
food products. Finally, announced in July 2011, Ralcorp holdings announced an IPO for the Post
Foods Unit, which was successfully spun off on February 7, 2012. The resulting company was not
a member of the S&P 500.
   Well-known products include Grape­Nuts, Honey Bunches of Oats, and Raisin Bran. In Febru-
ary 2015, Post purchased Malt­O­Meal (MOM), a major producer of private label cereals which
comprised about 8­9% of the overall market.

                                                 15
Quaker Oats: Quaker Oats is the result of a four­way merger of Midwestern oat mills in 1901.
The brand has no affiliation with the Religious Society of Friends (actual Quakers).
       In August of 2001 Quaker Oats was purchased by PepsiCo, an S&P 500 company, and it
remained in their portfolio for the duration of our sample. From March of 2010 until a settlement
in July of 2014, Quaker Oats was subject to a long and public legal battle over the veracity of
their health claims. They did not claim that their products cured appendicitis or moral impurity;
nevertheless, the legal battle may have contributed to a decline in sales.
       Well-known brands include Cap'n Crunch, and Life and Quaker Oats has around 8­9% of the
cereal market. The company also produces other morning foods (Oatmeals, and Aunt Jemima
branded foods) as well as other food products, but should be considered in the larger PepsiCo
setting, where it makes up a relatively small fraction of sales (2-3%).

4.2. Data Sources: Ownership Data
We are interested in the following firms, which at some point in 2004-2017 offered products in
the ready-to-eat cereal market: General Mills (GIS), Kellogg's (K), Kraft (KRFT: Q1 2013 - Q2
2015), Mondelez (MDLZ), Altria Group (MO), PepsiCo (PEP), Philip Morris (PM: Q4 2008 -
Q2 2017), Post Holdings (Q1 2012 - Q2 2017), and Ralcorp (RAH: Q1 2008 - Q4 2011). We use
the novel dataset of institutional holdings developed in Backus et al. (2021), and make a small
number of corrections to address potential double counting of large private holdings, as described
in Appendix B.
       Table 1 provides summary statistics on the common ownership data. There are some important
patterns to point out. The first is that Vanguard appears to be increasing its holdings across all
firms over time. In part this is driven by the growing share of Vanguard within the index fund
market. The second is that between 2004 and 2010 there is a reallocation from Barclays Global
Investors (BGI) and BlackRock which acquired the BGI exchange-traded-fund (ETF) business in
December of 2009. This made BlackRock the largest player in the ETF market.23 State Street is
another large player in the ETF market and also sees their ownership stakes increasing over time.
Another large player is FMR LLC, which is the financial entity behind Fidelity, a major player in
both actively managed and index funds. Capital Research, the parent company of the American
Funds family (primarily actively managed) is another major player particularly in the early periods.
We provide a more detailed accounting of ownership stakes over time by major investors in the
Appendix.
       We continue by computing the common ownership profit weights as described in (8). These
are depicted in Figure 1 for each of the four major firms in our sample.24 For example, the top
  23
     Azar et al. (2018a) use this event as an instrument for changes in ownership as it substantially increases the
holdings of BlackRock.
  24
     Here and throughout the analysis we make the proportional control assumption f s = f s . Our framework can
accommodate fully-specified alternative assumptions on  , some of which we consider in our companion piece Backus
et al. (2021).


                                                        16
                                 Table 1: Top 5 Owners of Major Firms, 2004-2016
                                                       General Mills (GIS)
                     2004                                     2010                                         2016
   Capital Research and Management   7.28%    BlackRock, Inc                    8.70%    BlackRock, Inc                    7.36%
   Barclays Global Investors         3.24%    State Street Global Advisors      5.92%    The Vanguard Group                6.92%
   Wellington Management Group       3.06%    The Vanguard Group                3.56%    State Street Global Advisors      6.14%
   State Street Global Advisors      2.48%    MFS                               2.65%    MFS                               3.37%
   The Vanguard Group                1.95%    Capital Research and Management   2.43%    Capital Research and Management   2.12%

                                                           Kellogg's (K)
                     2004                                       2010                                       2016
   W.K. Kellogg Foundation           29.87%   W.K. Kellogg Foundation           22.94%   W.K. Kellogg Foundation           19.75%
   Gund Family                        7.26%   Gund Family                        8.65%   Gund Family                        7.68%
   Capital Research and Management    2.83%   Capital Research and Management    3.54%   The Vanguard Group                 4.97%
   Barclays Global Investors          2.81%   BlackRock, Inc                     2.97%   BlackRock, Inc                     4.64%
   W.P. Stewart & Co.                 2.63%   The Vanguard Group                 2.42%   MFS                                3.51%

                                              Quaker Oats, a Unit of PepsiCo (PEP)
                     2004                                     2010                                         2016
   Barclays Global Investors         4.40%    BlackRock, Inc                    4.64%    The Vanguard Group                6.72%
   State Street Global Advisors      2.81%    Capital Research and Management   4.37%    BlackRock, Inc                    5.63%
   FMR LLC                           2.74%    The Vanguard Group                3.64%    State Street Global Advisors      3.98%
   The Vanguard Group                2.08%    State Street Global Advisors      3.19%    Wellington Management Group       1.48%
   Capital Research and Management   1.82%    Bank of America                   1.63%    Northern Trust                    1.37%

                  Post Brands, a Unit of Altria (2004, MO), Ralcorp (2010, RAH), and Post Holdings (2016, POST)
                    2004                                        2010                                      2016
   Capital Research and Management   7.37%    FMR LLC                           10.18%   Wellington Management Group       9.63%
   State Street Global Advisors      3.61%    BlackRock, Inc                     8.35%   BlackRock, Inc                    8.42%
   Barclays Global Investors         3.51%    The Vanguard Group                 3.57%   FMR LLC                           7.24%
   FMR LLC                           2.60%    Baron Capital Group                3.39%   The Vanguard Group                6.93%
   AllianceBernstein L.P.            2.25%    Steinberg Asset Management         2.68%   Tourbillon Capital Partners       6.89%

   Notes: This table documents the five largest institutional investors with holdings in each of the four largest RTE
   cereal companies for 2004, 2010, and 2016. Source: Backus et al. (2020b)


right pane shows the implied weight that Kellogg's puts on the profits of their competitors. Notice
that the weight Kellogg's puts on its own profit is normalized to one and constant over time. The
weights are similar across competitors and slowly growing over time from around 8% to 20%. These
relatively small weights are due to the large undiversified Kellogg's shareholders (Kellogg Family
Foundation and Gund Family). Contrast this with General Mills in the top left. General Mills
places between 60-80% weight on the profits of Quaker Oats and Post as it does on its own profits,
with substantial variation across time. It places slightly less weight on the profits of Kellogg's
because of less overlapping ownership, though still more weight (40-60%) than Kellogg's places on
the profits of General Mills. Quaker Oats (a division of PepsiCo) occasionally places more weight
 > 1 on competitor's (General Mills and Post) profits than it does on its own profits.25 Quaker
Oats puts somewhat less weight (though still  > 0.6 on the profits of Kellogg's which has less
overlap in ownership. Post generally puts less weight on each of its competitor's profits over time
as Post transitions from an S&P 100/500 component, to an S&P 400 Midcap Index Component,
and briefly after its 2012 IPO is not included in any index, before rejoining the S&P 400 Midcap
Index.
       One advantage of RTE cereal is that there is a large amount of useful variation in . In Backus
  25
    This is consistent with the observation of Backus et al. (2021) that common ownership weights are higher in
firms with a greater retail share (ownership by non-institutional investors). Both General Mills and PepsiCo, but
particularly the latter, have high retail shares.



                                                                17
                           General Mills                                                        Kellogg's
  1.25         BlackRock/Barclays
  1.00
  0.75
  0.50                                                                           BlackRock/Barclays
  0.25
  0.00 2007      2009     2011      2013    2015        2017             2007          2009   2011     2013   2015   2017
                        Quaker Oats (Pepsi)                                                       Post
  1.25                                                                           BlackRock/Barclays
  1.00
                                                                    Altria Spins Off
  0.75
                                                                                                Post IPO Post buys MOM
  0.50         BlackRock/Barclays
  0.25
                                                                          Bought by Ralcorp
  0.00 2007      2009     2011       2013        2015   2017             2007     2009      2011       2013   2015   2017

                                 General Mills          Kellogg's       Quaker Oats            Post
              Figure 1:  Profit Weights for Ready-To-Eat Cereal (Proportional Control)
  Notes: This figure depicts the common ownership profit weights for each of the four largest RTE cereal companies
  between 2007 and 2017. Horizontal lines at 1 represent the normalization of f f , i.e. the weight on a firm's own
  profits, to one. Arrows indicate major financial events that affect the ownership of the firms as described in the
  text. Source: Backus et al. (2020b) augmented by insider holdings data as detailed in Appendix B.1




et al. (2021) we showed that f g = gf when firms f and g differ in their investor concentration, as
measured by IHHI                   2
                                 s f s .   This asymmetry is on display in Figure 1. For instance, Kellogg's
puts much lower weight on General Mills than vice versa, and this is in large part due to the fact
that General mills has more unconcentrated ownership, driven in part by a relatively high retail
share, while Kellogg's has concentrated ownership, driven by a modest retail share and the presence
of the Kellogg's Foundation. One disadvantage of M HHI is that, by providing a single aggregate
measure for all firms in the market, it obscures these asymmetric relationships.

4.3. Data Sources: Sales, Product, and Input Price Data
Our primary data source for unit sales and prices of ready-to-eat (RTE) cereal comes from the Kilts
Nielsen Scanner Dataset. The data are organized by store, week, and UPC code. For each store­
week­upc we observe unit sales as well as a measure of "average price" which is revenue divided by



                                                               18
sales.26 Because there is little price variation across stores within the same chain (see DellaVigna
and Gentzkow (2019)), we aggregate unit sales and revenues to the DMA-chain level. We focus
on the years 2007-2016.27 We further restrict our attention to a set of six DMAs (cities): Boston,
Chicago, Charlotte, Denver, Phoenix, and Richmond. We choose these six cities to provide some
geographic diversity, and also because Nielsen reports high coverage of "all-commodities-volume"
for supermarket sales in these DMAs. Within these cities, we focus exclusively on the set of
conventional supermarket sales (which Nielsen labels as "F" stores) and exclude convenience stores
and pharmacies which sometimes sell RTE cereal ("C" or "D" stores) and mass- merchandise ("M"
stores). We further restrict our attention to a set of DMA-chains where we observe a sufficiently
high volume of individuals from the Nielsen Panelist Dataset as customers.28 This allows us to
construct chain-specific demographic profiles of customers at the DMA-chain-year level rather than
just by geography. We focus on two key demographics (income and presence of children) that were
previously shown to be important in demand for RTE cereal (Nevo, 2000).29
    The data are recorded at the level of a universal product code (UPC) with around 3500 unique
UPCs, we consolidate multiple package sizes at the "brand level", where our definition of brand also
includes flavor (Honey Nut Cheerios or Blueberry Frosted Mini-Wheats).30 Consistent with Nevo
(2000), we convert boxes of cereal into serving equivalents, and report prices and quantities on a
per-serving basis.31 Given this definition, we find that in a DMA-Chain-Week a typical consumer
chooses among 100-250 unique "products".
    We report some basic summary statistics for our main dataset in Table 2. We observe 1590
stores which we consolidate into 26 DMA-chains, over 522 weeks between 2007-2016. The average
price per serving to be around 20 cents across our sample, though it varies substantially across
   26
      Prices may vary within a UPC­store­week for a number of reasons: the first is that price changes may occur
within the middle of the reporting week, the second is that some consumers may use coupons; according to the Kilts-
Nielsen documentation, retailer coupons or loyalty card discounts are included in the "average price" calculation
while manufacturer coupons are not.
   27
      We exclude the year 2006 because the set of stores observed in that year does not sufficiently overlap with stores
observed in subsequent years.
   28
      This causes us to lose less than 4.3% of overall sales (as measured in servings).
   29
      We've examined other characteristics such as race and age, but this often required slicing the Panelist data too
thinly to observe differential patterns in cereal preferences.
   30
      This is especially important because a large number of individual UPCs are associated with a single "brand"
and new UPCs might represent new packaging for a movie-tie-in or small changes in product size. If a manufacturer
changes the package size from 14oz to 12.5oz and keeps the price fixed, we don't want to misinterpret this as "new
product" but rather we want to interpret this as a serving price change for an existing product. This causes us to
"miss" some nonlinear pricing where "Family Packs" are often less expensive on a per serving basis than smaller
boxes. Focusing exclusively on conventional supermarkets mitigates this somewhat, but not completely.
   31
      Nutrient dense cereals generally display smaller serving sizes (by weight) which lead to much smaller serv-
ing sizes by volume. There is some evidence that serving sizes are chosen so that caloric content falls in
the (100-150) range rather than measuring typical serving sizes by consumers. Consumer reports conducted a
survey (https://www.consumerreports.org/cro/news/2014/12/cereal-portion-control-matters/index.htm) and found
that 92% of consumers exceed the posted serving size when pouring bowls of cereal. The average overpour on Chee-
rios was 30%-130% while it was even greater for denser cereals like Muesli or Granola where the average overpour
was 282%.



                                                          19
products, chain-DMAs, and time. We find that at the DMA/city level, aggregate sales are between
1.5 and 8.5 million servings per week, with a typical box containing around 12-20 servings. We
find that between 80%-90% of sales (as measured in servings) are to branded cereals, with the
remainder being private label or store-brands.32 We assign each product to its ultimate owner in
each period, taking to account mergers and acquisitions.33

                                           Boston   Charlotte   Richmond   Chicago   Denver   Phoenix
               # Chains                         4           4          2         7        3         6
               # Stores                       257         296         98       366      221       352
               Nielsen ACV Coverage          83%         86%        81%       65%      86%       84%
               # Products (chain-week)        216       161.6      179.2     179.7    205.6     166.9
               Servings/ Week (millions)     7.61        3.26       1.52      8.47      5.5      6.92
               Price Per Serving (cents)    20.89        20.7       19.4     20.14    20.13     18.59
               Servings Per Box             13.81       14.13      14.28     14.09    14.92     16.41
               % Branded                     0.82        0.85       0.81      0.92     0.81      0.81
               P CA0                        -0.26        0.13       0.18      0.19    -0.21      0.14
               P CA1                        -0.07        0.04        0.1      0.03    -0.01      0.05
               P CA2                         0.15       -0.06      -0.07     -0.02    -0.04     -0.09
               % of HH with kids             0.19        0.18       0.22      0.23     0.19      0.16
               Mar 2009 Unemployment         7.02       11.65       7.09      9.58     6.97      8.52
               Mar 2016 Unemployment         3.77        4.85        4.1      6.12     3.29      4.84
               Median Income (07-09)       56,650      49,905     67,206    62,681   57,730    49,885
               Median Income (10-16)       58,080      51,373     61,595    63,796   58,774    50,669

                  Table 2: Summary Statistics of Sales and Demographic Data by City
   Notes: This table depicts summary statistics for our dataset of RTE cereal consumption in six DMAs (by column)
   between 2007 and 2017. Source: Nielsen Retailer Scanner Data: Stores and Sales, Nielsen Consumer Panelist Data:
   Income and Presence of Children, Nutritionix: Product Characteristics, Serving Size, FRED: Unemployment.



       Figure 2 plots a simple firm-level price index over time across all markets. This price index is
based on the price per serving of cereal. We highlight a few financial transactions from Figure 1 in
the figure.
       We augment the Nielsen dataset with nutritional information from the Nutritionix Database.
This database is organized by UPC code and was designed to provide API access for various fitness
tracking mobile apps. It encodes the nutritional label on the product packaging (serving size,
calories, sugar, fat, vitamin content, ingredient lists). We merged the Nielsen UPC information
with the nutritional label information from Nutritionix. A large number of products in our dataset
(and 9-10% by volume) are private-label brands. For these products, we do not have UPC codes
which we can match to the Nutritionix database.34 Instead, we must match these products to
the most similar branded product (for example, HNY TSTD O'S to Honey-Nut Cheerios ) and use
the nutritional information from the branded product. For some private label products we cannot
  32
     We provide additional detail on how the private label share varies across chains, DMAs, and with the business
cycle in Appendix C.3, see Figure C-4.
  33
     For example, prior to September 2014 we assign Annie's Homegrown products as belonging to Annie's Homegrown
(an independent firm), and after September 2014, we assign them to General Mills.
  34
     UPCs are obfuscated by Nielsen to prevent researchers from de-identifying stores. The true UPC code could
identify the product as Chain X Brand Honey Toasted O's.



                                                          20
identify the most similar brand (e.g. CTL BR C-M-C RTE ), rather than dropping these products
we impute product characteristics using averages.
    Because there are a large number of product characteristics (23), and we aren't interested in
nutritional aspects of products per se, we consolidate the nutritional information into a number
of principal components. The idea is to reduce the dimension of the characteristic space while
preserving the variation across products. This lets us measure which products are more (or less)
similar based on nutritional content. We elaborate on this process in Appendix C.1. Each com-
ponent is designed to have a mean of zero, and a variance of one. An additional advantage is
that these principal components form an orthogonal basis which aids in estimation of our random
coefficients model. We provide a map of the product space as defined by the first two principal
components in Figure C-1. Using only nutritional information (and nothing about substitution),
it appears to do a good job of separating the "kids" cereals from "adult" cereals and "healthy"
cereals from "less healthy" cereals. As Table 2 indicates, there appears to be more variation in
product assortment across DMAs in the "kids vs. adults" dimension than the others. If our goal
in estimating counterfactuals were to alter these product characteristics, we would not be able to
with a demand system based on these principal components, but that is clearly not the goal of this
analysis.
    We construct the distribution of consumer demographics to be representative of the consumers
shopping at a particular DMA-chain-year which is somewhat different than in the previous liter-
ature.35 We use the Nielsen HMS (household) dataset and construct a sample of all households
who visited a particular DMA-chain in that year. For each panelist we measure their income and
whether or not they have children. We weight each panelist by their annual number of trips to
each DMA-chain, with the idea being that more frequent shoppers at a store receive more weight.36
To smooth the income distribution, we estimate two lognormal distributions of income for each
DMA-chain-year, one for households with children and one for households without.37 We report
these overall averages in Table 2 where 18-25% of households report children at home, and the
median income varies from around $50,000 in Phoenix to around $67,000 in Chicago. In addition
to consumer demographics, we also record the unemployment rate for each MSA (which we match
to the corresponding DMA).38 We report these demographic variables in Table 2.
    Finally, we also gather data on input prices of different commodities. In particular, we gather
prices for rice, wheat, corn, and oat from quandl.com, while we gather sugar prices from Global
Financial Data. Changes in these input prices represent cost shocks for the production of a given
product, depending on the main ingredient of that product. That is, if a product's main ingredient
   35
      For example, Nevo (2000) samples demographics from the Current Population Survey (CPS) for the corresponding
city.
   36
      We impose a one visit per week maximum in the weighting.
   37
      For more details please consult Appendix C.6.
   38
      We use data provided by the St. Louis Federal Reserve (FRED) database, which is reported at the monthly level.
We impute to the weekly level using linear interpolation.



                                                        21
                       0.28     Ralcorp buys Post                     Post IPO                 Post buys MOM

                       0.26

                       0.24
   Price Per Serving




                       0.22

                       0.20                   BlackRock/Barclays
                                                                                                        General Mills
                       0.18                                                                             Kellogg's
                                                                                                        Quaker Oats
                       0.16                                                                             Post
                         2007    2008      2009     2010      2011        2012   2013   2014       2015      2016
                                              Figure 2: Average Serving Price by Firm
  Notes: This figure depicts the average serving price, given by the ratio of quarterly firm revenue to total servings,
  for the period 2007-2017. The Great Recession is indicated by the shaded area. The decline in Post's average
  price after buying M-O-M, is largely compositional due to M-O-M's low prices. Source: Nielsen.



is rice (e.g. Rice Krispies), it is more exposed to a price increase in rice than a price increase in
corn, when compared to a corn-based cereal (e.g. Corn Pops). We identify the main ingredient
for each product from the Nutritionix database discussed above. We plot the commodity prices in
Figure C-3. There is significant variation both over time and across ingredients in prices during
our sample period.

4.4. Prices and Market Concentration
We can also use market shares to construct quarterly concentration measures (such as the HHI
and M HHI ). We present plots of these measures over time in Figure 3 and across markets
in Appendix Figure E-10. Because we do not necessarily know which manufacturers produce the
private label products (around 50% of the private label volume is produced by Malt-O-Meal but we
do not observe which products), we instead assume that each privately label product is produced
by a different manufacturer.
   We break out concentration by DMA in Appendix Figure E-10. There is substantial cross market
variation in HHI with Denver and Phoenix being the least concentrated (HHI typically below 2200)
while Chicago is the most concentrated (HHI in excess of 2500 for most of the period). The
concentration approximately mirrors the inverse of the private label share (Chicago and Charlotte
are more concentrated and have a lower private label share). When we look at HHI averaged across
all markets we see relatively little response to the BlackRock/BGI event (as we would expect), we see
a substantial increase in HHI after the Post/Malt-O-Meal and General Mills/Annie's Homegrown


                                                                     22
acquisitions towards the end of the sample. We also see a substantial decline in HHI around the
same time as Kraft sold Post to Ralcorp. Across time we rarely see more than a 150 point change
in the national aggregate HHI.

                MMHI
                HHI                                                                Post buys MOM
    2400

    2200
               Ralcorp buys Post                      Post IPO
    2000

    1800

    1600                     BlackRock/Barclays

      2007      2008      2009      2010      2011        2012    2013      2014       2015        2016
                       Figure 3: HHI and M HHI  over time (Six Markets)
  Notes: This figure depicts the time series of the HHI and MHHI concentration measures over the time period
  2007-2017. For the purposes of the computation, private Label products are treated as single unified firm and
  "Other" independent sellers are treated as atomistic. M HHI  assumes proportional control. Source: Authors'
  computations.



   The main point of Figure E-10 and Figure 3 is to demonstrate that other than the spike in
private label sales during 2009, there isn't much variation within a DMA over time, but there
is much larger variation across DMAs in market concentration. This cross market variation in
HHI is likely to drown any time series variation in  when we construct M HHI . Indeed when
we construct the M HHI and plot it across DMAs in Figure E-10, the most salient feature is
common, cross-market shocks in the time series. We find that the M HHI is approximately the
same magnitude as the HHI: around 1500 for Phoenix and around 2250 for Chicago.

4.5. MHHI Regressions
To place our work in the context of the existing work on the effect of common ownership on pricing,
we next perform some regressions of the style used in many early papers in this literature. These
regressions are motivated by Section 3, although they do not correspond to a true reduced form
if any of the assumptions of Section 3 are violated. Table 3 shows regressions of log(price) on
HHI and M HHI . An observation is at the manufacturer-DMA-retailer-quarter level. Prices
and shares are computed at the level of a serving in this analysis. The different specifications
across columns add additional fixed effects or controls. The regressions show that ­ if anything ­

                                                     23
                                    (1)          (2)           (3)       (4)         (5)          (6)
        HHI                      0.106        0.164      0.0681       0.0647      0.0707           0.525
                                  (13.04)      (16.58)      (5.73)       (5.43)      (6.64)       (0.58)
        MHHI-                   -0.0366        0.00585   -0.0427      -0.0429     -0.0370      -0.0367
                                  (-8.50)       (1.32)     (-5.86)      (-5.90)      (-5.69)      (-5.59)
        Share                                                                      -1.135       -1.135
                                                                                    (-40.53)     (-40.53)
        DMA FE                      No          Yes           No         Yes         Yes          Yes
        Retailer FE                 No          No            Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
        Quadratic Time Trend        Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
        Firm FE                     Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
        Cubic HHI                   No          No            No         No          No           Yes
        Observations               6538         6538          6538      6538        6538         6538
        R2                         0.753        0.786         0.826     0.828       0.862        0.862
        t statistics in parentheses
        
          p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001
                                           Table 3: MHHI Regressions
  Notes: This table reports results for a regression of log(average serving price) on concentration measures such as
  HHI and MHHI. An observation is a manufacturer-chain-DMA-quarter. Prices and shares are computed based
  on servings. Source: Authors' computations.



an increase in M HHI  is associated with lower prices in this context. However, in a differentiated
products setting, there is no interpretation of these regressions and so they are only included for
completeness. Appendix E.4 contains additional specifications for this type of regression.




                                                         24
5. Demand Specification and Results
One main advantage of studying the RTE cereal market is that Nevo (2001, 2000) estimate a BLP-
style demand model with random coefficients, product fixed effects, and demographic interactions
which provides a roadmap for developing our model of consumer demand. Readers familiar with
Berry et al. (1995) or Nevo (2000) should find the setup familiar and therefore we leave the micro-
foundation of the discrete choice multinomial logit demand system to Appendix A.2.
                                                        -1
    In short, one can derive estimating equations where j  (·) represents the inverse share equation
("generalized Berry inverse"):

                      -1
                      j  (St , pt , yt ; 2 ) = hd (xjt , vjt ; 1 ) + jt   with E[jt |zt ] = 0.                   (11)

We follow the notation of Conlon and Gortmaker (2020) and partition the parameter space into
[1 , 2 ] where the first set of parameters govern exogenous variables which enter (11) linearly,
while the second set enter (11) nonlinearly and also affect the markups jt (2 , ). The inverse
share equation depends on the observed shares St , the observed prices pt and the distribution of
demographics yt .
    We augment our aggregate scanner data on price and quantity with demographics yt and micro-
moments (see Petrin (2002) or Berry et al. (2004)) formed from the Nielsen Panelist dataset. We
use two demographic variables (inspired by Nevo (2000)): household income (in $100,000s), and
an indicator for the presence of children.39 We draw yit from the (DMA-chain specific) joint
distribution of income for households with and without children. This is meant to better reflect the
demographics (particularly income) of shoppers at a particular chain beyond just the demographics
of the area.40
    Each micro-moment is meant to target a different demographic interaction parameter. We
use two types of micro-moments: the first are expectations of demographic variables conditional
on purchasing the outside good. For example, conditional on purchasing the outside good, the
expectation of the variable "kids," which is an indicator for the presence of children in a household,
is 17.85% and the expected income is around $66,000.41 The second type are covariances between
purchaser demographics and product characteristics including price conditional on purchase.
                                                                               1
    We can use (11) to construct aggregate moments g D () =                    N    j,t jt   · b(zt ), where b(zt ) is
some (matrix-valued) function of the exogenous variables. We combine the aggregate data demand
  39
     Nevo (2000) also includes the age of the head of the household although it appears to be insignificant. While
Nielsen reports the age of the head of household for panelists, we face a bias-variance trade off when slicing the
demographic bins too finely, and we don't find much impact of including age.
  40
     This allows us to address the fact that shoppers at a premium, natural, and organic supermarkets in Chicago are
wealthier or have different preferences than shoppers at discount supermarkets in Chicago.
  41
     This is substantially lower than the unconditional share of households with children, suggesting childless house-
holds are less likely to consume cereal overall and leads to a positive interaction coefficient const,kids > 0.




                                                          25
moments and micro-moments g M (1 , 2 ) to form a GMM estimator for [1 , 2 ]:42

                                                                                    g D (1 , 2 )
                   arg min q (1 , 2 )  g (1 , 2 ) W g (1 , 2 ),      g (1 , 2 ) =                  .             (12)
                       1 ,2                                                         g M (1 , 2 )

We estimate (12) via two-step GMM. For the second step we replace b(zt ) with the feasible ap-
proximation to the optimal instruments following the recipe in Conlon and Gortmaker (2020), and
update the weighting matrix W .43
    We use three kinds of instruments in the initial b(zt ). The first set are the wjt instruments,
or own-cost-shifters, which we plot in Figure C-3. We measure commodity prices of the main
ingredient over time. This has advantages and disadvantages. Fortunately, these series do not
covary as much as one might expect. The advantage is that commodity prices of corn are different
from commodity prices of wheat and we can compare retail prices of corn-based cereals to those of
wheat-based cereals. The disadvantage is that this instrument provides no geographic variation to
explain prices in different stores for the same product at the same time.
    The second type of instruments are observable variation in demographics yt . We use the share
of households with children, as well as the 10%, 50%, and 90% quantiles of the income distribution
calculated separately for households with and without children.
    The third type of instruments are a variant of the BLP instruments. Here we follow Gandhi and
Houde (2019). This measures the distance between each pair of products in characteristic space
                                (l)      (l)     (l )
for each characteristic l: dj,k = |xkt - xjt |. We use the quadratic version of their differentiation
measure which contains all quadratic interactions of dl
                                                      j,k summed over k .
                                                                         44 We then obtain an

                                                                     ^jt via random forest regression.45
                                                      GH , promo ] = p
estimate of expected price: E [pjt |xjt , wjt , yt , zjt        jt
We include this expected price measure in our set of characteristics and repeat the procedure above
(to construct "differentiation instruments" for expected price). Following the recommendation in
Gandhi and Houde (2019), we further interact these instruments with moments of the distribu-
tion of demographics (income and children) for each market yt . This leads to a large number of
  42
     The covariance between aggregate data moments and micro moments is assumed to be zero in W . One cannot
estimate this covariance because the expectations are taken over different measures. We do estimate the covariance
between micro-moments in W .
  43
     For optimal instruments using only the demand side, we need an estimate of expected price E [pjt |zt ] which we
describe below, and evaluate shares at this expected price and an initial guess of [1 , 2 ]. This is similar to the
procedure described in (Amemiya, 1977; Chamberlain, 1987; Berry et al., 1995, 1999; Reynaert and Verboven, 2014)
and additional details are provided in C.4.
  44
     We found this led to a stronger first stage than the local version of the Gandhi and Houde (2019) variant of the
BLP instruments.
  45
     We also estimated this regression with linear fixed effects: chain (26), product (987), and week (522). The R2 of
the linear model is 0.87 and the within R2 = 0.22. The random forest regression does not include the fixed effects
and does not interact the (44) instruments and exogenous regressors xjt or with the demographic moments. The
random forest has an R2 = 0.97 and reduces MSE by 75% compared to the linear regression. Correlation in predicted
prices across both specifications is high:  = 0.957. Both specifications include a dummy for promotional activity as
recorded in the scanner dataset though this flag is often missing. This flag is also included in other studies of RTE
cereal (Michel and Weiergraeber, 2018).


                                                         26
such instruments, many of which are highly correlated with one another. We perform dimension
reduction following Carrasco (2012) or Conlon (2017) by projecting these instruments down onto
principal components which explain 99% of the variance in the original set and are left with 143
instruments.

                Parameter    Variable                          Prices Only       Correlated Normal
                             Prices                              -13.369                  -9.531
                                                                 (0.096)                 (0.113)
                             Unempt × Brandedj                    -0.024                  -0.028
                                                                 (0.002)                 (0.002)
                             Recall 1                             -0.243                  -0.209
                                                                 (0.068)                 (0.069)
                             Recall 2                             -0.033                  -0.034
                                                                 (0.039)                 (0.042)
                             Recall 3                             -0.063                  -0.053
                                                                 (0.045)                 (0.047)
                2                                            Cons     Prices      Cons        Prices
                             Cons                                                 2.214       -1.000
                                                                                 (0.040)
                             Prices                                    1.945                   5.013
                                                                      (0.049)                 (0.043)
                                                             Kids          Inc    Kids             Inc
                             Cons                             3.822    -2.554     2.876        -0.518
                                                            (0.012)   (0.008)    (0.028)      (0.007)
                             Prices                         -17.665    7.815     -15.429       3.102
                                                            (0.072)   (0.031)    (0.184)      (0.030)
                             PCA0                             0.064    0.066      0.052        -0.027
                                                            (0.000)   (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)
                             PCA1                             0.182    -0.011     0.206        -0.033
                                                            (0.000)   (0.000)    (0.001)      (0.000)
                             PCA2                            -0.244    0.089      -0.287        0.068
                                                            (0.000)   (0.000)    (0.001)      (0.000)
                             Observations                        361,105              361,105
                             Product Fixed Effects                 946                  946
                             Market Fixed Effects                 1,970                1,970
                             Median Own-Elasticity                -2.420               -2.665
                             Median Aggregate Elasticity          -0.395               -0.344
                             Mean Outside Good Diversion          0.621                0.482

                                 Table 4: Demand Parameter Estimates

  Notes: This table reports demand estimates for RTE cereal between 2007 and 2017 in our six DMAs on a sample
  of 2 weeks per quarter. We estimate parameters using the Cholesky root of the correlated normal LL = 2 .
  The transformed parameter estimates we report are computed using the Delta method in pyBLP. The correlated
  normal estimates the components relating to prices and the constant as nearly perfectly negatively correlated, and
  the component on prices independent of the constant to be nearly zero. This implies that the marginal consumer
  (controlling for demographics) tends to prefer the least expensive products. Source: Authors' computations.


   We estimate our demand model using pyblp (Conlon and Gortmaker, 2020). We estimate de-
mand on a random subset of 2 weeks from each quarter (16% sample) in our data. We do this
to alleviate concerns around potential storage (Hendel and Nevo, 2006), as well as to mitigate the
computational burden, and provide some out-of-sample diagnostics. We report the second-stage
GMM estimates of [1 , 2 ] in Table 4 after updating both the weighting matrix and the (feasible


                                                       27
approximation to the) optimal instruments. Both sets of estimates include product (brand) and
market (DMA-chain-week) fixed effects in hd (xt , wt ) as well as indicators for the weeks following
three product recall events (interacted with the relevant products), and the DMA-week unemploy-
ment rate interacted with a dummy for branded products. Parameters have the expected sign: the
recall events have a small but negative effect on demand, and when areas or periods experience
high unemployment, consumers substitute away from branded products.46
       Both sets of estimates include demographic interactions  between the presence of children and
income with: prices, the first three principal components of product characteristics, and a constant.
These parameters are largely related to the corresponding micro-moments. As is expected, high
income households are substantially less price-sensitive, but have a lower overall preference for
cereal.47 Households with children are more price sensitive but have a higher overall preference
for cereal. Tastes for the principal components are small but precisely estimated from the micro-
moments.
       Finally, we estimate two distributions of unobserved (normally distributed) heterogeneity .
The first estimates a normally distributed taste for price, while the second estimates a bivariate
normal distribution for price and the constant. We find a strong negative correlation which suggests
that as households become more price sensitive, they also have a higher mean utility for all inside
goods.48 In general our estimates of own price elasticities are around                 jj   = -2.6 which are in line
with Nevo (2000) and other studies of RTE cereal Michel and Weiergraeber (2018) using data from
the 1990's.
       In Table 5, we report the values of the micro-moments used to estimate our parameters and
the violations at [1 , 2 ]. For the most part, we fit these moments well. We report both the fit on
the random sample of 2 weeks from each quarter (Estimation Sample) and the overall dataset (Full
Sample). The latter is an out-of-sample evaluation of model fit, and in general performs similarly
to the in-sample fit.49
       In Table 6, we report the firm level (sales-weighted) diversion ratios, as well as the overall
purchase probabilities for different subsets of markets. We report the diversion ratios for the
markets in the top 25% of household income and the bottom 25% of household income, and the top
  46
     See Figure C-2 for cross-sectional and time series variation in unemployment.
  47
     With a large outside good share, we worry that the richest (and least price sensitive) households purchasing all
of the cereal if we fail to include interactions with the constant.
  48
     These estimates are derived from the estimates of the Cholesky root of the bi-variate normal (l11 , l21 , l22 ), and
the lower triangular term l22  0, while the other two terms have opposite signs.
  49
     The GMM weighting matrix determines how much priority is given to satisfying the micro-moments versus the
aggregate data E[jt Zjt ] = 0 moments. As noted by Berry et al. (2004) and Petrin (2002), there is no covariance
between micro-moments and aggregate data moments as they are expectations computed over different measures. If
one fails to account for the fact that the micro-moments have sampling uncertainty from the panelist data, the naive
update to the optimal weighting matrix places a very high weight on the micro-moments relative to the aggregate
data moments (and can fit them to 6-7 decimals). This would effectively ignore the aggregate data moments, and
makes it difficult to estimate the parameters other than . For this reason we scale the weight on the micro-moment
block so that it fits to roughly the third decimal place.



                                                           28
                                                 Data              Estimation Sample       Full Sample
                                            Income    Kids         Income       Kids    Income      Kids
                   E [yit |Outside Good]     0.1785    0.6593       0.1820     0.6372    0.1823    0.6367
                   Cov (yit , pjt )         -0.0052    0.0027      -0.0086     0.0011   -0.0086    0.0011
                   Cov (yit , PCA0jt )       0.1626   -0.0152       0.1364    -0.0207    0.1365   -0.0206
                   Cov (yit , PCA1jt )       0.0790    0.0066       0.0726    -0.0016    0.0724   -0.0015
                   Cov (yit , PCA2jt )      -0.0500   -0.0003      -0.0432     0.0042   -0.0435    0.0042

                                           Table 5: Micro Moment Values
   Notes: This table reports values for the micro moments for the fitted model, the estimation sample, and the full
   sample. Estimation Sample is T = 1,973 markets and N = 307,675 observations. Full Sample is T = 12,733
   markets and N = 1,981,930 observations. Source: Authors' computations.



25% of children at home and the bottom 25% of children at home. We find substantial heterogeneity
in the substitution patterns across markets. For example, Post products (such as Honey Bunches
of Oats) are much more popular in markets with fewer children, while General Mills products (such
as Cheerios) are more popular in markets with more children. Likewise, private label products are
more popular in markets (defined as DMA-chain) with low incomes. Average prices (sales-weighted)
in low-income markets tend to be 5-10% lower than prices in high-income markets. We also report
the average share across markets by firm                   j Jf    sjt (inclusive of the outside good share). This
represents the weekly probability that a consumer, having walked into the supermarket, purchases
a product. The plain IIA logit model would predict diversion ratios proportional to share (around
7% for Kellogg's or General Mills products) while our estimate model predicts much higher diversion
ratios (closer to 20%). Likewise, though the outside good share is nearly 74% in the data (roughly
26% of consumers purchase cereal each week), our estimated diversion ratios are closer to 35%
suggesting that most cereal customers choose another brand as their preferred product becomes
more expensive.50

6. Non-Nested Model Comparisons
6.1. Predicted Markups
We begin by recovering markups and marginal costs under different conduct assumptions.51 For
our application to ready-to-eat cereal sold in food outlets, this exercise requires an additional as-
  50
     This should be unsurprising given the relatively large variance estimated on the random coefficient for the constant
in Table 4, as well as the large  value estimated for households with children for the constant.
  51
     Recovering markups, which is a standard exercise in the literature, requires prices and market shares (pt , st ); a
matrix of demand derivatives a observed prices pt , which we take as known from the demand estimation exercise
and write (pt ), and a product-level ownership matrix, H(t ), which is an extension of the typical firm-level matrix
of profit weights. This latter object embeds the model of conduct. Then, markups are computed as

                                           t (pt , st , t ) = (H(t )    (pt ))-1 st .

See Appendix A.3 for a complete derivation from the first order conditions of Nash pricing.




                                                              29
                                                High Income
        Firm            Gen Mills   Kellogg   Quaker   Post Private Label       Outside   Price   Share
        General Mills        19.8      19.2       5.5    11.9             8.7      34.2    20.2     7.5
        Kellogg              20.3      18.4       5.1    11.7             8.4      35.2    21.5     7.1
        Quaker Oats          21.4      18.8       6.5    12.7             9.2      30.6    17.0     1.8
        Post                 20.5      19.1       5.6    13.0             9.9      31.1    17.3     4.2
        Private Label        21.1      19.5       5.8    14.1            11.2      27.2    13.4     2.7
        Other                17.7      16.5       4.4    10.9             8.7      40.8    26.4     0.4

                                                 Low Income
        Firm            Gen Mills   Kellogg   Quaker   Post     Private Label   Outside   Price   Share
        General Mills        20.2      19.7       5.1    10.6            10.7      33.6    18.2     7.3
        Kellogg              20.7      18.0       5.0    10.4            10.3      35.4    20.5     7.1
        Quaker Oats          22.3      20.8       5.1    11.5            11.6      28.4    15.3     1.6
        Post                 21.2      19.9       5.3    10.7            11.4      31.3    16.6     3.5
        Private Label        21.9      20.1       5.4    11.6            12.1      28.7    14.0     3.3
        Other                16.5      15.3       4.1     8.9             9.9      44.9    27.8     0.1

                                              High Children Share
        Firm            Gen Mills   Kellogg   Quaker    Post   Private Label    Outside   Price   Share
        General Mills        22.0      17.1       5.3     9.1             9.3      36.0    20.4     7.3
        Kellogg              19.9      17.5       5.0     9.1             8.9      38.5    23.3     6.4
        Quaker Oats          22.6      18.2       6.3     9.6             9.4      32.8    18.0     1.7
        Post                 21.8      18.9       5.4    10.0             9.2      33.7    18.9     3.0
        Private Label        22.7      19.0       5.4     9.5            13.3      28.8    13.6     2.7
        Other                20.5      16.3       4.5     7.6             9.2      40.8    25.3     0.4

                                              Low Children Share
        Firm            Gen Mills   Kellogg   Quaker   Post   Private Label     Outside   Price   Share
        General Mills        18.2      17.9       6.9    14.1            6.8       36.0    19.8     4.9
        Kellogg              13.9      27.2       7.1    14.0            7.2       30.3    17.3     6.7
        Quaker Oats          16.1      21.1      11.8    14.8            7.0       29.0    15.3     2.1
        Post                 14.4      18.5       6.6    17.6            9.9       32.8    16.4     4.7
        Private Label        13.7      18.4       6.2    19.6           12.6       29.3    12.1     2.2
        Other                14.7      10.2       5.6    11.9            6.3       51.2    29.3     0.1

     Table 6: Diversion Ratio Estimates by Income and Presence of Children (2016 Q4)

Notes: This table reports quantity-weighted average diversion ratios by firm pair (row and column) for different
demographic groups (by panel). High and low represent the top quartile and bottom quartile of all markets
in 2016 Q4 (after Post's acquisition of Malt-O-Meal) by median household income (below $70k or above $88k),
and fraction of households with children (< 14% or > 21%). Diversion ratios are reported as percentages (sum
to 100%). Prices are reported in cents. Share is reported inclusive of the outside good. Source: Authors'
computations.




                                                        30
                                     General Mills                                                               Kellogg's
          17.5                                              Own-Profit Max                                                          Own-Profit Max
                                                                                            14
                                                            Monopoly                                                                Monopoly
          15.0                                              Common Ownership                12                                      Common Ownership

          12.5                                                                              10
          10.0




                                                                                  Density
                                                                                            8
Density




           7.5                                                                              6
           5.0                                                                              4
           2.5                                                                              2

           0.0                                                                              0
            0.00       0.05   0.10       0.15        0.20     0.25         0.30             0.00   0.05   0.10     0.15      0.20     0.25         0.30
                                     Quaker Oats                                                                   Post
          17.5                                              Own-Profit Max                                                          Own-Profit Max
                                                            Monopoly                        12                                      Monopoly
          15.0                                              Common Ownership                                                        Common Ownership
                                                                                            10
          12.5
                                                                                            8
          10.0




                                                                                  Density
Density




                                                                                            6
           7.5

           5.0                                                                              4

           2.5                                                                              2

           0.0                                                                              0
            0.00       0.05   0.10       0.15        0.20     0.25         0.30             0.00   0.05   0.10     0.15      0.20     0.25         0.30

                   Figure 4: Distribution of Implied Price-Cost Margins by Conduct Assumption and Firm
            Notes: This figure depicts the distributions of price-cost margins for the four largest RTE cereal firms in the fourth
            quarter of 2016 under three different conduct hypotheses: own-profit maximization, a hypothetical monopolist,
            and common ownership. The unit of observation is a product-chain-DMA-week. Source: Authors' computations.


sumption that manufacturers directly set retail prices.52 The set of conduct hypotheses we consider
includes own-profit maximization, perfect competition, a hypothetical monopolist composed of the
four largest firms, and common ownership (and variants). Note that everything that follows uses
the full sample.
                 We depict the price-cost margins for all of these conduct hypotheses in Figure 4. We focus
on the fourth quarter of 2016, the last period in the data; we also exclude perfect competition,
for which price-cost margins would be trivially zero. Under own-profit maximization (f g = 0),
larger firms (here, Kellogg's and General Mills) have larger implied markups as they recapture more
diverted sales with their own products. We also see that the difference between markups under own-
profit maximization and common ownership maps neatly to the profit weights depicted in Figure 1.
Kellogg's large undiversified owner depresses their profit weights, and so the difference between
own-profit maximization and common ownership is slight. In contrast, Quaker Oats' (PepsiCo's)
large retail share inflates their profit weights, and so the difference is much larger.
                 To frame the economic magnitude of these differences, we compare the effect of common own-
ership on prices to the effect of hypothetical pairwise mergers. To be precise, we derive marginal
          52
    There is some evidence that this is true for consumer products in supermarkets (Villas-Boas, 2007; Bonnet and
Dubois, 2010). Recent work suggests that retailers extract surplus via slotting fees Hristakeva (2019) rather than
markups above wholesale prices. Under double marginalization, the retailer internalizes substitution across brands
from competing manufacturers. This softening of competition can be implemented using an ownership matrix which
also sets f g > 0. Therefore, if one has a strong prior that double marginalization is salient, we should expect the
results to be biased against own-profit maximization.


                                                                               31
costs under the assumption of own-profit maximization, and then compute counterfactual equilib-
rium prices using those marginal costs under all of the alternative scenarios. Results are presented
in Table 7. Each column represents a counterfactual scenario: the first six are pairwise merger
counterfactuals, while the seventh represents "turning on" common ownership incentives, and the
eight represents pricing of a hypothetical monopolist composed of the four largest firms. Price
effects, weighted by quantity of servings sold, are represented in the table. The first four rows
represent prices for the four largest firms in the market, while the fifth row represents an aggregate
servings-weighted price index.
   We see, predictably, that the most anticompetitive merger in the marketplace would be that
between General Mills and Kellogg's, resulting in both firms raising prices around 5% and the price
index rising by 3.3%. Mergers of the two smaller firms (Quaker Oats and Post) and one of the two
larger firms, lead to smaller increases in the overall price index but often large changes (5-6%) for
the smaller firm.
   The effects of any pairwise predicted merger, however, are dwarfed by the 5.42% increase in the
price index predicted under common ownership. This highlights the anticompetitive potential of
the hypothesis: it yields substantially larger price increases than a hypothetical merger between the
two dominant firms in the market, which we would expect antitrust authorities to block. By way of
comparison, a hypothetical monopolist composed of the four largest firms yields a price increase of
10.25%, and so common ownership would get us 5.42/10.25  53% of the way to monopoly pricing.
In Appendix B and Table B-1, we show how common ownership can lead to smaller or larger price
effects of a merger, and those effects can depend on the financial structure of the merger (an all
cash deal or a share-swap).
   The question remains, however, whether patterns of common ownership are reflected in pricing.
For this we implement the conduct testing procedure developed in Section 2.

  Firm            GM-KEL      GM-QKR      GM-POST      KEL-QKR       KEL-POST     QKR-POST       Monopoly   CO
  General Mills        4.69        1.10         3.00         -0.10        -0.16          -0.11       9.42    3.97
  Kellogg's            5.13       -0.13        -0.19          1.04         2.90          -0.11       9.30    5.34
  Quaker Oats         -0.37        6.39        -0.36          5.60        -0.37           3.93      14.87    7.75
  Post                -0.15       -0.11         6.16         -0.10         5.19           1.45      12.76    7.06
  Price Index          3.32        0.91         2.22         0.78          1.96          0.58       10.25    5.42

                        Table 7: Price Increases under Counterfactual Scenarios
   Notes: This table reports counterfactual percent price increases from the observed baseline in the fourth quarter
   of 2016. We compute the serving-weighted percentage change in price at the market and firm level (with the last
   row containing all firms) and report the median price change across markets. The market-level mean price per
   serving observed in the data is $0.2255. Columns indicate the counterfactual scenario: the first six are pairwise
   mergers, the seventh is a hypothetical monopolist composed of the four largest firms, and the last is under common
   ownership. In some cases, prices of non-merging firms decline in response to the merger. This is because with
   random coefficients and demographics (or any mixture of logits), prices need not be strategic complements as is
   often assumed. Source: Authors' computations.




                                                        32
6.2. Testing: Inclusions and Exclusions
Our test employs a criterion function that is based on detecting a correlation between the difference
in markups between two models and the recovered cost shocks. This means that useful instruments
                                                              1,2
are those which are able to explain the difference in markups jt  and are excluded from the
marginal cost equation in (3).
       Since markups are fully determined by the model of marginal costs, demand, and conduct,
we can also fully characterize the set of relevant variables. The contents of zt are five sets of
instruments. The first set of instruments are the exogenous own-product characteristics (xjt , wjt )
included in equation (3). In our tests, product characteristics xjt (which also appear in the demand
system) are captured by a full set of product, retailer-DMA, and quarter fixed effects. This set also
includes the fraction of servings that are on sale, as well as dummies for periods in which a product
was on recall (see Appendix C.7 for further discussion of recalls). Variables in wjt (which do not
appear in the demand system) include the input costs for designated "main" ingredients. The four
remaining instruments in zt are all excluded from (3).
       The second set of instruments are the demand shifters vt which affect demand but not marginal
costs and form the basis of the identification argument in Berry and Haile (2014).53 In theory there
are many such variables (more so than cost-shifters wjt ) and one could exploit seasonal or regional
variation in demand or promotional activity.54 In our cereal example, we have variation in the local
unemployment rate (interacted with branded products). Demand shifters for other goods v-j,t are
also valid instruments.
       A special kind of demand shifter which enters demand non-linearly rather than linearly are
changes in the distribution of demographics across markets. That is, demand (and markups) for
certain products (sugary cereals) may be higher in areas with lots of children, but the marginal
cost of serving consumers in these areas is unlikely to be affected by demographics.
       A third set of exclusion restrictions are w-j,t , the cost shifters of other products. In our cereal
application, this might be the price of rice for Corn Flakes, or the price of corn for Rice Krispies.
The most obvious explanation would be that a lower rival cost wkt increases the price-cost margin
(and/or reduces the price) of the substitute. At the same time, the estimated marginal cost of
Corn Flakes should not respond to the input prices for rice.55
       The fourth set are the characteristics of other goods x-j,t or the "BLP instruments." The nested
logit version of these instruments from Berry (1994) involve counting the number of competitors
  53
     We use the bold notation to denote the matrix of characteristics for all Jt products in the market to highlight
the fact that we also utilize characteristics of other products vt = [vj,t , v-j,t ].
  54
     Berry et al. (1995) exploited functional form differences so that miles-per-gallon shifted marginal cost wjt , while
miles-per-dollar shifted demand vjt . Michel and Weiergraeber (2018) exploit the non-price demand shift effects of
in-store promotions.
  55
     This mimics the well-known reduced form test of collusion. Conditional on a competitor's prices, own prices
should not respond to changes in rival marginal costs which makes it a valid exclusion restriction (Genesove and
Mullin, 1998).



                                                           33
in each nest. Gandhi and Houde (2019) extend this idea to measure "closeness of competition"
more generally. All things being equal, as the product space around j becomes more crowded
(more cereals with similar characteristics) we expect the markup for product j to fall, while the
characteristics of rival products should not directly impact the marginal costs cjt .
    The final set of potential instruments come from exogenous changes in conduct f gt itself. As
an example, Miller and Weinberg (2017) use a binary instrument for treated firms in the post-
joint venture period as an instrument for conduct . Another (somewhat obvious) example is that
mergers may change CO
                   f gt such as Post's acquisition of Malt-O-Meal in 2015.
    Exogenous changes in financial ownership may also serve as an instrument for common owner-
ship profit weights CO
                    f gt . This is the instrumental variables strategy in several reduced-form studies
of common ownership. Inclusion in a stock market index is likely to increase overlap among in-
vestors; and serves as the basis for the identification strategy in Boller and Scott Morton (2020).
Azar et al. (2018a) look before and after the BlackRock-Barclays acquisition with the implied as-
sumption that it shifts CO                              CO
                        f gt . The challenge with using f gt restrictions is that they are often event
studies. We could use less discrete changes in CO
                                               f gt since it continuously varies period by period,
however there is a question whether the variation is substantial enough and whether managers are
fully aware of small changes in common ownership. To be conservative, we don't include these
events in our set of instruments zt .
    We should also mention what are not valid exclusion restrictions. The variables (xjt , wjt ) are
not excluded, but included and help to reduce the residual variance in jt . The so-called "Hausman
instruments" which are prices of the same product in other markets pj,-t are not valid instruments
for markup differences. The motivation for these instruments is that they capture unobserved
variation in marginal costs that is common across markets such as unobserved shocks to input
prices. However, unobservable changes in marginal cost are potentially correlated with jt .56
    In light of these observations, we run our tests with four different specifications of the excluded
variables in g (·). Comparing results across them will both shed light on the role of the nonlinear
relationship between zt and jt , and also offer us an informal overidentification test insofar as the
results are similar or different. We report the number of variables in parentheses.

   1. Other firms' input costs (5): w-jt in the above, we use the price of ingredients (corn, rice, oat,
      wheat, and sugar) that are not designated as "main" ingredients in the Nutritionix dataset.

   2. Demographic moments (5): these correspond to those we use in predicting the distribution of
      the nonlinear coefficients in Section 5. In particular, we use the fraction of households with
      children, and the mean and standard deviation of income for households with and without
      children.
   56
      What looks to authorities like collusive behavior (changes in ) is explained by defendants as a "correlated shock
to marginal costs". In this case, the "Hausman instruments" can be perfectly valid as instruments for demand
E [jt |zt , pj,-t ] = 0 but are invalid as instruments for marginal costs E [jt |zt , pj,-t ] = 0.



                                                          34
   3. BLP instruments (143): these are explained in detail above in Section 5 where we follow
      Gandhi and Houde (2019). These summarize variation in x-jt and vt .

   4. Demand-optimal instruments (18): these too are explained in detail above in Section 5. Note
      that these are constructed using the model, summarize all of the variation in the four sets of
      excluded instruments in zt .

6.3. Implementation
The specification of g (·) in Step (b) of our algorithm is important because markups are a nonlinear
function of everything in the model. The power of the test, therefore, depends on the fit of
this regression. However, if we allow arguments of g (·) to enter flexibly while using a restrictive
functional form for hs (·), then any misspecification of the hs will functionally enter as additional
exclusion restrictions in our test (this is a known problem when using flexible forms to estimate
the first-stage regression of a linear IV problem; see Chen et al. (2020) for a recent discussion).
Therefore, as in nonparametric instrumental variables regression (Ai and Chen, 2003; Newey and
Powell, 2003), we fit both functions flexibly. We use a random forest (Breiman, 2001) to estimate
both hs (·) in Step (a) and g (·) in Step (b).57 By way of comparison, we will also consider a version of
our test that uses a linear fit for hs (·) and g (·). The reason we do this is to highlight the importance
of fitting the nonlinearity in the relationship between jt and zt in the Step (b) regression. We
discuss results for both sets of regressions further and document the mean-squared error of the Step
(b) regression in Appendix Section D.3.
    In order to compute                               ~ ( 1 ) - Q
                        ^ , the standard deviation of Q         ~ ( 2 ) which appears in the denom-
inator of our test statistic, we bootstrap the entire procedure. Bootstrap samples, and standard
errors in all of the regressions reported, are clustered at the retailer-DMA-year level of aggregation.
    Finally, note that at every step--Step (a) and (b) regressions, as well as the computation of
~ ( m )--we weight observations (which are product-chain-DMA-weeks) by the total quantity of
Q
servings for that product across all markets. We do this to guarantee that our results are not
driven by the large number of niche products in our sample.

6.4. Results: Testing Common Ownership
Our main results are presented in Table 8. Here we test variations on the common ownership hy-
pothesis, perfect competition, and monopoly pricing (by row) against own-firm profit maximization
using different sets of exclusions (by column), for different specifications (by panel). To interpret
an entry in the table, recall that the Rivers-Vuong test statistic is distributed N (0, 1). The null
hypothesis is that the two models perform equally well. A negative value can reject that null in
favor of the alternative that model 1 better fits the data (here, own-profit maximization), while a
  57
     Alternative approaches might include LASSO regression (Belloni et al., 2012) and deep neural nets (Hartford
et al., 2017).



                                                      35
                   Table 8: Testing Results: Own-Profit Maximization vs Alternatives

                                          Others' Costs         Demographics            BLP Inst.            Dmd.
                                                                                                            Opt. Inst.
              Own Profit Max vs.                                 Panel 1: A(zt ) = zt , linear hs (·)
          Common Ownership                    -2.4732               -0.0079              -1.2333              -4.9099
          Common Ownership (MA)               -2.5918                0.0070              -1.2105              -4.9215
          Common Ownership (Lag)              -2.5208                0.0075              -1.2125              -4.9351
          Perfect Competition                  0.8611               -2.3033              -3.1652             -10.9229
          Monopolist                          -2.4166               -0.8783              -3.5162              -6.0048
              Own Profit Max vs.                        Panel 2: A(zt ) = E[ 12 |zt ], linear hs (·) and g (·)
          Common Ownership                    -1.2859               -0.2126              -0.8317              -5.2361
          Common Ownership (MA)               -1.3993               -0.2071              -0.8340              -5.3019
          Common Ownership (Lag)              -1.3506               -0.2093              -0.8367              -5.3271
          Perfect Competition                  1.1732               -0.8843              -1.4708             -10.7559
          Monopolist                          -1.4038               -0.3243              -1.0613              -5.3183
              Own Profit Max vs.                 Panel 3: A(zt ) = E[ 12 |zt ], random forest hs (·) and g (·)
          Common Ownership                    -4.8893               -5.4460              -5.4412              -5.9585
          Common Ownership (MA)               -5.4345               -6.1348              -5.8757              -6.4357
          Common Ownership (Lag)              -5.1770               -5.9221              -5.7041              -6.2255
          Perfect Competition                 -7.7749               -8.7051              -8.9758             -10.0654
          Monopolist                          -5.2711               -6.7789              -5.9158              -6.5933

Notes: This table reports testing results for pairwise comparisons of own-firm profit maximization against various alternatives.
Variations on common ownership include a one-quarter lagged  (Lag), and a four-quarter backwards looking moving average
(MA). The column label indices the set of exclusions used in the Step 2 regression. A negative value constitutes evidence for
own-profit maximization and a positive value constitutes evidence for the model of that row. The null hypothesis is that they
satisfy the criterion function equally well, and the critical values for rejection at  = 0.5 are ­1.96 and 1.96. The bootstrap is
clustered at the retailer by DMA by year level and observations are weighted by servings volume.




                                                                 36
positive value can do so for model 2 (specified by the row).
    The three panels are contrasted to underscore the importance of, first, using the model to inform
the design of moment restrictions (recall A(zt ) from Section 2.3) and, second, loosening parametric
restrictions in order to capture the nonlinear relationships between the excluded instruments and
markups. Panel 1 depicts the conduct test that the literature has focused on, in which instruments
                                                                 m z ] = 0. Since there are
are translated directly into unconditional moments of the form E[jt jt
potentially many such moments, we weight them by (Z Z )-1 to form a scalar criterion function,
where Z is the full n × k matrix of instruments stacked across markets.58 We also follow them in
adopting a linear form for hs (·). Panel 2 uses Algorithm 1 but retains a linear functional form for
hs (·) and g (·) in Step (a) and Step (b), respectively.
    In both Panels 1 and 2 we find substantial variation in results across different sets of instruments.
The similarity of the test statistics in these two panels reflects the fact that when everything is
linear, the Step (a) regression in our method accomplishes little more than to change the weighting
matrix over the moments interacting the instruments with   m . Using others' costs rejects com-
                                                         ^ jt
mon ownership against profit maximization, but fails to reject (and even weakly prefers) perfect
competition. In contrast, demographic moments and BLP instruments are inconclusive. How-
ever, the demand optimal instruments decisively favor own-profit maximization against all other
alternatives. This is particularly notable because the demand optimal instruments are a nonlinear
aggregation of the variation captured by the prior three (see Appendix C.4). This suggests that
the different results have more to do with functional form than the informational content of the
exclusion restrictions.
    Therefore, Panel 3, our preferred specification, uses a random forest to fit both hs (·) and g (·).
Here, all sets of instruments reject all alternative hypotheses in favor of own-profit maximization.
The demand optimal instrument generally rejects most strongly, which reflects the fact that it
aggregates variation from all of the other three. Demographic variables do particularly well, which
is consistent with their prominence in explaining variation in demand, as we saw in Section 5.
Finally, we also observe that the test statistics for the demand optimal instruments are not much
stronger, and occasionally weaker, than those from Panel 2. This too is intuitive: since they
already capture the nonlinearity of the model, using an approximately correct linear functional
form restriction can offer greater power, like using the true functional form offers efficiency gains
in estimation problems.59
    In order to bridge the gap between our testing procedure and recent conduct parameter esti-
  58
     We follow Duarte et al. (2020) in selecting the 2SLS weighting matrix (Z Z )-1 for the test with multiple moment
restrictions, but caveat that the test in Panel 1 does not correspond to theirs. They propose using a sieve expansion
of zt which will, in the limit, fit the nonlinearity of the model.
  59
     A reasonable question might be to ask why the demand optimal IV work so well independent of functional form.
One possible explanation is in (10), the difference in markups between all of the alternative models can be written
as proportional to g 1      ,2
                           fg ·
                                                           1, 2
                                   kJg k · Djk where f g represents the difference in profit weights between the two
models. The demand optimal IV are good at explaining the diversion ratios Djk .



                                                         37
mation exercises, we also use our procedure to evaluate own-profit maximization against "partial"
common ownership, the latter of which we specify as   {0.1, . . . , 0.9}, where  is a multiplicative
scalar on all of the off-diagonal terms of the common ownership profit weight matrix CO
                                                                                     t . So,
 = 0 implies own-profit maximization, and  = 1 implies common ownership pricing.60 Results
are depicted in Table 9. As before, a negative value less than 1.96 represents a rejection in favor of
own-profit maximization at  = 0.05. In brackets, under each test statistic, we write the numerator
                                                     ~ ( 2 ) and /n.
                                           ~ ( 1 ) - Q
and the denominator, i.e. our estimates of Q
       Two features are salient. First, the test statistic is monotonically decreasing in  , so that models
closer to own-profit maximization are preferred. Second, however, for no set of excluded variables
do we statistically reject the model for  < 0.3. There is a third, more subtle feature of the results
evident in the brackets beneath the test statistics. While the difference in the criterion function
(the numerator, Q~ ( 1 ) - Q
                           ~ ( 2 )) is converging to zero as the models become more similar (  0),
                                                               
the standard error of the difference (the denominator, / n) is too. This reflects a degeneracy
problem with the Rivers and Vuong (2002) statistic when testing sufficiently similar models. As
  0, that standard error shrinks to zero because the models become identical (they imply nearly
identical markups), and the test statistic is degenerate. While it is not our primary interest, for
applications in which the researcher is interested in local comparisons, this could be resolved by
sample splitting (Yatchew, 1992; Whang and Andrews, 1993), partial sample splitting (Shennach
and Wilhelm, 2017), or debiasing methods (Shi, 2015).
       To summarize, our results consistently reject the common ownership hypothesis in favor of own-
firm profit maximization. We emphasize that our results are not driven by comparisons of average
markups. All of our regressions in the testing procedure include product dummies. Moreover,
we would also stress that our result does not answer the ill-posed question of whether common
ownership, broadly construed as the presence of common owners, has any price effects. Rather, we
have shown that the pricing model implied by the common ownership hypothesis, as outlined in
Section 3 above, is inconsistent with the pricing behavior we observe.61

7. Conclusion
In this paper we study how to test among competing assumptions for conduct in a differentiated
products market by exploiting implied differences in additive markups. We show that exclusion
restrictions can be used to differentiate between alternative models of firm conduct. Our testing
procedure has advantages over previous approaches: it is easy to implement and performs well
across different sets of instruments. We take this testing procedure to data from the RTE cereal
market where we first estimate demand in a rich framework using detailed scanner data as well
as demographic data of shoppers. We then apply our test against several alternative models of
  60
   This internalization parameter design mirrors that in Kennedy et al. (2017).
  61
   In Appendix Section D.1 we offer further pairwise comparisons. Our findings consistently favor own-firm profit
maximization against alternative conduct models.



                                                       38
                                       Table 9: Profit Maximization vs. 

                    Others' Costs             Demographics                 BLP Inst.             Dmd. Opt. Inst.
        = .1              -0.4328                    -0.321                    -0.6851                   -0.7026
                    [-0.0176/0.0407]          [-0.0145/0.0452]           [-0.0372/0.0543]          [-0.0437/0.0622]
        = .2              -1.0734                   -0.9217                    -1.5237                   -1.6487
                     [-0.224/0.2087]           [-0.201/0.2181]            [-0.418/0.2743]           [-0.509/0.3087]
        = .3              -2.6522                   -2.6837                    -3.1898                   -3.5225
                     [-1.590/0.5995]           [-1.640/0.6111]            [-2.570/0.8057]           [-3.140/0.8914]
        = .4              -3.8962                   -4.1062                    -4.5616                   -4.9736
                     [-5.140/1.3192]           [-5.210/1.2688]            [-7.950/1.7428]           [-9.620/1.9342]
        = .5              -3.2687                   -3.4082                    -3.7689                   -4.1914
                   [-10.6435/3.2562]         [-10.5109/3.0840]           [-16.512/4.3811]          [-20.022/4.7769]
        = .6              -3.3722                   -3.6771                    -4.0833                    -4.547
                   [-17.6249/5.2266]         [-17.5416/4.7706]          [-28.7501/7.0409]          [-34.935/7.6831]
        = .7              -4.1593                   -4.4611                    -4.6689                   -5.2397
                   [-36.6078/8.8014]         [-35.6581/7.9931]         [-56.8988/12.1867]        [-69.4023/13.2456]
        = .8              -4.7044                   -5.1992                    -5.3273                   -5.8925
                  [-64.5747/13.7264]        [-61.8094/11.8882]         [-99.7635/18.7269]       [-119.7003/20.3141]
        = .9              -4.4131                   -4.7389                    -4.8305                   -5.3131
                  [-120.783/27.3691]       [-114.8521/24.2358]        [-179.9577/37.2543]       [-214.9648/40.4595]

Notes: This table reports testing results for pairwise comparisons of own-firm profit maximization against  -adjusted common
ownership (as indicated by row). The column label indicates the set of excluded variables used in the Step 2 regression. A
negative value constitutes evidence for profit maximization and a positive value constitutes evidence for the  -adjusted model
of common ownership. The null hypothesis is that they satisfy the criterion function equally well, and the critical values for
rejection at  = 0.5 are ­1.96 and 1.96. The bootstrap is clustered at the retailer by DMA by year level and observations are
weighted by servings volume.



conduct. We find support for the classical model of own-profit maximization; however, simulated
effects of common ownership incentives imply large potential effects. While the common owner-
ship hypothesis is of interest in this paper, the testing procedure we develop is more general and
applicable elsewhere. We hope our method makes it possible for other researchers to examine firm
price-setting behavior in a variety of other settings.




References
Ai, C. and X. Chen (2003): "Efficient Estimation of Models with Conditional Moment Restric-
  tions Containing Unknown Functions," Econometrica, 71, 1795­1843.

Amemiya, T. (1977): "The Maximum Likelihood and the Nonlinear Three-Stage Least Squares
 Estimator in the General Nonlinear Simultaneous Equation Model," Econometrica, 45, 955­968.

Anto´ n, M., F. Ederer, M. Gine´, and M. C. Schmalz (2020): "Common ownership, Compe-
 tition, and Top Management Incentives," Working Paper.



                                                             39
Azar, J., S. Raina, and M. C. Schmalz (2016): "Ultimate Ownership and Bank Competition,"
 Https://ssrn.com/abstract=2710252. Accessed on 2020-01-08.

Azar, J., M. C. Schmalz, and I. Tecu (2018a): "Anti-Competitive Effects of Common Own-
 ership," Journal of Finance, 73.

------ (2018b): "Reply to:"Common Ownership Does Not Have Anti-Competitive Effects in the
  Airline Industry"," .

Backus, M., C. Conlon, and M. Sinkinson (2019): "The Common Ownership Hypothesis:
 Theory and Evidence," Brookings Working Paper.

------ (2020a): "Theory and Measurement of Common Ownership," AEA: Papers and Proceedings,
  110.

------ (2021): "Common Ownership in America: 1980­2017," American Economic Journal: Mi-
  croeconomics.

Backus, M., C. T. Conlon, and M. Sinkinson (2020b): "Common Ownership Data: Scraped
 SEC form 13F filings for 1999-2017," Https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/ZRH3EU, Harvard Data-
 verse, V1.

Belloni, A., D. Chen, V. Chernozukhov, and C. Hansen (2012): "Sparse Models and
 Methods for Optimal Isntruments with an Application to Eminent Domain," Econometrica, 80,
 2369­2429.

Berry, S., M. Gaynor, and F. Scott Morton (2019): "Do Increasing Markups Matter?
 Lessons from Empirical Industrial Organization," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 33, 44­68.

Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (1995): "Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium,"
 Econometrica, 63, 841­890.

------ (1999): "Voluntary Export Restraints on Automobiles: Evaluating a Trade Policy," Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 89, 400­430.

------ (2004): "Differentiated Products Demand Systems from a Combination of Micro and Macro
  Data: The New Car Market," Journal of Political Economy, 112, 68­105.

Berry, S. T. (1994): "Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Differentiation," The RAND
 Journal of Economics, 25, 242­262.

Berry, S. T. and P. A. Haile (2014): "Identification in Differentiated Products Markets Using
 Market Level Data," Econometrica, 82, 1749­1797.

Boller, L. and F. Scott Morton (2020): "Testing the Theory of Common Stock Ownership,"
 Working Paper.

Bonnet, C. and P. Dubois (2010): "Inference on vertical contracts between manufacturers and
 retailers allowing for nonlinear pricing and resale price maintenance," The RAND Journal of
 Economics, 41, 139­164.


                                             40
Breiman, L. (2001): "Random Forests," Machine Learning, 45, 5­32.

Bresnahan, T. F. (1982): "The Oligopoly Solution is Identified," Economics Letters, 10, 87­92.

------ (1987): "Competition and Collusion in the American Automobile Industry: The 1955 Price
  War," The Journal of Industrial Economics, 35, 457­482.

Bresnahan, T. F. and S. C. Salop (1986): "Quantifying the Competitive Effects of Production
 Joint Ventures," International Journal of Industrial Organizatoin, 4, 155­175.

Carrasco, M. (2012): "A regularization approach to the many instruments problem," Journal of
 Econometrics, 170, 383 ­ 398, thirtieth Anniversary of Generalized Method of Moments.

Chamberlain, G. (1987): "Asymptotic Efficiency in Estimation with Conditional Moment Re-
 strictions," Journal of Econometrics, 34, 305­334.

Chen, J., D. L. Chen, and G. Lewis (2020): "Mostly Harmless Machine Learning: Learning
 Optimal Instruments in Linear IV Models," Https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.06158.

Conlon, C. (2017): "The Empirical Likelihood MPEC Approach to Demand Estimation," Work-
 ing Paper.

Conlon, C. and J. Gortmaker (2020): "Best practices for differentiated products demand
 estimation with PyBLP," The RAND Journal of Economics, 51, 1108­1161.

Cowling, K. and M. Waterson (1976): "Price-Cost Margins and Market Structure," Econom-
 ica, 43, 267­274.

Cox, D. R. (1962): "Further Results on Tests of Separate Families of Hypotheses," Journal of the
 Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological), 24, 406­424.

Crawford, G. S., R. S. Lee, M. D. Whinston, and A. Yurukoglu (2018): "The Welfare
 Effects of Vertical Integration in Multichannel Television Markets," Econometrica, 86.

DellaVigna, S. and M. Gentzkow (2019): "Uniform Pricing in U.S. Retail Chains*," The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134, 2011­2084.

Duarte, M., L. Magnolfi, and C. Sullivan (2020): "Testing Firm Conduct," Unpublished
 Manuscript.

Elhauge, E. (2016): "Horizontal Shareholding," Harvard Law Review, 109, 1267­1317.

Gandhi, A. and J.-F. Houde (2019): "Measuring Substitution Patterns in Differentiated Prod-
 ucts Industries," Working Paper.

Gasmi, F., J. Laffont, and Q. Vuong (1992): "Econometric Analysis of Collusive Behavior in
 a Soft-Drink Market," Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 1, 277­311.

Genesove, D. and W. P. Mullin (1998): "Testing Static Oligopoly Models: Conduct and Cost
 in the Sugar Industry, 1890-1914," The RAND Journal of Economics, 29, 355­377.



                                              41
Gramlich, J. and S. Grundl (2017): "Estimating the Competitive Effects of Common Owner-
 ship," FEDS Working Paper 2017-029.

Hall, A. R. and D. Pelletier (2011): "Nonnested Testing in Models Estimated via Generalized
 Method of Moments," Econometric Theory, 27, 443­456.

Hartford, J., G. Lewis, K. Leyton-Brown, and M. Taddy (2017): "Counterfactual Pre-
 diction using Deep Instrumental Variable Networks," Working Paper.

Hausman, J. A. (1978): "Specification Tests in Econometrics," Econometrica, 46, 1251­1271.

Hendel, I. and A. Nevo (2006): "Measuring the Implications of Sales and Consumer Inventory
 Behavior," Econometrica, 74, 1637­1673.

Hristakeva, S. (2019): "How Do Vertical Contracts Affect Product Availability? An Empirical
 Study of the Grocery Industry," Working Paper.

Imbens, G., S. Donald, and W. Newey (2003): "Empirical Likelihood Estimation and Consis-
  tent Tests with Conditional Moment Restrictions," Journal of Econometrics, 117, 55­93.

Kennedy, P., D. P. O'Brien, M. Song, and K. Waehrer (2017): "The Competitive Effects
 of Common Ownership: Economic Foundations and Empirical Evidence," Working Paper.

Michel, C. and S. Weiergraeber (2018): "Estimating Industry Conduct in Differentiated
 Products Markets The Evolution of Pricing Behavior in the RTE Cereal Industry," Working
 Paper.

Miller, N. and M. Weinberg (2017): "Understanding the Price Effects of the MillerCoors Joint
 Venture," Econometrica, 85, 1763­1791.

Nevo, A. (1998): "Identification of the Oligopoly Solution Concept in a Differentiated-Products
 Industry," Economics Letters, 59, 391­395.

------ (2000): "Mergers with Differentiated Products: The Case of the Ready-to-Eat Cereal In-
  dustry," RAND Journal of Economics, 31, 395­421.

------ (2001): "Measuring Market Power in the Ready-to-Eat Cereal Industry," Econometrica, 69,
  307­342.

Newey, W. K. (1990): "Efficient Instrumental Variables Estimation of Nonlinear Models," Econo-
 metrica, 58, 809­837.

Newey, W. K. and J. L. Powell (2003): "Instrumental Variables Estimation of Nonparamatric
 Models," Econometrica, 71, 1565­1578.

O'Brien, D. and S. Salop (2000): "Competitive Effects of Partial Ownership: Financial Interest
 and Corporate Control," Antitrust Law Journal, 67, 559­614.

O'Brien, D. P. (2017): "Price-Concentration Analysis: Ending the Myth, and Moving Forward,"
 Https://ssrn.com/abstract=3008326. Accessed on 2020-01-08.



                                              42
Pakes, A. (2017): "Empirical tools and competition analysis: Past progress and current problems,"
  International Journal of Industrial Organization, 53, 241 ­ 266.

Park, A. H. and K. Seo (2019): "Common Ownership and Product Market Competition: Evi-
  dence from the U.S. Airline Industry," Korean Journal of Financial Studies, 45, 617­640.

Petrin, A. (2002): "Quantifying the Benefits of New Products: The Case of the Minivan," Journal
 of Political Economy, 110, 705­729.

Posner, E. A., F. M. Scott Morton, and E. G. Weyl (2017): "A Proposal to Limit the
 Anti-Competitive Power of Institutional Investors," Antitrust Law Journal, 81.

Reynaert, M. and F. Verboven (2014): "Improving the performance of random coefficients
 demand models: The role of optimal instruments," Journal of Econometrics, 179, 83­98.

Rivers, D. and Q. Vuong (2002): "Model selection tests for nonlinear dynamic models," The
  Econometrics Journal, 5, 1­39.

Rotemberg, J. (1984):        "Financial Transactions Costs and Industrial Performance,"
 Http://hdl.handle.net/1721.1/47993. Accessed on 2020-01-08.

Schmalensee, R. (1989): "Chapter 16 Inter-industry studies of structure and performance,"
  Elsevier, vol. 2 of Handbook of Industrial Organization, 951 ­ 1009.

Shennach, S. M. and D. Wilhelm (2017): "A Simple Parametric Model Selection Test," Journal
  of the American Statistical Association, 112, 1663­1674.

Shi, X. (2015): "A Nondegenerate Vuong Test," Quantitative Economics, 6, 85­121.

Smith, R. J. (1992): "Non-Nested Tests for Competing Models Estimated by Generalized Method
  of Moments," Econometrica, 60, 973­980.

Villas-Boas, S. B. (2007): "Vertical Relationships between Manufacturers and Retailers: Infer-
  ence with Limited Data," The Review of Economic Studies, 74, 625­652.

Vuong, Q. H. (1989): "Likelihood Ratio Tests for Model Selection and Non-Nested Hypotheses,"
 Econometrica, 57, 307­333.

Whang, Y.-J. and D. W. K. Andrews (1993): "Tests of Specification for Parametric and
 Semiparametric Models," Journal of Econometrics, 57, 277­318.

Wollmann, T. G. (2018): "Trucks without Bailouts: Equilibrium Product Characteristics for
 Commercial Vehicles," American Economic Review, 108, 1364­1406.

Yatchew, A. J. (1992): "Nonparametric Regression Tests Based on Least Squares," Econometric
  Theory, 8, 435­451.




                                               43
Appendices
A. Theory Appendix
A.1. Proofs of Propositions
Lemma 1: A Property of Quadratic Forms For a symmetric, positive semi-definite matrix
A  Rk×k and two vectors (x, y )  Rk , the difference in quadratic forms is given by:

                               xT Ax - y T Ay = (x + y )T A(x - y ).

Proof of Lemma:

                   (x + y )T A(x - y ) = xT A(x - y ) + y T A(x - y )
                                      = xT Ax - xT Ay + y T Ax - y T Ay
                                                              T   T
                                      = xT Ax -     xT Ay             + y T Ax - y T Ay
                                                              T
                                      = xT Ax - y T AT x          + y T Ax - y T Ay
                                                          T
                                      = xT Ax - y T Ax        + y T Ax - y T Ay
                                      = xT Ax - y T Ax + y T Ax - y T Ay
                                      = xT Ax - y T Ay.

Statement of Proposition 1a:
Under the following assumptions:
(i) A fixed k × k positive semi-definite weighting matrix W ;
(ii) A (n × k ) matrix of instruments Z of full column rank k ;
(iii) A vector of n unobservable cost components  m = p - h(z ) -  m and moment restrictions such
that E [ m Z ] = 0  Rk is satisfied at the true  0 and not at  m =  0 , and
(iv) The function h(z ) is known (rather than estimated).
(a) As n   and under standard regularity conditions, the difference in GMM objective functions
(QW ( )  R+ ) under weighting matrix W , for any two markup models ( 1 ,  2 ), can be expressed
as:
                    p
 QW ( 1 ) - QW ( 2 )  -E[Z  1 ] W E[Z  1,2 ] - E[Z  2 ] W E[Z  1,2 ] where  1,2 =  1 -  2 .


Proof of Proposition 1a:
Under (iii) and (iv) note we can write: 1 - 2 = - 1,2 and 2 = 1 +  1,2 .




                                            Appendix-1
   The difference in GMM objective functions is given by:

            QW ( 1 ) - QW ( 2 ) =  1T Z W Z T  1 -  2T Z W Z T  2
                                 = ( 1 +  2 )T Z W Z T ( 1 -  2 ) by Lemma 1
                                 = -( 1 +  2 )T Z W Z T  1,2
                                 = - 1T Z W Z T  1,2 -  2T Z W Z T  1,2
                                     p
                                  -E[Z  1 ]T W E[Z  1,2 ] - E[Z  2 ]T W E[Z  1,2 ].

As n   and under standard regularity conditions (first two sets of first moments are finite), the
                          a.s.                        a.s.
SLLN applies so (Z T  m )  E[Z T  m ] and (Z T  1,2 )  E[Z T  1,2 ], which delivers the final line.

Statement of Proposition 1b:
                                                           a.s
(v) Model 1 is the correctly specified model, i.e. E[Z 1 ]  0.
(b) Under the additional condition (v), then:
                                                   p
                         QW ( 1 ) - QW ( 2 )  -E[Z  1,2 ] W E[Z  1,2 ].
Proof of Proposition 1b:
Using the fact that 2 = 1 +  1,2 and the second to last line of the proof of Proposition 1(a)

           QW ( 1 ) - QW ( 2 ) =  1T Z W Z T  1,2 +  2T Z W Z T  1,2
                               =  1T Z W Z T  1,2 + ( 1 +  1,2 )T Z W Z T  1,2
                               = 2 ·  1T Z W Z T  1,2 +  1,2T Z W Z T  1,2
                                p                                                    a.s.
                                E[Z T  1,2 ]T W E[Z T  1,2 ] since E[Z T  1 ]  0 by (v).

A.2. Microfoundation of Demand Model
We define the utility of consumer i for product j and market (chain-dma-week) t as:

                                         Uijt = jt - pjt + µijt + ijt .                          (1)

Following the usual convention we decompose the utility into three parts: a mean preference which
all consumers agree on jt , a consumer-specific taste shock µijt , and an idiosyncratic error ijt .
Consumers select the option among the set of Jt = {0, 1, . . . , Jt } alternatives which provides the
most utility. Following convention we include a no purchase alternative, denoted j = 0, which
provides ui0t  i0t . Aggregate market shares are given by integrating over heterogeneous consumer
choices:
                        sjt (t ) = I[Uijt (t , µit ) > Uikt (t , µit )] dµit dit .

A frequent assumption is that ijt is distributed IID type I extreme value (Gumbel) so that market
shares are given by:

                                             exp[jt - pjt + µijt ]
                    sjt (t , 2 ) =                                    f (µit | 2 ) dµit .        (2)
                                            kJt exp[kt - pkt + µikt ]




                                                  Appendix-2
       We follow standard practice and put an additive structure on the mean utilities:

                                           jt (St , 2 ) = hd (xjt , vjt ; 1 ) + jt .                                    (3)

    We specify the linear component of utility hd (xjt , vjt ; 1 ) as follows. We include four vjt variables
which affect demand, but are excluded from supply. Three of those variables are dummies for the
twelve weeks following a product recall for the affected products. For further discussion of the
product recall events (including plots demonstrating the effect on demand) consult Appendix C.7.
We also include an interaction between the DMA-week level unemployment rate and a dummy
for branded products. This is meant to capture the fact that during the Great Recession there is
an increase in the relative demand for private label as opposed to branded products. We provide
additional support for this in Figure C-2 and Figure C-4. We also include a large number of two-way
fixed effects: 946 product fixed effects and 1970 chain-week fixed effects.62
    We specify the distribution of unobservable heterogeneity from (1) similar to Nevo (2000):
                                                                                          T
                                   µijct (2 ) = (L · ict +  · yict ) · 1, pjct                 .

We define the nonlinear parameters as 2 = [L, ] where the  represent the parameters on inter-
actions between demographic draws yict = [kidsict , incomeict ] and observable characteristics xjct ,
and L represents the Cholesky root of covariance matrix (LL = 2 ) for the (multivariate normally
distributed) unobserved heterogeneity. We allow consumers to have heterogeneous preferences over
prices and a constant (which captures inside vs. outside good substitution).63 Demographics are
drawn from the DMA-chain-year specific distribution calculated using the Nielsen Panelist data.
Our demographics capture the joint distribution of income and presence of children in the house-
hold.64

A.3. Markups and their Derivatives
We can augment the usual static multi-product Bertrand Nash pricing game to allow for common
ownership (or "internalization" effects). In this case a firm chooses the price for product j but now
treats $1 of rival g 's profit as f g of their own. We further augment this setup with an "internaliza-
tion parameter"  . Here  = 1 denotes acting in accordance with the common ownership hypothesis
while  = 0 represents own-profit maximization. The downside is that   (0, 1) is not necessarily
interpretable although intermediate values possibly represent some partial internalization.
    The first-order condition of firm f which controls several products Jf with respect to pj is given
by the following:
                                                                                        

                 arg max                (pj - mcj ) · sj (p) +  ·           f g          (pk - mck ) · sk (p) ,
                     pj : j Jf
                                 j Jf                                   g         j Jg
                                                                                                                       
           sj                                 sk                                                     sk
sj (p) +      (p) · (pj - mcj ) +                (p) · (pk - mck ) +  ·                  f g            (p) · (pk - mck ) = 0.
           pj                                 pj                                   g
                                                                                                     pj
                                        kJf                                                    kJg
                                                                                                                        (4)
  62
     Nevo (2000) and Nevo (2001) include one fixed effect for each of the 26 products in the dataset.
  63
     See Section 4.3 or Appendix C.1 for a discussion on how prices and product characteristics are constructed.
  64
     See Section 4.3 and Appendix C.6.


                                                        Appendix-3
    With a bit more notation we can write the system of first­order conditions in matrix form,
which is helpful for what follows. First, let (p) denote the J × J matrix of demand derivatives so
                                    sj
that each (j, k ) entry is given by pk . Second, we introduce the product level "cooperation matrix".
We can augment the setup in Nevo (2001) with f g for potential common ownership effects, and 
as the "internalization parameter":
                                    
                                    1
                                              if (j, k )  Jf for any f ,
                      Hjk (,  ) =  · f g if j  Jf and k  Jg for any (f, g ),
                                    
                                     0        otherwise.
                                    

Then, for a single market t, where        denotes the element-wise (Hadamard) product of the two
Jt × Jt matrices:

                              st (pt ) = (Ht (,  )     (pt )) · (pt - mct ).                      (5)

The augmented markup in matrix form can be written as:

                              t (pt , st , t ,  ) = (H(t ,  )   (pt ))-1 st .

This gives us a multi-product, multi-firm markup which incorporates potential conduct effects:
 (p, s, ,  ). Note that this depends on the conduct among all firms  as well as all of the endogenous
variables.
    We are also interested in the Jacobian matrix    t        t
                                                      and  . We will consider a single market
and omit the t subscript.
    The markup has a derivative given by:
              t   
                =  (H(,  )           (p))-1 s(p)
                  
                                            
                  = (H(,  )     (p))-1       (H(,  )        (p)) (H(,  )        (p))-1 s(p)
                                            
                  = (H(,  )     (p))-1 [If =g        (p)] t (,  ; 2 ).

where If =g represents a Jt × Jt matrix of zeros and ones, with ones if f g > 0 and f = g .
   We also consider the derivative with respect to a scalar element of , f g :

             t    
                =     (H(,  )           (p))-1 s(p)
            f g   f g
                                            
                  = (H(,  )     (p))-1          (H(,  )         (p) (H(,  )      (p))-1 s(p)
                                            f g
                  = (H(,  )     (p))-1 [ · If =g       (p)] t (; 2 ).

Where If =g is a Jt × Jt matrix of zeros and ones, where the ones occur if and only if the row product
is owned by f and the column by g . The result are two J × J matrices multiplying a J × 1 vector
which results in a J × 1 vector.
    The Jacobians of the markup with respect to the internalization parameters (, f g ) are impor-
tant because they represent the (infeasible) optimal instruments (in the sense of Amemiya (1977);


                                               Appendix-4
Chamberlain (1987)) for the conduct parameters themselves. They are also the continuous analogue
of the discrete markup difference that forms the basis for our test E [jt |zt ].
                                                                 
                                                                jt                 jt
    In order to compute the feasible approximations E f          g
                                                                   |zt or E           |zt , we have two choices
which parallel the discussion of optimal instruments in Berry et al. (1995, 1999); Conlon and
Gortmaker (2020). The Newey (1990) approach is to compute the expectations by calculating the
Jacobian at the true values of (pt , st ) (and the conjectured  and 2 ) and then projecting those
values onto exogenous variables zt via (nonlinear) regression. The Chamberlain (1987) approach as
discussed in Berry et al. (1999); Reynaert and Verboven (2014) instead would allow us to calculate
E [pjt |zt ] with a "first-stage" estimate p^ t from a (potentially nonlinear) regression, draw t              and

calculate st (p       ;  ) = ^
                ^ t , t       st . Given (^    ^ t ) we can calculate (^
                                          st , p                         st , p
                                                                              ^ t ; 2 ) and t (^ st , p
                                                                                                      ^ t ; 2 ) now
                        2
purged of the endogeneity problem of pt and t , and use these to calculate the Jacobian. The
conventional approach (Berry et al., 1999) replaces t  = 0, and Conlon and Gortmaker (2020)
show that it works well in Monte Carlo analysis.

B. Financial Market Data Appendix
B.1. Ownership Data
While the main data source on holdings used in this literature is the Thomson Reuters S34 database,
we instead use our hand-collected dataset described in Backus et al. (2021) due to the problems
with the Thomson dataset discussed in Backus et al. (2019).
   Additionally, we gather data on insider holdings from the Thompson Reuters Insider Holdings
database accessible via WRDS. This compiles SEC forms 3,4,5, and 144 to get a picture of insider
holdings that we may be missing from the 13f filings -- in particular, holdings of executives and
board members. We find that these holdings are always less than five percent of shares outstanding
(and typically substantially so) and so, for the RTE cereal industry, have a minor effect on the
computed common ownership profit weights.

B.2. Share Swap Mergers
One important aspect of common ownership is that post-merger incentives may be affected by the
financial structure of the transaction. For example, in an all-cash deal, the equity of the target is
purchased by the acquirer and the merged firm retains the ownership structure of the acquirer f s .
We report the ownership matrix for Q4 2016 below. In practice, many transactions are realized as
share-swaps where the acquirer issues additional shares and uses those to acquire the shares of the
target.
    Absent any acquisition, we have that the ownership stake of s in f is given by:
                                                       sharesf s
                                             f s =                .
                                                     outstandingf

After a share swap, we need to adjust both the numerator and denominator. First we calculate
what is known as the exchange ratio
                                                              pricetarget
                                       ERtarget,acquirer =                 .
                                                             priceacquirer




                                                  Appendix-5
Then we update the shares held in the acquirer:

              sharess,merged = sharess,acquirer + sharess,target · ERtarget,acquirer
        outstandings,merged = outstandings,acquirer + outstandings,target · ERtarget,acquirer .


    Because f g depends on relative investor concentration, the effects of a share-swap merger on
 can be difficult to predict and need not be a convex combination of pre-merger  and the merged
ownership under an all-cash deal. We provide several examples below. The most striking feature
is that acquisitions involving Quaker Oats (a division of PepsiCo) can lead to huge changes in
profit weights for the merged entity. The extremely large market capitalization of PepsiCo tends
to swamp the other cereal manufacturer's ownership structure, and the relative generosity  > 1
can be even more pronounced under a share-swap acquisition.


                                               GM     KEL    P OST    QKR
                                                                           
                                    GM      1.00      0.67    0.70    0.80
                                   KEL      0.23      1.00    0.17    0.19 
                                                                           
                                   P OST    0.41      0.30    1.00    0.44 
                                   QKR      1.07      0.74    1.00    1.00


                            GM     KEL/QKR       P OST                   GM/KEL      P OST   QKR
                                                                                                  
               GM         1.00       0.78        0.78        GM/KEL         1.00     0.85    0.85
            KEL/QKR       1.08       1.00        0.99         P OST         0.33     1.00    0.39 
              P OST       0.37       0.34        1.00         QKR           0.93     1.12    1.00
                         GM/QKR     KEL       P OST                      GM    KEL    QKR/P OST
                                                                                                   
           GM/QKR           1.00     0.75      1.0           GM        1.00 0.67          0.80
             KEL            0.19     1.00      0.2           KEL       0.23 1.00          0.19     
            P OST           0.36     0.27      1.0       QKR/P OST     1.06 0.73          1.00
                         GM/P OST    KEL       QKR                       GM    KEL/P OST     QKR
                                                                                                  
          GM/P OST          1.00      0.69     0.83          GM        1.00        0.69      0.80
             KEL            0.22      1.00     0.19      KEL/P OST     0.31        1.00      0.26 
            QKR             1.06      0.74     1.00          QKR       1.07        0.78      1.00


C. Product Market Data Appendix
C.1. Product Characteristics
Because we are not interested in the relationship between demand and the 19 nutritional character-
istics per se, and because the characteristics are often correlated with one another we consolidate
our product characteristics into a smaller number of principal components. This is particularly
helpful because nutritional information often creates collinearity problems. For example total calo-
ries are a linear function of fat, carbohydrates, and protein; or sugar and dietary fiber are a source
of carbohydrates. We report average nutritional information on a per-serving basis in Table C-2


                                                 Appendix-6
                                Share-Swap Mergers under Common Ownership
   Firm            GM-KEL      GM-QKR GM-POST         KEL-QKR    KEL-POST          QKR-POST       Monopoly
   General Mills        0.68       -3.43        -0.58         1.59         -2.73          -0.29        3.12
   Kellogg              6.75        4.88         5.69         5.55          7.03           5.76        8.80
   Quaker Oats         -4.36       -7.30        -6.73        -4.41         -9.46          -5.79        0.40
   Post                 8.24        5.65         5.89         8.11          6.97           3.89        9.51
   Price Index          3.74        0.92         2.33         3.66          1.89           2.10        6.09

                                  Cash Mergers under Common Ownership
   Firm            GM-KEL      GM-QKR GM-POST        KEL-QKR   KEL-POST            QKR-POST       Monopoly
   General Mills        1.31       -3.00        -0.55        -4.86         -3.52          -0.22        3.12
   Kellogg              7.29        4.25         5.49         4.88          6.82           5.79        8.80
   Quaker Oats         -5.03       -6.81        -7.17        -5.46        -10.38          -5.79        0.40
   Post                 5.96        2.39         5.93         1.03          6.74           3.89        9.51
   Price Index          3.60        0.21         2.26        -0.28          1.37          2.14         6.09

                               Base Case: Mergers under Own Profit Maximization
   Firm            GM-KEL      GM-QKR      GM-POST      KEL-QKR     KEL-POST       QKR-POST       Monopoly
   General Mills        4.69        1.10         3.00        -0.10         -0.16          -0.11        9.42
   Kellogg              5.13       -0.13        -0.19         1.04          2.90          -0.11        9.30
   Quaker Oats         -0.37        6.39        -0.36         5.60         -0.37           3.93       14.87
   Post                -0.15       -0.11         6.16        -0.10          5.19           1.45       12.76
   Price Index          3.32        0.91         2.22         0.78          1.96          0.58        10.25

                   Table B-1: Price Increases under Counterfactual Scenarios
Notes: This table reports counterfactual percent price increases from the observed baseline in the fourth quarter
of 2016. We compute the serving-weighted percentage change in price at the market and firm level (with the last
row containing all firms) and report the median price change across markets. The market-level mean price per
serving observed in the data is $0.2255. Columns indicate the counterfactual scenario: the first six are pairwise
mergers, the seventh is a hypothetical monopolist composed of the four largest firms, and the last is under common
ownership. Source: Authors' computations.




                                                Appendix-7
                                                     mean     standard deviation
                            calories               133.636               43.111
                            calories from fat       12.785               11.659
                            vitamin a dv             7.715                6.637
                            vitamin c dv             9.910               15.105
                            iron dv                 30.718               24.454
                            calcium dv               4.844               10.456
                            serving weight (g)      36.111               11.604
                                         As a Percentage of Weight
                            cholesterol              0.080                0.515
                            dietary fiber            0.075                0.053
                            monounsaturated fat      0.007                0.015
                            polyunsaturated fat      0.006                0.012
                            protein                  0.077                0.042
                            saturated fat            0.006                0.015
                            sodium ×1000             4.403                2.186
                            sugars                   0.264                0.125
                            total carbohydrate       0.811                0.076
                            total fat                0.041                0.035
                            other carbs              0.472                0.114

           Table C-2: Summary Statistics of Product Characteristics (3478 Products)



We use a principal components approach to reduce the dimension of the product space and provide
a lower dimensional basis of orthogonal components. We describe our procedure in detail below.
     Consider a (J × K ) matrix X with rows denoting products and columns denoting nutritional
characteristics. Principal components constructs an eigen-decomposition of the covariance matrix
(X X ) = W W where W is the matrix of eigenvectors and  is a diagonal matrix of eigenvalues.
We can approximate the covariance matrix by considering the largest k < K eigenvalues and their
corresponding eigenvectors and construct a basis in dimension k rather than K . This yields the
approximation (X X )  W k W where k is the same diagonal matrix as  but with zeros for all
eigenvalues except the k largest. This lets us write X     ~ = XW where Wk is the J × k matrix of
                                                                  k
eigenvectors which correspond to the k largest eigenvalues in . X   ~ is an orthonormal approximation
in dimension k to the basis spanned by the covariance matrix (X X ) in dimension K .
     This has some advantages: for one we have reduced the number of dimensions of nutritional
information that we need to keep track of. This is especially helpful when we want consumers
to have heterogeneous preferences (random coefficients) across these characteristics. The second
advantage is that the columns of X  ~ are now orthogonal. In general this makes estimating parameters
much easier because we no longer have to worry about columns of X being highly correlated with
one another (such as sugar and carbohydrate content). The disadvantage is that the transformed
components of X   ~ can be difficult to interpret.
     When we apply this to our dataset, instead of working with the covariance matrix (X X ) we
work with the weighted covariance matrix (X X ) where  is an J × J diagonal matrix of weights
where the weights correspond to the brand-level market shares for each row of X . This prevents
less popular brands with strange product characteristics from becoming outliers and distorting
our transformed product space. It is also helpful to pre-standardize and scale the nutritional
information so that each column of X (and X        ~ ) has mean zero and variance one. The first five
components comprise around 75% of the overall variation of the 19 nutritional characteristics. The
first four principal components are plotted in pairs in Figure C-1


                                                 Appendix-8
                                                            3
                                                                                                                                                            CINNAMON TOAST CRUNCH


                                                                             GO LEAN CRUNCH!

                                                            2                                                                                                        REESE'S PUFFS
                                                                                                                                                                                     CAP'N CRN CRN BRY
                                                                                                                                                                                     CAP'N CRN
                                                                                             SELECTS GREAT GRAINS
                                                                                                                                                                HONEY NUT CHEERIOS
                                                                                                                                                                                         HONEY SMACKS
                                                            1                                                         RAISIN BRAN                                       LUCKY CHARMS
               Principal Component: Healthy vs. Unhealthy       GO LEAN                                                                                                    COCOA PUFFS
                                                                                                                                                                                    APPLE JACKS
                                                                                                                                                            SPECIAL K CHOCOLATY DELGHT
                                                                                                                                                                         TRIX       FROOT LOOPS
                                                                                                                                                                                 COOKIE-CRISP
                                                                                                                                                                                        COCOA PEBBLES
                                                                                                                                                                                         FRUITY PEBBLES
                                                                                                                                                                              GOLDEN GRAHAMS
                                                                                                                     RAISIN BRAN    RAISINHONEY BUNCHES OF OATS
                                                                                                                                           BRAN CRUNCH
                                                            0                                                                         LIFE TO HEART
                                                                                                                                     HEART
                                                                                                                                                                                       COCOA KRISPIES
                                                                                                                              CHEERIOS          CINNAMON LIFE                HONEY-COMB
                                                                                                                                                                    SPECIAL K VANILLA ALMOND
                                                                                                                                                                  SPECIAL K FRUIT & YOGURT
                                                                                                                                                      MULTIGRAIN CHEERIOS
                                                                                       ESSENTIALS OATMEAL SQUARES
                                                                                     OATMEAL SQUARES                                                                                   CORN POPS
                                                            1                                                                                                                                 FROSTED FLAKES



                                                                                                                                                        KIX        WHEATIES

                                                                                                 FROSTED MINI-WHEATS                                                                SPECIAL K RED BERRY
                                                                                               FROSTED MINI-WHT LTTLE BTS
                                                            2                                                                                                    CORN CHEX
                                                                                                                    WHEAT CHEX
                                                                                    GRAPE-NUTS                                            SPECIAL K


                                                                                                                                      SMART START                            CORN FLAKES
                                                            3                                                                                                                RICE CHEX
                                                                                                                                                                           CRISPIX




                                                                                                                                                                                RICE KRISPIES
                                                            4
                                                                6           5                4             3         2           1         0                             1                2
                                                                                                      Principal Component: Adults vs. Kids

                                                                                                                                                 GO LEAN

                                                            3
                                                                                                                                                          HEART TO HEART




                                                            2


                                                                                  HONEY SMACKS                                      SPECIAL K RED BERRY
                                                                                                           GO LEAN
                                                                                                              APPLECRUNCH!
                                                                                                                    JACKS
               Principal Component: 3




                                                                                                              FROOT LOOPS
                                                            1                                                                                  SPECIAL
                                                                                                                                    SPECIAL K FRUIT     K VANILLA ALMOND
                                                                                                                                                    & YOGURT

                                                                                               CORN POPS                                   LUCKY CHARMS

                                                                                       RAISIN
                                                                                   RAISIN BRANBRAN                                 CINNAMON LIFE
                                                                                                                                               MULTIGRAIN CHEERIOS
                                                                                                                                                    HONEY  NUT CHEERIOS
                                                                                                                                                         SPECIAL K CHOCOLATY DELGHT
                                                                   FROSTED MINI-WHEATS
                                                                      RAISIN
                                                                FROSTED      BRAN
                                                                        MINI-WHT   CRUNCH
                                                                                 LTTLE BTS          FROSTED FLAKES                     WHEAT CHEX                                   SPECIAL K
                                                                                                                                        GOLDEN GRAHAMS
                                                                                                                                    COOKIE-CRISP     WHEATIES KIX
                                                            0                                                                                  LIFE
                                                                                                                      COCOA KRISPIES
                                                                                                               CAP'N CRN
                                                                                                                                     COCOA PUFFS                                             CHEERIOS
                                                                                                                         CAP'N CRN CRN BRY
                                                                                                                     ESSENTIALS OATMEAL
                                                                                                       SMART START GRAPE-NUTS      TRIX SQUARES
                                                                                                                    OATMEAL SQUARES REESE'S PUFFS            CORN CHEX
                                                                                                                                                                             RICE CHEX
                                                                                                                                                      CORN FLAKES
                                                            1                                                                FRUITY PEBBLES         CINNAMON TOAST CRUNCH
                                                                                                                    HONEY-COMB              CRISPIX


                                                                                                                    COCOA PEBBLES               RICE KRISPIES
                                                                                                      SELECTS GREAT GRAINS



                                                            2                                                                                 HONEY BUNCHES OF OATS


                                                                    3                 2                       1                0                        1                       2                        3
                                                                                                                  Principal Component: 2
            Figure C-1: Principal Components of Nutritional Data: Top 50 Brands
Notes: This figure depicts the PCA location of the top 50 brands of cereal. Circle size is proportional to the
inverse of national sales rank. Colors indicate different manufacturers. Source: Authors' computations.


                                                                                                                  Appendix-9
C.2. Macro Variables
Here we document some additional macroeconomic variables that we use in our demand estimates.
One important variable is the unemployment rate. This is obtained from the St. Louis Federal
Reserve (FRED) database. For each DMA, we find the corresponding (monthly) unemployment
series for the corresponding Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA). We plot MSA level unemployment
in Figure C-2.
    For most MSAs, the unemployment rate peaks in early 2010, but the magnitude of the swing
is much larger in Charlotte than in Boston. The rate of recovery also varies across MSA, and is
slower in Chicago, for example, than in other cities. We do simple linear interpolation to construct
a weekly estimate of the unemployment rate.
    We also acquire data on commodities prices from Global Financial Data on a weekly basis. We
track the prices of: corn, oats, rice, wheat, and sugar and compute an index value relative to the
middle of our sample (2011). We report those input prices in Figure C-3.

                                                                                   Boston
                                                                                   Charlotte
                                   12
                                                                                   Richmond
                                                                                   Chicago
                                                                                   Denver
                                                                                   Phoenix
                                   10
               Unemployment Rate




                                   8



                                   6



                                   4



                                   2
                                          2008     2010         2012    2014   2016
                                        Figure C-2: Unemployment Rate by MSA/DMA



C.3. Private Label
Below, in Figure C-4 we show the share captured by private label sales over time in our sample.
The private label share grows during the Great Recession. It begins to decline immediately after
the BlackRock acquisition of iShares from Barclays. During this period the four major brands all
cut prices substantially, and then begin to increase prices in 2012. From 2013 onwards, the private
label share continues to decline, press accounts often attribute this to rising incomes during the
recovery rather than pricing changes by the four major manufacturers.
    We also plot the private label share for each DMA/city. There is a lot of heterogeneity across
cities, for example Chicago (and to a lesser extent Charlotte) have a much lower private label
share than other cities. This may be due to a number of factors, the most likely of which are the

                                                          Appendix-10
                               Standardized Nominal Commodity Prices (Log Scale)
                                                                                                         Corn
200
                                                                                                         Oat
                                                                                                         Rice
                                                                                                         Sugar
                                                                                                         Wheat


100
 90
 80
 70
 60
 50
                    2008                  2010                     2012         2014            2016
                                             Figure C-3: Input Prices
   Notes: This figure depicts the time series of major RTE cereal ingredient input prices for the period 2007­2017.
   Source: Global Financial Data.



particular stores and chains that operate in each DMA/city and their own focus on private label
brands. It may also be due to persistent geographic preferences, or heterogeneity in incomes across
cities. For example, the private label share in Phoenix follows the business cycle more closely than
in other cities. The cross-sectional variation in private label share is an important driver in the
cross-sectional variation in the concentration measures (HHI and M HHI ).

C.4. Instruments
The so-called BLP instruments are functions of characteristics of other goods within the same
market f (~
          xt ). We follow the "best practices" of Conlon and Gortmaker (2020) and begin with the
recipe in Gandhi and Houde (2019). First we construct a product-characteristic specific differen-
tiation measure. We suppress the market subscript t to economize on notation, and consider the
                                                                                    (l)
distance between products (j, k ) in the dimension of characteristic l, and we let xj represent the
suitably standardized lth principal component for product j in matrix X   ~:

                                                             (l)      (l)
                                                        ~k - x
                                              djk,(l) = x    ~j

We form a second-order basis using djk,(l) including interactions with other characteristics djk,(m) :

                          quad
                         zjt   =           d2
                                            jk,(l) ,       djk,(l) × djk,(m)   (l, m).
                                      k                k




                                                       Appendix-11
                      0.18                                                                     Post buys MOM
                                                  BlackRock/Barclays
                      0.17
Private Label Share




                      0.16

                      0.15

                      0.14

                      0.13      Great Recession

                      0.12
                        2007      2008      2009        2010      2011    2012   2013   2014        2015       2016
                                                                                            Boston             Chicago
                      0.225                                                                 Charlotte          Denver
                                                                                            Richmond           Phoenix
                      0.200
Private Label Share




                      0.175

                      0.150

                      0.125

                      0.100

                      0.075

                      0.050
                         2007      2008      2009        2010      2011   2012   2013   2014        2015       2016
                                                   Figure C-4: Private Label Market share




                                                                  Appendix-12
We then use that second-order basis, along with the observable cost shifters wjk to form a measure
of expected price (via a linear or polynomial regression). As in the demand model we allow xjt to
contain product specific intercepts:

                                                   E [pjt |xjt , wjt , zjt ] = p
                                                                               ^jt .

We compute the differentiation measure in terms of expected price:

                                                              ^k - p
                                                    djk,(p) = p    ^j .
                          quad
This allows us to extend zjt   as:

             quad
            zjt   =          d2
                              jk,(l) ,       d2
                                              jk,(p) ,       djk,(l) × djk,(m) ,       djk,(l) × djk,(p)      (l, m).
                         k               k               k                         k

Gandhi and Houde (2019) show these instruments are most useful in the estimation of the standard
deviations and covariances of the random coefficients . Since we are also interested in estimating
demographic interactions , we follow their suggestion and interact these instruments with moments
of the distribution of demographics. In our case the moments of the demographic distribution we
use are: with quantiles of the income distribution (conditional on children), and the fraction of
households with children.
                 quad
           D
          zjt = zjt    1, %kidst , inc10%
                                      it
                                          ,k
                                             , inc50%
                                                  it
                                                      ,k
                                                         , inc90%
                                                              it
                                                                 ,k
                                                                    , inc10%
                                                                         it
                                                                            ,nk
                                                                                , inc50%
                                                                                     it
                                                                                         ,nk
                                                                                             , inc90%
                                                                                                  it
                                                                                                     ,nk
                                                                                                         .

After obtaining consistent initial estimates of [1 , 2 ] we construct the feasible approximation to
the optimal instruments (Amemiya, 1977; Chamberlain, 1987; Berry et al., 1999; Reynaert and
Verboven, 2014). Because we estimate the demand side separate from any supply side, we are
unable to exploit the additional cross-equation restrictions (see Conlon and Gortmaker (2020)).
The simplified version of the expression in Conlon and Gortmaker (2020) becomes:

                j                            j               j                 D           j                   D
                1
                  = xj , v j ,
                                             2
                                               = E            |xt , vt , wt , zt   , E
                                                                                            2
                                                                                              |xt , vt , wt , zt   .

The first expectation is simply the expected price from above E [pjt |xjt , wjt , zjt ] = p
                                                                                          ^jt , while the
                                     
second expectation is the Jacobian j evaluated at p  ^jt and t = 0. For each set of instruments we
                                      2
construct, we standardize each column to mean zero and variance one, and then perform the prin-
cipal components dimension reduction outlined above.65 This has the advantage that it produces
a well-scaled and orthogonal set of instruments, and has the added benefit that the identity matrix
is often close the optimal weighting matrix.

C.5. Market Size
Recall that our market is defined as a DMA-chain-week and we have 21,833 markets. In other
words we combine weekly sales for stores within the same chain, so long as those chains belong to
the same Nielsen DMA. Our market definition is: the number of people who walk into the store
 65
      We make sure our principal components always span at least 99% of the variance of the initial set of instruments.



                                                             Appendix-13
during a particular week (summed over stores within the same chain and DMA).
    Since we don't directly observe the number of consumers to walk into a store, we estimate this
number using two other commonly purchased categories: milk and eggs. We run the following fixed
effects regression:
                         RT EServings          milk          eggs
                    log qc,t          = 1 log qc,t  + 2 log qc,t  + c + ct .

We predict the weekly number of RTE Cereal servings purchased as a function of milk sales (in
gallons) and egg sales (in dozens) along with fixed effects at the DMA-Chain level. We don't
include any time varying fixed effects because those might be correlated with the overall price level
for RTE cereal. Instead we rely on the milk and eggs purchases to capture the time varying traffic
of individual chains. We report the results of those regressions in Table C-3. We find that on its
own 1% increase in milk sales increases the sales of RTE Cereal (measured in servings) by 0.88%
while a 1% increase in egg purchases increases cereal purchases by 0.81%. While not displayed in
the table, chain fixed effects alone explain around 94% of the variation in the cereal sales, while
the addition of milk and egg sales increase the R2 to almost 99% and the within R2 = 0.7742.

                                                        log(Servings)
                              log(milk)      0.886***                   0.535***
                                             (0.0666)                   (0.0572)
                              log(eggs)                   0.809***      0.407***
                                                          (0.0587)      (0.0648)

                              Observations    21,836       21,833        21,833
                              R-squared        0.983        0.982        0.987
                              Chain FE          Yes          Yes          Yes
                                   Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                     *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                   Table C-3: Predicted Market Size Using Milk and Eggs Sales


   We then define our market size as follows, where  is a constant chosen to match the (average)
outside good share of s0 = 1 - 0.276 = 0.723:

                          ^ c,t =  · 
                          M          ^1 log q milk + ^2 log q eggs + ^c .
                                             c,t             c,t


In this process we find a very small number of outliers and drop 249 out of 21,833 observations (1.1%
of the sample by observations, 0.8% by revenue) by trimming the largest and smallest values by the
                                                                                              j  sjct
outside good share. We report the resulting distribution of the inside good share 1 - s0ct = M  ct
in Figure C-5, which we have standardized around the 27.6% purchase probability. This is a bit
different from the usual approach. Most papers, including Nevo (2001), construct market size using
population demographics for the surrounding area (the population of the DMA, the population of
the zipcode, etc.). That approach generally does not capture the fact that some stores face more
competition than other stores (ie: we often don't know if there is a major competitor nearby or
not). One disadvantage of our approach is that it can become potentially contaminated if sales
of milk or eggs respond to the price for cereal or if consumers go to the supermarket just to buy
cereal. Even if cereal and milk are complements (or Leontief in breakfast production) as long as
the price of cereal doesn't causally impact the sales of milk and eggs we should be fine.


                                              Appendix-14
            4



            3
Frequency




            2



            1



            0       0.1      0.2        0.3        0.4  0.5      0.6
                                  Inside Good Share
                Figure C-5: Distribution of Inside Good Shares




                                   Appendix-15
C.6. Demographics and Micro Moments
We construct the distribution of demographics for each DMA-chain-year as follows. We are inter-
ested in estimating the joint distribution of:

 f (incit , kidsit |i  DMA-Chainit ) = f (incit |kidsit , i  DMA-Chainit ) · P(kidsit |i  DMA-Chainit ).

First we estimate P(kidsit |i  DMA-Chainit ) from a weighted sample of households in the Nielsen
Panelist (HMS) data. We weight each panelist by their annual number of trips to each DMA-chain,
with the idea being that more frequent shoppers at a store receive more weight.66 We then split the
sample into households with children at home (roughly 15-25%) and those without and separately
estimate a parametric lognormal distribution by method of moments. The moments we estimate
are of the form:

                                            P(as  incomeht  as+1 ).

    The first form of micro-moment are covariances between the observed demographics and the
observed characteristics conditional on the purchase of some product. We then take the average of
this market-level covariance across markets:
                                            T   It
                                      1
                                                      wi (dit - dt )(xit - xt ) - b.
                                   It · T
                                            t=1 i=1

We construct our estimate of the true covariance b using the Nielsen Panelist data. That is we
compute the covariance between the panelists income and the price per serving (or principal compo-
nent) for the product they purchase. We construct this covariance moment conditional on purchase
(for the set of households purchasing cereal). We construct similar micro moments for the covari-
ance between the indicator for presence of children in the household and the product characteristics
(including price per serving).
    We use the panelist data to construct two additional moments, conditional on not purchasing
cereal, we compute the expected value of income and the expected probability of children in the
home.

C.7. Product Recalls
We use a number of product recalls as demand shifting instruments vjt in the notation of the model.
We report a list of recalls in Table C-4. We only use the three Kellogg's recalls in our data. For
the Malt-O-Meal Puffed Wheat and Puffed Rice Recall and the Post Great Grains Protein Blend
recall we don't observe any sales after the recall period so it is as if those products are removed
from the choice set. Variation in the choice set enters through x-j,t rather than vjt .

C.8. Demand Estimation
Below is the problem definition in pyBLP.




 66
      We impose a one visit per week maximum in the weighting.


                                                      Appendix-16
               Date                          Affected Brands                          Reason
               6/25/10                    Frosted Mini-Wheats                      Metal Shards
               10/10/12   Honey Smacks, Froot Loops, Corn Pops, and Apple Jacks      GI Issues
               2/20/13                    Special K Red Berries                   Glass Fragments
               04/04/08              M-O-M Puffed Wheat and Rice*                   Salmonella
               06/10/16                Post Great Grains Protein*                    Listeria

                                   Table C-4: List of Product Recalls
  * denotes products which were permanently withdrawn from the market after recall.




                                 Figure C-6: Demand Estimation Code
>>> problem = pyblp.Problem(
...     product_formulations=(
            # Linear demand
...         pyblp.Formulation('0 + prices+ unemp_branded +v_0+v_1+v_2',
...         absorb='C(product_ids)+C(market_ids)'),
...         pyblp.Formulation('1+ prices + pca_0 + pca_1+pca_2')    # Nonlinear demand
...     ),
...     agent_formulation=pyblp.Formulation('0+kids+inc'),           # Demographics
...     product_data=df,
...     agent_data=agent_df
... )
>>> print(problem)

Dimensions:
======================================================
 T      N      F     I      K1    K2    D    MD    ED
---- ------ --- ------ ---- ---- --- ---- ----
1970 361105    7   563420   5     5     2    18    2
======================================================

Formulations:
=============================================================================
       Column Indices:             0             1          2      3      4
----------------------------- ---------- ------------- ----- ----- -----
 X1: Linear Characteristics      prices    unemp_branded   v_0    v_1    v_2
X2: Nonlinear Characteristics      1          prices      pca_0 pca_1 pca_2
       d: Demographics         demog_kids    demog_inc
=============================================================================
                             This is the definition of our demand model in pyBLP.




                                                Appendix-17
                                     Table D-5: Full Pairwise Comparisons

                                                 Others' Costs
                                         Profit Max   Common                      Perfect          Monopolist
                                                      Ownership
          Profit Max                            -              -4.8318            -7.7749             -5.2711
          Common Ownership                                         -              -8.0656              -5.237
          Perfect Competition                                                         -               -4.0458
          Monopolist                                                                                      -
                                                     Demographics
          Profit Max                            -              -5.5819            -8.7051             -6.7789
          Common Ownership                                         -               -9.223             -6.6265
          Perfect Competition                                                         -               -4.6365
          Monopolist                                                                                      -
                                                       BLP Inst.
          Profit Max                            -              -5.4286            -8.9758             -5.9158
          Common Ownership                                         -              -9.1621             -5.8744
          Perfect Competition                                                         -               -4.6767
          Monopolist                                                                                      -
                                                    Dmd. Opt. Inst.
          Profit Max                            -              -5.9627            -10.0654            -6.5933
          Common Ownership                                         -              -10.4858            -6.5205
          Perfect Competition                                                         -               -5.1268
          Monopolist                                                                                      -

Notes: This table reports testing results for pairwise comparisons of different conduct models, as indicated by the row and
column. The panel labels indicate the set of exclusions used in the Step (b) regression. A negative value constitutes evidence
for row model and a positive value constitutes evidence for the column model. The null hypothesis is that they satisfy the
criterion function equally well, and the critical values for rejection at  = 0.5 are ­1.96 and 1.96.



D. Testing Appendix
D.1. Additional Pairwise Tests
Here we consider additional pairwise hypothesis tests using our framework. We begin by including
perfect competition and a hypothetical monopolist as two extremal cases, and consider all pairwise
combinations of conduct tests including these, profit maximization, and common ownership.
   Results for our four sets of exclusions are presented in Table D-5. To read this table, negative
numbers favor the row-wise conduct model, while positive numbers favor the column-wise conduct
model. The diagonal is undefined, and the lower triangle is symmetric to the upper triangle (by
construction; the test is symmetric). We see that profit maximization is preferred to not only
common ownership, but perfect competition and monopoly pricing as well.
   We can break these same results out by firm, as we do in Table D-6. We see that the evidence
against common ownership is somewhat weaker for Kellogg's, but this is unsurprising because, as


                                                      Appendix-18
we saw in Figure 1, they have the smallest common ownership weights (CO ), and so it is relatively
more difficult to distinguish own-profit maximization from common ownership.

D.2. Pakes-Wollmann Regressions
A separate innovation in the conduct testing literature is what we refer to as the "Pakes-Wollmann
regression," introduced in Pakes (2017).67 The author is interested in whether or not own-profit
maximization is an appropriate model of firm behavior given an estimated demand system. The
idea is to run the following regression:
                                                                    m
                                         pjt = hs (xjt , wjt ) +  · jt + jt ,                                         (6)

and, since markups (jt m ) are endogenous, to use BLP instruments to estimate . This last point is

the novel insight that we borrow for our testing procedure. Pakes (2017) predicts that, if own-profit
maximization is what firms engage in, we should obtain      ^ = 1 for markups c, and indeed he does
using data and the demand system from Wollmann (2018). However, this approach is less suited to
comparisons between alternative models. In general, distance of     ^ from 1 does not correspond to
an economically interpretable measure of the similarity of firm behavior to the candidate model.68
    Here we use our four sets of exclusion restrictions to estimate the Pakes-Wollmann regressions.
Recall that for this test, we say that the model is confirmed if ^ = 1.
    Results are presented in Table D-7. The four sets of exclusion differ substantively in their
implications. Others' costs are inconclusive; demographic exclusions and BLP instruments are
most consistent with common ownership, and finally the demand optimal instruments cast a vote
for profit maximization.

D.3. Step (a) and Step (b) Regressions
Here we document the intermediate marginal cost and markup difference regressions that make
up Step (a) and Step (b) of our proposed test. While our main results use a random forest
to estimate the supply regression, for expositional purposes we report results here for a simple
linear regression. Estimates are presented, for each conduct hypothesis, in Table D-8. Results are
remarkably consistent across different conduct models, although we observe substantial variation
in the R2 and within-R2 , which are lowest for the monopolist conduct model. Reassuringly, almost
all of the input cost variables enter positively (rice enters negatively, but insignificantly). The sales
variable enters negatively, as we would expect, and the recall dummies enter positively.
    We report mean-squared error for the fit of the Step (b) regressions in Figure D-7. Here we
compare the random forest approach, our preferred specification, to a linear fit with a third-order
orthogonal polynomial expansion of own and others' input costs. The random forest performs
  67
     This test is closely related to the "informal" test of Villas-Boas (2007).
  68
     If firms behave heterogeneously, then the estimate    ^ will represent a weighted average effect, with weights that
depend on the variation induced by the instruments. In this way it is possible to construct examples that will yield
^ close to 1 for a candidate model that may be far from any particular firm's behavior. Even when firm behavior

is homogenous, however, it is possible to construct examples in which       ^ = 1 for a false model, and  ^ is arbitrarily
far from 1 for a true model. For a particularly perverse example, consider the constant fractional markup case. If
we compute markups, at fraction x of marginal costs, to be p · x/(1 + x) and the instruments for p are relevant,
then we will mechanically obtain      ^ = (1 + x)/x. For example, if x = 0.5, the correct estimate is  = 3. Sending
the hypothesized x  , we can get arbitrarily close to 1. However, if the model of constant fractional markups is
correct, then BLP instruments should be weak in the first stage. Therefore, we require that the constant fractional
markups model is incorrect to obtain the result that the     ^  1 as the hypothesis x  .


                                                     Appendix-19
                                       Table D-6: Pairwise Comparisons by Firm

                                            General Mills                                           Kellogg's
    Others' Costs         Profit Max   Common         Perfect   Monopolist   Profit Max   Common             Perfect   Monopolist
                                       Ownership                                          Ownership
    Profit Max                -         -2.2732        -1.611    -2.5548         -          -1.45            -1.9016    -2.6387
    Common Ownership                        -         -0.8248    -2.6282                      -              -1.8277    -2.7001
    Perfect Competition                                   -      -1.2465                                         -      -0.9356
    Monopolist                                                       -                                                      -
    Demographics
    Profit Max                -         -2.1394       -1.7664    -2.4701         -         -1.3899           -2.1431    -2.5216
    Common Ownership                        -         -0.9534    -2.5632                       -             -2.0555    -2.5802
    Perfect Competition                                   -      -1.1029                                         -      -0.7526
    Monopolist                                                       -                                                      -
    BLP Inst.
    Profit Max                -         -2.4684       -1.8368    -2.9054         -         -1.641            -2.3678    -3.0363
    Common Ownership                        -         -0.8616    -2.9978                      -              -2.2599    -3.0911
    Perfect Competition                                   -      -1.4759                                         -      -1.1429
    Monopolist                                                       -                                                      -
    Dmd. Opt. Inst.
    Profit Max                -         -2.6369       -2.1915    -3.0621         -         -1.8304           -2.6658    -3.2037
    Common Ownership                        -         -1.1207    -3.1487                       -              -2.54     -3.2578
    Perfect Competition                                   -      -1.5415                                         -      -1.2211
    Monopolist                                                       -                                                      -
                                            Quaker Oats                                               Post
    Others' Costs
    Profit Max                -          -1.749       -2.2883    -2.1783         -         -2.1508           -1.9202    -2.4236
    Common Ownership                        -         -1.3747    -2.3534                       -             -1.6392    -2.3983
    Perfect                                               -       -0.721                                         -      -0.8617
    Monopolist                                                       -                                                      -
    Demographics
    Profit Max                -         -1.6486       -2.6564    -2.1565         -         -2.0544           -2.1703    -2.3658
    Common Ownership                        -         -1.4841    -2.4233                       -             -1.8503    -2.3596
    Perfect                                               -      -0.6289                                         -      -0.7302
    Monopolist                                                       -                                                      -
    BLP Inst.
    Profit Max                -         -1.9596       -2.6735    -2.5427         -         -2.2828           -2.1713    -2.7349
    Common Ownership                        -         -1.3429    -2.8117                       -             -1.7999    -2.7258
    Perfect                                               -      -1.0085                                         -      -1.0921
    Monopolist                                                       -                                                      -
    Dmd. Opt. Inst.
    Profit Max                -         -2.1256        -3.041    -2.7207         -         -2.4638           -2.5659    -2.8826
    Common Ownership                        -         -1.5703    -2.9736                       -             -2.1574    -2.8657
    Perfect                                               -      -1.0371                                         -      -1.0983
    Monopolist                                                       -                                                      -


Notes: This table reports testing results for pairwise comparisons of different conduct models, as indicated by the row and
column. The panel labels indicate the set of exclusions used in the Step (b) regression. A negative value constitutes evidence
for row model and a positive value constitutes evidence for the column model. The null hypothesis is that they satisfy the
criterion function equally well, and the critical values for rejection at  = 0.5 are ­1.96 and 1.96.




                                                            Appendix-20
                                Table D-7: Pakes-Wollmann Regression Results

                                            Others' Costs    Demographics     BLP Inst.    Dmd. Opt. Inst.
                 Profit Max                    -0.4233           1.5141         1.3701          1.0028
                 SE                            0.1435            0.4794         0.1766          0.0456
                 First Stage Fstat              8.7038           9.9748         60.187         482.7362
                 R-squared                     0.2594            0.6647         0.6651           0.644

                 Common Ownership              -0.3104           1.013         0.9633           0.6704
                 SE                            0.0855            0.3864         0.1856          0.0397
                 First Stage Fstat             13.1769           6.8737        26.9474         285.2434
                 R-squared                     0.3094            0.5968         0.5955          0.5726

                 Monopolist                    -0.1223           0.201           0.191           0.1242
                 SE                            0.0268             0.168         0.1295           0.0172
                 First Stage Fstat             20.9002           1.4312         2.1762          52.1729
                 R-squared                       0.39            0.4462         0.4461           0.4425



Notes: This table reports results for the Pakes-Wollmann regression setup using different exclusion restrictions (indicated by
the column), for different conduct models (indicated by the row). We report the coefficient on the markup, the standard error
below that, and then the first-stage F-statistic and the R2 .



substantively better for all but the BLP instruments, and we believe this has to do with the fact
that there are 143 of them.

E. Problems with the MHHI Regression Approach
E.1. Discussion of MHHI-based Approaches to Testing
As summarized above, the literature on common ownership so far has largely relied on MHHI
measures of market concentration; these papers regress market-level prices on HHI and MHHID,
where the coefficient on the latter, if positive and statistically significant, is taken as evidence for
common ownership effects on pricing.
     The problem is that symmetric Cournot is a restrictive framework.69 If the world is actu-
ally characterized by product differentiation, as workhorse empirical models in IO typically as-
sume, MHHI-based measures fare particularly poorly. This is because they are functions of market
shares, or quantity. So, any misspecification in demand means that the misspecification bias will be
correlated with quantities, and quantities are, as we know, endogenous to prices. In short, misspec-
ification pursuant to the assumption of symmetric Cournot pricing will introduce a non-classical
measurement error problem.
     This problem is generic to HHI and MHHI measures, and has led to the wholesale abandonment
of their use in modern empirical IO. In the next section we discuss these problems in detail,
and offer a numerical example to show how the misspecification bias could yield both positive
and negative correlations between MHHID and price, even when MHHID is "instrumented" with
upstream financial shocks in an attempt to isolate good variation in common ownership incentives.
We also replicate this approach for our own setting, RTE cereal, and estimate a negative coefficient
-- a stark and theoretically uninterpretable result which we contend is most easily reconciled not
  69
     Symmetry is a necessary condition for interpretation. O'Brien (2017) shows that the mapping from MHHI to
prices is no longer one-to-one when that assumption alone is relaxed; therefore under asymmetric Cournot, a regression
of prices on MHHI is not a "reduced form" of anything.



                                                      Appendix-21
                                      Table D-8: Linear Supply Regressions


                            Profit Max           Common Ownership                  Perfect                 Monopolist
                               (1)                     (2)                           (3)                      (4)
 Pct. Sales                   -0.0594                   -0.0594                   -0.0740                    -0.0657
                              (0.0009)                  (0.0009)                  (0.0012)                   (0.0010)
 Corn                         0.0048                     0.0050                    0.0050                     0.0051
                              (0.0011)                  (0.0011)                  (0.0013)                   (0.0013)
 Oat                          0.0040                     0.0058                    0.0049                     0.0040
                              (0.0017)                  (0.0019)                  (0.0021)                   (0.0019)
 Rice                          -0.0009                   -0.0016                   -0.0019                   -0.00005
                              (0.0023)                  (0.0024)                  (0.0029)                   (0.0028)
 Sugar                        0.0129                     0.0127                    0.0163                     0.0140
                              (0.0023)                  (0.0024)                  (0.0032)                   (0.0026)
 Wheat                         0.0011                    0.0015                     0.0026                    0.0015
                              (0.0015)                  (0.0015)                  (0.0018)                   (0.0017)
 Recall 1                     0.0101                     0.0117                    0.0123                     0.0081
                              (0.0033)                  (0.0039)                  (0.0045)                   (0.0037)
 Recall 2                     0.0059                     0.0043                   0.0065                      0.0049
                              (0.0021)                  (0.0021)                  (0.0030)                   (0.0023)
 Recall 3                     0.0041                     0.0033                    0.0068                     0.0029
                              (0.0020)                  (0.0019)                  (0.0025)                   (0.0023)
 Product
 Quarter
 Retailer × DMA
 Observations                1,404,106                  1,404,106                 1,404,106                 1,404,106
 R2                           0.80179                    0.80299                   0.82532                   0.74929
 Within R2                    0.34721                    0.32784                   0.34384                   0.23974

Notes: This table reports regressions of marginal costs, given by the column-wise conduct model, on included variables (xjt
and wjt ). Standard errors are clustered at the retailer by DMA by year level and observations are weighted by servings volume.
* denotes statistical significance at  = 0.05.




                                                       Appendix-22
                                   Figure D-7: Step (b) Mean-Squared Error

                          (a) Profit Max. vs. CO                      (b) Profit Max. vs. Monopoly




                    (c) Profit Max. vs. Perfect Comp.                   (d) CO vs. Perfect Comp.




                           (e) CO vs. Monopoly                      (f) Perfect Comp. vs. Monopoly




Notes: This figure depicts mean-squared error for the Step (b) regressions. The panel name indicates the candidate model pair.



as a causal relationship, but an expression of the misspecification of the regression.
    There are several other reasons we eschew MHHI concentration measures. Many of these are
related to measurement and market definition, and we discuss these in Backus et al. (2021) and
Backus et al. (2019). More importantly for testing, however, MHHI reduces the entire market-level
cooperation matrix to a single index. In doing so, it throws away what we view as the most useful
source of variation: the within-market asymmetries in CO . For this reason we adopt a structural
approach based on the Bertrand first-order conditions and a series of exclusion restrictions.



                                                      Appendix-23
                                 Table E-9: Example Ownership Structure

                                                           Firm 1   Firm 2
                                            Investor 1      20%        -
                                            Investor 2        -      20%
                                            Investor 3      20%      20%
                                           Retail Share     60%      60%


               Notes: This table presents investor holdings in two firms for the example of Section E.2.




E.2. Analytic Example
We begin with two single-product firms playing a static (Betrand) pricing game. Suppose that the
ownership structure of the two firms is as follows, based on Example 1 from Backus et al. (2021):
60 percent of each firm is held by small, undiversified retail investors. 20 percent of each is held,
respectively, by two large, undiversified investors. The final 20 percent of each is held by a single,
diversified investor. This ownership pattern is summarized in Table E-9. From these numbers we
would compute CO           CO
                   12 = 21 = 0.5, and MHHID = 2 · 0.5 · s1 (a1 ) s2 (a1 ).
     Despite the ownership structure assumed above, we will maintain the null hypothesis that firms
are profit maximizers, and ignore rival profits. Our question is, under this null hypothesis, can we
still find (spurious) evidence for common ownership using the MHHI approach?
     Demand for both products is linear and given by:

                                     q1 = a1 - 1 · p1 + 1 · p2 , and
                                     q2 = a2 - 2 · p2 + 2 · p1 .

To further simplify we assume symmetric marginal costs of zero so that mc1 = mc2 = 0. Then,
under the assumption of own-firm profit maximization, best replies are given by:
                                                          a1 + 1 · p2
                                        p1 (p2 ) =                    , and
                                                              21
                                                          a2 + 2 · p1
                                        p2 (p1 ) =                    .
                                                              22
Which solves to:
                                                   2ai j + i aj
                                            pi =                ,
                                                   4i j - i j

The panel regression: Suppose that across markets there is variation in a1 . We set (a2 , 1 , 2 , 1 , 2 ) =
(100, 1, 1, 0.5, 0.5) and parametrize each "market" by a different demand intercept a1 which we vary
over [80, 100] and so that:
                                              1
                            q1 = a 1 - p 1 +     · p2 for a1  [80, 100], and
                                              2
                                                1
                            q2    = 100 - p2 + · p1 .
                                                2



                                                   Appendix-24
                Figure E-8: Analytic/Numerical Example: Varying Demand Intercept



We can calculate p           
                   1 (a1 ), p2 (a1 ) as well as HHI (a1 ). These are depicted in Figure E-8, where we
plot both prices and M HHI as a function of the demand intercept a1 holding all other quantities
fixed.
    For a1 < 100 we find that there is a positive correlation between prices (p1 in blue and p2 in
red) and M HHI , while for a1 > 100 we find that there is a negative correlation between prices
and M HHI . Therefore if the researcher observes sample 1, they will conclude that common
ownership raises prices, and if they observe sample 2, they will find that common ownership lowers
prices. Both results are spurious.70

The Barclays acquisition instrument: One response to this concern has been to use the
BlackRock-Barclays merger in 2010, and show that results are robust. To this end Azar et al.
(2018a) instrument using the within-market variation alone, i.e. the change in MHHID due to
the merger. This may help address the endogeneity of CO , but does this differencing exercise
also "clean out" the endogenous variation driven by demand shocks? We continue with the same
parameterization of demand and variation in a1 .
     An obvious objection would be that variation in a1 may be correlated with exposure to the
BlackRock-Barclays merger. The following argument does not rely on such a claim.
     Continuing with our example, suppose that in the ownership structure of Table E-9, the holdings
of Investor 3 are the result of a merger of two symmetric investors, call them "Blackpebble" and
"Pubclays." Therefore prior to the merger both investors held a 10% stake in both Firm 1 and
Firm 2. This means that prior to the merger, we would compute CO                  CO
                                                                         12 = 21 = 1/3. And
so the differenced MHHID (pre-merger minus post-merger) would be equal to: M HHID =
2 · (1/3 - 1/2) · s1 (a1 ) s2 (a1 ).
     We plot this difference in Figure E-9. What is immediately apparent is that the differencing
exercise has not removed the endogenity of market shares. If the researcher observes sample 1, then
in markets where there was a small increase in a1 , there would be a rise in prices and a decrease
in MHHID. Therefore they would conclude that MHHID and prices are negatively correlated.
Alternatively, if the researcher observes sample 2, then in markets where there was an increase in
  70
    The astute observer will note that the expression for MHHID here is log-linear, and so running the regression in
logs would solve the problem. This is not generically true for n > 2 firms.


                                                  Appendix-25
              Figure E-9: Analytic/Numerical Example: Varying Demand Intercept



a1 , there would be a rise in prices and a rise in MHHID, and they would conclude the opposite.
The key insight is that the merger may have affected CO , but since the MHHID measure interacts
with market shares, the endogeneity problem remains. As a result, both results would again be
spurious.

E.3. Concentration and Modified Concentration Measures in RTE Cereal
Below we plot the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) and common-ownership modified HHI Bres-
nahan and Salop (1986) for each of our six DMAs over time. When constructing the concentration
measures, we compute marketshares for each of the four major manufacturers (General Mills, Kel-
logg's, Quaker (PepsiCo), and Post) making sure to incorporate any brands they acquire during
the sample. For example in September 2014, General Mills acquires Annie's Homegrown and inde-
pendent organic focused brand. The largest remaining manufacturers include Malt-O-Meal which
produces both its own products and also produces approximately 50% of the store-brand and pri-
vate label products in the United States. We treat the Malt-O-Meal branded products as a distinct
firm. We also treat private label products as a single monolithic firm. This makes sense because
our unit of observation is a DMA-chain, so we assume that prices are being set by the retail chain.

E.4. MHHI Regressions in RTE Cereal
We now perform the same set of price-concentration regressions as the previous literature: Azar
et al. (2018a), Azar et al. (2016), Kennedy et al. (2017), Gramlich and Grundl (2017). We run the
following regression:

        log pjmt = mj + 1 HHImt + 2 M HHImt + 3 sjmt + c1 t + c2 t2 + . . . +      jt .

    We report our regression results in Tables E-10 - E-13. We perform these regressions at two
levels of aggregation. The first is at the manufacturer-chain-DMA-quarter level, and the second is
at the manufacturer-DMA-quarter level. While we might want to use higher frequency time series
data, because we only observe 13-F filings once per quarter such variation would be dubious to
use to identify common ownership effects. We use both prices and log prices as our left hand side
variable. When we construct prices we use the PV (t) version of the price index (just total revenue


                                           Appendix-26
                                Boston             Richmond          Denver
                                Charlotte          Chicago           Phoenix
        2800

        2600

        2400
HHI




        2200

        2000

        1800
          2007   2008   2009   2010         2011   2012       2013   2014      2015   2016
        3000
                                Boston             Richmond          Denver
        2750                    Charlotte          Chicago           Phoenix

        2500

        2250
MHHID




        2000

        1750

        1500

        1250
          2007   2008   2009   2010         2011   2012       2013   2014      2015   2016
                    Figure E-10: HHI and M HHI  over time by City/DMA




                                            Appendix-27
divided by total servings). We include fixed effects at the dma-level, chain-dma-level, manufacturer
level, and a quadratic time trend. In some specifications we also include a cubic polynomial in HHI,
in case M HHI is picking up nonlinearities in the price-concentration relationship. In all of our
specifications there is a negative and significant relationship between the M HHI and price. This
suggests that additional overlapping ownership is correlated with lower prices rather than higher
prices. We don't interpret this as causal mechanism. That is, it is inappropriate to conclude that
common ownership leads to lower prices. Instead we offer our numerical example from Section E.2
as an explanation: cross sectional variation in demand provides variation in market shares. When
we interact these market shares with CO  f g we can produce spurious positive or negative correlations
between M HHI and price.

                                Table E-10: DMA Level MHHI Regressions p

                                              (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)
                                             Price         Price       Price        Price        Price
                                             b/se          b/se        b/se         b/se          b/se
                 hhi servings             0.0123***     0.0221***   -0.0062***     0.0021       0.0028*
                                           (0.0029)      (0.0031)    (0.0019)     (0.0015)     (0.0016)
                 mhhid servings          -0.0261***    -0.0254***   -0.0351***   -0.0232***   -0.0243***
                                           (0.0034)      (0.0034)    (0.0020)     (0.0016)     (0.0016)
                 DMA FEs                      No            Yes         No           Yes          Yes
                 Manufacturer FEs             No            No          Yes          Yes          Yes
                 Quadratic Time Trend         Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
                 Cubic HHI                    No            No          No           No           Yes
                 R2                         0.110          0.204       0.831        0.903        0.904
                 N                           1294          1294        1294         1294         1294
                 * p¡0.10, ** p¡0.05, *** p¡0.01




                            Table E-11: DMA Level MHHI Regressions log p

                                              (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)
                                         Log(Price)    Log(Price)   Log(Price)   Log(Price)   Log(Price)
                                             b/se         b/se         b/se          b/se         b/se
                 hhi servings             0.0396***    0.0730***     -0.0141*      0.0121*      0.0028*
                                           (0.0115)     (0.0123)     (0.0074)     (0.0062)     (0.0016)
                 mhhid servings          -0.1092***    -0.1059***   -0.1388***   -0.0959***   -0.0243***
                                           (0.0134)     (0.0136)     (0.0075)     (0.0064)     (0.0016)
                 DMA FEs                      No           Yes          No           Yes          Yes
                 Manufacturer FEs             No           No           Yes          Yes          Yes
                 Quadratic Time Trend        Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
                 Cubic HHI                    No           No           No            No          Yes
                 R2                         0.124         0.193        0.846        0.899        0.904
                 N                           1294         1294         1294          1294        1294
                 * p¡0.10, ** p¡0.05, *** p¡0.01



    As a final exercise we run a "true reduced form" regression as suggested by O'Brien (2017). Here
an observation is a manufacturer-chain-dma-quarter. The variable of interest is . Theoretically
it should be the entire matrix K which we summarize by using the arithmetic or geometric mean
of the off-diagonal CO entries. We report the results of the regression of average prices on these
functions of K in Table E-14. Once again we observe a negative (and significant) relationship
between the common ownership profit weights  and the prices pjmt . For some specifications the
results are barely (in)significant.


                                                      Appendix-28
                 Table E-12: DMA-Chain Level MHHI Regressions p

                             (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)
                            Price       Price        Price        Price         Price        Price
                            b/se        b/se         b/se         b/se          b/se         b/se
hhi servings             0.0130***   0.0234***    -0.0067***     0.0021      0.0110***    0.0105***
                          (0.0017)    (0.0018)     (0.0016)     (0.0015)      (0.0013)     (0.0014)
mhhid servings          -0.0269***   -0.0265***   -0.0358***   -0.0240***    -0.0181***   -0.0192***
                          (0.0019)    (0.0019)     (0.0016)     (0.0015)      (0.0013)     (0.0014)
share servings                                                               -0.0026***   -0.0026***
                                                                              (0.0001)     (0.0001)
DMA FEs                     No          Yes          No            Yes           Yes          Yes
Retailer FEs                No          No           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes
Quadratic Time Trend        Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes
Parent FEs                  Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes
Cubic HHI                   No          No           No            No            No           Yes
r2 a                       0.229       0.295        0.720         0.767         0.820        0.820
N                          5173        5173         5173          5173          5173         5173
* p¡0.10, ** p¡0.05, *** p¡0.01




               Table E-13: DMA-Chain Level MHHI Regressions log p

                             (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)            (5)          (6)
                        Log(Price)   Log(Price)   Log(Price)   Log(Price)    Log(Price)   Log(Price)
                            b/se         b/se         b/se        b/se           b/se         b/se
hhi servings             0.0495***    0.0857***     -0.0105    0.0181***      0.0578***    0.0559***
                          (0.0068)     (0.0074)    (0.0066)     (0.0064)       (0.0057)     (0.0060)
mhhid servings          -0.1216***   -0.1204***   -0.1523***   -0.1097***    -0.0833***   -0.0892***
                          (0.0079)     (0.0081)    (0.0065)     (0.0064)       (0.0056)     (0.0059)
share servings                                                               -0.0116***   -0.0117***
                                                                               (0.0003)     (0.0003)
DMA FEs                     No          Yes          No            Yes           Yes           Yes
Retailer FEs                No          No           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Quadratic Time Trend        Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Parent FEs                  Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Cubic HHI                   No          No           No            No             No           Yes
r2 a                       0.267       0.312        0.722         0.754         0.814         0.814
N                          5173        5173         5173          5173           5173         5173
* p¡0.10, ** p¡0.05, *** p¡0.01




                           Table E-14: log p on  regression

                                                   Mean        Geometric Mean
                                                     (1)             (2)
                   Market Share                   -0.0026         -0.0026
                                                  (0.0001)        (0.0001)

                                                  -0.0771
                                                  (0.0115)

                                                                  -0.0951
                                                                  (0.0120)
                   Retailer, Parent, DMA FE
                   Quadratic Time Trend
                   N                               5173             5173




                                        Appendix-29
