                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             POPULISM, PROTECTIONISM, AND POLITICAL INSTABILITY

                                        Tyler Daun
                                      Sebastian Galiani
                                      Gustavo Torrens

                                     Working Paper 28359
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28359


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2021




This paper is solely meant to represent the opinions and professional research of individual
authors, and is not meant to represent in any way the views of the U.S. International Trade
Commission or any of its individual Commissioners. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Tyler Daun, Sebastian Galiani, and Gustavo Torrens. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Populism, Protectionism, and Political Instability
Tyler Daun, Sebastian Galiani, and Gustavo Torrens
NBER Working Paper No. 28359
January 2021
JEL No. F13

                                          ABSTRACT

Most populist regimes in Latin American countries used trade policy to redistribute income,
despite being less efficient than other redistribution schemes such as transfers financed with an
income tax. Often, this outcome is attributed to the lack of fiscal capacity in Latin American
countries. Instead, we develop a simple political economy game where the populist government
may use trade policy to encourage capitalists to invest in the more labor-intensive industry. Since
moving capital is costly, those capitalists will support the continuation of the protectionist trade
policy even after the populist government falls from power. The populist government may
therefore choose to implement the less efficient but politically-sustainable policy instead of the
more efficient policy that will be easily overturned after a regime change. Building fiscal capacity
does not change the equilibrium. Only a long run commitment to a minimum level of
redistribution restores efficiency.

Tyler Daun                                       Gustavo Torrens
U.S. International Trade Commission              Department of Economics
500 E Street,SW                                  Indiana University
Washington DC, DC 20436                          Wylie Hall, 100 S Woodland Ave
tyler.daun@usitc.gov                             Bloomington, IN 47405-7104
                                                 gtorrens@indiana.edu
Sebastian Galiani
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
galiani@econ.umd.edu
1         Introduction
         Why did so many Latin American countries resort to protectionism during the second
half of the 20th century? The standard explanation is that they employed trade policy to
redistribute income from the owners of natural resources (usually, traditional elites) to
workers in manufacturing urban centers. A potential problem with this explanation is that
other methods of redistribution, such us income-tax-funded transfers, are much less
distortive than trade policy. However, income-tax-funded transfers were rarely considered.
One possibility is that Latin-American countries lacked the required fiscal capacity to collect,
enforce, and manage a less distortionary redistribution scheme. Imposing and collecting
tariffs at ports was simply the only available policy to ameliorate inequality. We propose and
formally model an alternative explanation based on two key elements: unstable political
regimes and costly capital mobility across industrial sectors.

         The mechanism behind our explanation is as follows. Pro-labor Latin-American
governments did not only care about the level of redistribution and its costs for the economy
in the present, but also about the persistence of redistribution in the future. 2 Would
redistribution survive if traditional elites regain control over the government? Given the
political history of many Latin-American countries this was a real and serious concern.
Moreover, dismantling a redistributive system based on income-tax-funded transfers was
perceived as a relatively easy task. All the elites had to do was to cut transfers or de-fund the
system with a tax reform. This was not the case with trade policy. Once capital has been
invested and sunk in the import-competing sectors, it was much more complicated to reduce
tariffs without incurring large loses (at least in the short run). Thus, pro-labor Latin-
American governments faced a choice between distortive but persistent redistribution
(trade policy) and efficient but easy to reverse redistribution (i.e., income-tax-funded
transfers). We argue that they opted for trade policy, fearing that elites would soon return to
power and trusting that sunk investments would make trade opening extremely costly.

         We develop a simple model that formally captures this trade-off. In the model, there
are two players (workers and investors) and two industries (a labor-intensive, import-
competing sector and a land-intensive export sector). At the beginning of the game, a pro-
labor coalition is in control of the government and must choose a redistribution policy.
Specifically, suppose that the pro-labor coalition can select income-tax-funded transfers or
import tariffs. In period 2, with some positive probability, investors regain control over the
government and, if they choose to do so, they can dismantle any redistributive policy. Ex-
ante, i.e., before investors allocate their capital to the two sectors in the economy, both
workers and investors prefer income-tax-funded transfers rather than import tariffs. That
is, a priori, nobody is interested in using tariffs as a redistributive policy. However, if tariffs
induce enough capital to allocate in the labor-intensive sector, investors may prefer to keep
tariffs in place rather than opening the economy. The reason is that moving capital is costly
and, hence, capital owners who have moved to the labor-intensive industry are better off
supporting protectionist policies. For the pro-labor coalition this is crucial because a
redistribution scheme based on tariffs will persist even if in the future investors regain

2
    See, for example, Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. Robinson (2005).

                                                                                                 2
control over the government. Thus, tariffs could be the more politically stable option for the
pro-labor coalition.

        Fiscal capacity plays only a marginal role in our explanation. We can imagine that
improving fiscal capacity makes the income-tax-funded transfers more attractive for
workers. But, even if fiscal capacity is not a binding constraint, the combination of costly
capital mobility across industrial sectors and the chance that investors regain control over
the government and completely dismantle redistribution policies, makes trade policy a more
politically-sustainable option than income-tax-funded transfers. Moreover, in some sense,
fiscal capacity is the opposite of what workers need to be persuaded of not using trade policy
as a redistributive mechanism. The reason is that improvements in fiscal capacity will only
make workers better off when the pro-labor coalition controls the government; while the
key problem of the pro-labor coalition is to maintain redistribution when they do not control
the government. This motivates an important extension of our model. An implicit
assumption in our baseline model is that workers and investors cannot credibly commit to
implement some policies in the future. In an extension of the model, we show that if workers
and investors can commit to a minimum level of redistribution, then workers prefer income-
tax-funded transfers to tariffs.

        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews related
literature. Section 3 develops the baseline model and characterizes the equilibrium. Section
4 extends the model to the case in which workers and investors can commit to a minimum
level of redistribution. Section 5 applies the model to the case of Argentina in the twentieth
century. Section 6 concludes.

2      Related Literature
       There are three bodies of literature connected with this paper. First, several papers
have explored the political economy of protectionism in the context of developing countries
and the connections between economic structure, political institutions and trade policy.
Some of these papers have been applied to the history of protectionism in Latin American
countries during the 20th century. Second, there is a literature on inefficient redistribution
and populism. Finally, there is an extensive literature on costly factor mobility and capital
reallocation.

2.1    Economic Structure, Political Institutions and Protectionism
        Several papers have explored the relation between factor endowments, political
institutions and trade policy. The closest to this paper are Galiani, Schofield and Torrens
(2014), Galiani and Torrens (2014), and Galiani and Somaini (2018).

       Galiani, Schofield and Torrens (2014) combine a factor specific economy with a
probabilistic voting model to study trade policy divergence between countries as well as
trade policy instability within countries. They show that some economic structures (natural
resource abundant economies with an important domestic industry that competes with the
imports) are more prone to induce divergence in political platforms along the trade policy
dimension as well as relatively more protectionist platforms. Thus, in these countries trade

                                                                                            3
policy is likely to be more protectionist and unstable.

        Galiani and Torrens (2014) develop a dynamic model in which the political regime,
trade policy and a redistribution scheme based on income taxation are simultaneously
determined. In their model, income taxation induces a rich-poor/elite-workers political
cleavage, but trade policy opens the door to intra-elite conflict and, hence, the possibility that
workers and part of the elite support protectionism. Under such circumstances, changes in
the political regime (e.g., a military coup) tend to maintain the trade policy to avoid losing
the support of one of the elite groups. Our paper complements these studies. While Galiani,
Schofield and Torrens (2014) and Galiani and Torrens (2014) stress how dysfunctional the
political economy of protectionism could be once the import-substitution sector is relatively
important, in this paper we provide a political economy explanation of the emergence and
persistence of the import-substitution sector.

       Galiani and Somaini (2018) provide an explanation of why Argentina switched to
protectionism in the postwar period based on shocks to international trade. The idea is that
the two World Wars and the Great Depression severally impacted Argentina's economic
structure, inducing the formation of a domestic manufacturing sector that replaced imports.
When international trade flows recovered in the post WWII period, Argentina had an
economic structure that makes trade opening very unpopular. Our paper offers a second
complementary channel to explain Argentina's switch to protectionism. In a context of
severe political instability (from 1930 to 1983 the country experienced 6 military coups),
populists governments resorted to trade policy to make redistribution more sustainable
over time. Indeed, in Section 5 we argue that, most likely, the initial change in the
Argentinean economic structure was triggered by the economic shocks stressed by Galiani
and Somaini (2018), but fears of reversals and an attempt to weaken the economic power of
the traditional rural elite also played an important role in consolidating import substitution
policies in the Peronist years.

2.2    Inefficient Redistribution and Populism
        There is a vast literature that documents the use of highly distortive redistributive
policies, even when less distortive alternatives are available. In particular, for Latin
American countries, see Fergusson and Suárez (2010). Several papers have also developed
different mechanisms to explain the use of distortive policy instruments (e.g., Acemoglu and
Robinson 2001, Acemoglu 2003) and why less distortive instruments are not developed
(Besley and Persson 2009). Perhaps, the closest to this paper is Acemoglu and Robinson
(2001), who develop a political economy model to explain inefficient redistribution policies.
In their model, a group with political power chooses economic policies that provide modest
transfers to the members of the group at a cost for the overall economy, but the policies
maintain the political power of that group. One important difference between our paper and
theirs is that we focus on a group that is unable to hold on to power. Instead, the group can
try to influence the decisions of the future government by incentivizing current-period
actions with persistent consequences.

       Our paper is also related to models of populism. For example, Acemoglu, Egorov and

                                                                                                4
Sonin (2013) develop a signaling theory of populism, in which government officials
intentionally choose non-optimal leftist polices to demonstrate that they are not corrupt. In
this case, even honest politicians might implement populist policies to hide their true type.
Our model does not have any hidden information, so this signaling mechanism does not show
up. We argue, however, that our political-sustainability mechanism better captures one of
the two key features present in all populist programs in Latin America: the use of very
distortionary policies to redistribute income.3

2.3     Costly Factor Mobility
        One of the key features in our model is a cost to reallocating capital between
industries. The model is agnostic on exactly where these costs are coming from, but two
potential interpretations would be a literal cost to altering equipment to fit the other sector,
or a time and investment cost of letting one sector's capital depreciate and putting resources
into the other sector. Regardless of the specific interpretation, this assumption is aligned
with an extensive literature in international trade that studies costly factor reallocations. For
example, many papers have extended the Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson model to incorporate
barriers to the reallocation of factors across sectors (see Mayer 1974, Neary 1978, Grossman
1983, and Mussa 1984, among others). There is also empirical evidence that supports the
idea of costly factor reallocation. For example, Magee (1980) evaluates the competing
hypotheses of mobile versus immobile factors by comparing the lobbying behavior of capital
owners and laborers across industries. He finds that lobbying is determined more by current
industry than by type of factor, suggesting significant reallocation costs, at least in the short-
run.

3.      A Model of Redistribution under Political Instability
       This section develops a simple political economy model for the determination of
redistributive policy in a politically unstable environment.

3.1     The Economy
        Consider a society with two socioeconomic groups: workers and investors, denoted
by  and  , respectively. There are two sectors: the import-competing manufacturing
sector () and the exporting agricultural sector (). Time is discrete and indexed by  = 1,2
and all agents have the same discount factor   (0,1). Initially, capital is invested in sector
, but in periods  = 1,2, investors can choose where to put their capital. To simplify things,
assume that this is a binary choice with   {, } indicating the allocation of capital in
period  . More importantly, moving capital from one sector to the other incurs an
instantaneous utility cost  for investors. Formally, (-1 ,  ) =  if -1   and
(-1 ,  ) = 0 if -1 =  , where 0 =  .

     The utility received by socioeconomic groups  and  in period  are given by
 ( ,  ) and  ( ,  ) - (-1 ,  ), respectively, where  is the government policy


3 The other key distinguishing feature of Latin-America populist governments, which we do not consider in
this paper, is the use of highly inconsistent fiscal and monetary policies that frequently led to macroeconomic
crisis.

                                                                                                             5
in period  . To simplify things, assume that the government can only choose one of the
following three policies: redistribute income using an income tax ( ), redistribute income
through an import tariff (), or do not redistribute income at all (). With this simple policy
space, we capture three alternative public policies in relation to income distributions: no
explicit government intervention (), a redistributive program with a serious concern for
minimizing distortions and deadweight loses (  ); and, finally, a populist redistributive
program highly based on very inefficient distortions such as protectionist tariffs ().

     Worker and Investor utility  ( ,  ) and  ( ,  ) satisfy the following
assumption.

        Assumption 1 Per-period payoffs for satisfy the following preference order:
        1. Workers:  (, ) >  (, ) >  (, ) >  (, ) >  (, ) >  (, ).
        2. Investors:  (, ) >  (, ) >  (, ) >  (, ) >  (, ) >  (, ).

        Thus, workers' utility is strictly greater with the income tax () than with the tariff
(  ), and strictly greater with the tariff than with no redistribution (  ). Moreover, the
allocation of capital does not affect how workers rank government policies. Finally, for a
given government policy, they prefer capital to be allocated into sector . The intuition is
that sector  is labor intensive. Investors have a more complex ordering. When capital is
allocated in the exporting sector , they prefer no redistribution to the income tax and the
income tax to the tariff. On the other hand, when capital is allocated to sector , investors
prefer the tariff to no redistribution and no redistribution to the income tax. That is, when
investors have their capital in the import-competing sector, they support protectionism.

3.2     Politics
       In each period the government can be controlled by workers or investors. Whichever
group controls the government selects  to maximize the discounted expected payoff of
the group. In period 1, the government is controlled by workers. At the beginning of period
2, with probability   (0,1), there is a switch to an investor controlled government, while
with probability 1 -  , the government remains under the control of workers. More
precisely, the timing of events is as follows:

        1. Period 1 :  selects 1  {, , } . Then,  observes 1 and chooses 1 
{, }.

      2. Period 2: Nature determines whether the government remains under the control
of workers or not.

      a. If there is a switch to an investor controlled government, then  selects 2 
{, , } and 2  {, }.

    b. If the government remains under the control of workers, then 2 = 1 and
2 = 1 .


                                                                                            6
        Three important remarks apply to this timing. First, we assume that initially the
government is under the control of workers. With this assumption we capture the moment
in which workers begin to massively participate in elections and their interests are seriously
considered by the political institutions. Second, this does not mean that elites quietly accept
the new distribution of political power. With probability , elites will regain control of the
government (for example, through military coups or recapturing key institutions). Thus, 
measures political instability, the likelihood that workers lose control of the government.
Third, if workers retain the control of the government, we assume that neither workers nor
investors alter their decisions4.

3.3     Subgame Perfect Nash Equilibrium
       For the notion of equilibrium we employ subgame perfect Nash equilibrium (SPNE).
A strategy for workers is a policy 1 
                                        {, , } that  selects and implement whenever
the government is controlled by  (i.e., in period 1 and in period 2 if the government
remains under the control of  ). A strategy for investors is a tuple (1           , 2 , 2 .
                                                                                   )

1 : , }  {, } assigns a capital allocation whenever the government is controlled by
  {,

 to any policy selected by workers. (2      ): {,
                                           , 2      }  {, , } × {, } assigns a policy
and a capital allocation in period 2 for any capital allocation in period 1, when in period
2 there is a switch to an investor controlled government. A profile of strategies
(1 
           , 2 is a SPNE if and only if:
           )
   , 1 , 2

      1. For any 1  {, }, if in period 2 there is a switch to an investor controlled
government,  selects (2 , 2 ) to maximize  's payoff in period 2. Formally:
                     ( ),  ( ))
                 (2   1 2      1  = argmax{ (2 , 2 ) - (1 , 2 )}
                                                      2 ,2
        2. In period 1,  selects 1 to maximize 's expected discounted payoff taking
into account that for any 1 ,  will select 1 to maximize  's expected discounted
payoff. Formally:
                               (1 , 1 ) - (, 1 )
              ( )                        ( ),  ( ))          ( ))]
           1 1 = argmax {+[ (2             1 2   1  - (1 , 2    1   }
                         1
                              +(1 - )[ (1 , 1 ) - (1 , 1 )]
                                ( ))                ( )),      ( )))
             
                          (1 , 1   1   +  (2     (1   1  2 (1     1
           1  = argmax {                                              }
                     1                     ( ))
                         +(1 - ) (1 , 1      1


       Finally, a profile of strategies (1
                                          
                                                   , 2 will induce the following contingent
                                                   )
                                           , 1 , 2
outcome  = (1 , 1 , (1 , 1 , 1 - ), (2 , 2 , )) , where (1 , 1 ) = (1      ( ))
                                                                           , 1 1     is the
policy and capital allocation whenever  controls the government (i.e., in period 1 and in


4  We feel that this assumption is justified, as it improves the intuition of expanding this two-period model to
an infinite-horizon understanding. With an infinite horizon, there are still t wo distinct "periods", before and
after the regime change. The uncertainty is about how long it takes before investors take control. In other
words, the infinite horizon model has the first period for a stochastic amount of time before changing to the
second period with Investors in power ­ there is no outcome where Workers behave as if they are permanently
in control. In the true two-period model, allowing players to change their actions after revealing no regime
change does not translate well into this infinite horizon understanding.

                                                                                                              7
period 2 with probability (1 - ) ) and 2 = 2 (1         ( ))
                                                          1  , 2 = 2  
                                                                        (1 ( ))
                                                                              1   is the
policy and capital allocation whenever  controls the government (i.e., in period 2 with
probability  ). If (1    , 1 , 2 , 2 is a SPNE, then the induced contingent outcome is
                            )

denoted a SPNE outcome.

3.4    Equilibrium Analysis
       To characterize the SPNE we proceed through backward induction. Throughout the
section we assume that Assumption 1 holds.

       Lemma 1 Suppose that at the beginning of period 2 there is a switch to an investor
controlled government. Let
                                1 =  (, ) -  (, )                                       (1)
Then:
       1. If [1 = ] or [1 =  and  < 1 ], then (2        ( ),  ( ))
                                                          1 2      1   = (, ).
       2. If 1 =  and   1, then (2       (),  ())
                                              2        = (, ).
       Proof: see Appendix. 

        Lemma 1 states that the reallocation cost must be sufficiently high for investors to
stay in sector  after there is a switch to an investor controlled government. More
precisely, when in period 1 capital is allocated to sector  (1 = ), investors keep their
capital in sector  if in period 2 they gain control of the government. The reason is that in
such situation, they can implement their most preferred outcome (, ). When in period 1
capital is allocated to sector , investor's best course of action in period 2 depend on the
cost of reallocation. If the reallocation cost is lower than 1, investors prefer to move their
capital back to sector . On the other hand, if the reallocation cost is greater than or equal
to 1, investors keep their capital in sector .

       Lemma 2 1     ()
                        = 1  ()
                                = .
       Proof: see Appendix. 

       Lemma 2 states that, in period 1, investors will not reallocate their capital to sector
 if workers do not incentivize them with a tariff. Intuitively, investors prefer (, ) to
(, ) in the present and (, ) to any other outcome in the future, so they will definitely
not reallocate their capital to sector  if labor does not provide the incentive to do so.

       Lemma 3 If  < 1, then 1
                             
                               =  .
       Proof: see Appendix. 

        Lemma 3 states that if capital will not remain in sector  when in period 2 there is
a switch to an investor controlled government, then workers will prefer to use the income
tax rather than the tariff. Intuitively, when workers cannot induce investors to keep their
capital in sector , the best alternative for them is to maximize their present payoff using
the income tax .

       Combining Lemmas 1-3, it is clear that when  < 1 , the unique SPNE outcome is

                                                                                            8
  = (, , (, , 1 - ), (, , )) . That is, when the cost of reallocation is low enough,
workers have no incentive to employ tariffs to redistribute income because tariffs are not
capable of inducing investors keep their capital in sector . On the contrary, when   1,
investors are willing stay in sector  if in period 2 there is a switch to an investor
controlled government. Lemma 4 explores the conditions under which investors are willing
to move their capital to sector  in the first place, i.e., in period 1.

     Lemma 4 Let
               2 = (1 + )[ (, ) -  (, )] - [ (, ) -  (, )]                                   (2)
If 1   < 2 , then 1  ()
                         = , while if   2, then 1
                                                 ()
                                                    =  .
     Proof: see Appendix. 

      Lemma 4 states that investors reallocate their capital to sector  in period 1 only
when workers select the tariff  and the reallocation cost is sufficiently low (formally,  <
2 ).

      The following proposition combines Lemmas 1-4 to fully characterized the SPNE
outcome for each value of  .

       Proposition 1 Equilibrium. Suppose that the following conditions hold:
                                      1   < 2                                                (3)
                                       (,)+(1+-) (,)
                             (, ) >                                                          (4)
                                                 1+
Then, the unique SPNE outcome is  = (, , , ) . In any other case, the unique SPNE
outcome is   = (, , (, , 1 - ), (, , )).
       Proof: see Appendix. 

        For intermediate values of  (formally, 1   < 2), the reallocation cost is high
enough for investors to keep their capital in sector  if in period 2 they gain control of the
government, but it is low enough for investors to move their capital from  to  in period
1. In such circumstances, workers can guarantee a payoff equal to  (, ) in each period,
provided that they use a tariff. Moreover, if condition (4) holds, this payoff is higher than the
expected payoff workers will obtain if they use taxation to redistribute income. Finally, for
high values of  (formally,   2), the reallocation cost is simply too high for investors to
move their capital from  to  in period 1. In such a case, workers have no reason to use
a tariff. Thus, when 1   < 2 and (4) does not hold or when   [1 , 2 ] , the unique
SPNE is   = (, , (, , 1 - ), (, , )).

3.4    Comparative Statics
       = (, , , ) is the SPNE outcome if and only if (3) and (4) hold. The following
proposition explores when these conditions are more likely to hold.

       Proposition 2 Comparative Statics.
       1. An increase in  makes (3) less likely to hold, but (4) more likely to hold.
       2. An increase in  makes (3) more likely if and only if

                                                                                               9
                                           (, ) +  (, )    1
                               (, )                      <
                                                2          2
or
                              (, ) +  (, )            (, ) -  (, )
                (, ) <                           <
                                       2              (, ) -  (, )
and (4) more likely to hold if and only if  (, ) >  (, ) + (1 - ) (, ).
        3. An increase in  (, ) and a decrease in  (, ) or  (, ) make (3) more
likely to hold.
        4. An increase in  (, ) and a decrease in  (, ) or  (, ) make (4) more
likely to hold.
        Proof: see Appendix. 

       It is clear why the condition is more restrictive as  increases ­ if Investors are
highly likely to take power in the second period, it is harder to encourage them to make the
move. This effect is magnified when  is large since the second period is more important,
as seen in figure 0.




 Figure 1: The scalar is decreasing in , meaning the restriction is tightened as the regime
 change becomes more likely.

        The impact of  is more complicated. If  is very high (so Investors are likely to
take power in period 2) then raising  means Investors are more willing to wait for that
future power ­ it will be harder to incentivize them to move. However, the opposite is true
when  is very small ­ the added patience from a higher  puts added weight on the
likely future of permanent populism, so the Investors are more willing to move capital to
sector-. This relationship be seen in figure 2 for several values of .




                                                                                         10
 Figure 2: The effect of patience  on the scalar depends on the likelihood  of a regime
 change.


4      The Model Under Commitment
It is clear from the preferences in Assumption 1 that both agents prefer (, ) to (, ).
However, (, ) is never an equilibrium outcome in the model without commitment since
Investors prefer (, ) to (, ), so they cannot credibly commit to keeping the income tax
. What if they could?

The environment is identical to the the model under no commitment, but with an ultimatum
game in stage 0. In that preliminary stage, Workers can offer a policy to Investors. If Investors
accept the policy, both agents are bound to that policy for all periods. If Investors reject the
policy, the game plays out normally. Again, an equilibrium to this model should be sub-game
perfect. A subgame perfect equilibrium for this model satisfies the following conditions:

       1. All of the conditions from the SPNE under no commitment must hold.

     2. Investors accept an offer in stage 0 if the outcome is better than the model without
commitment and reject otherwise.

      3. Workers offer the policy that maximizes their payoff given the future policies of
themselves and Investors.

     The following proposition characterized the equilibrium outcome for the model with
commitment.

       Proposition 3 Suppose that Assumption 1 holds and 1    2 . Then, in the model
with commitment, Workers and Investors will agree to implement policy .

                                                                                              11
       Proof: see Appendix. 

       The intuition for this outcome is fairly straightforward: Investors prefer both policies
 and  (where they will not change sectors) over , so they will accept any of the three
policies, being indifferent with the last one. Of those options, Workers prefer  to  but
 to , so Workers will offer  and Investors will accept. This outcome is far better than
the result under no commitment. Not only do both players prefer the instantaneous payoff
of  over , but Investors also avoid paying the capital reallocation cost  .

5      Case Study: Argentina in the Twentieth Century
       The drastic fall in the commodity prices during the Great Depression severely hit the
Argentinean economy, which heavily depended on the export of agricultural products.
Indeed, in 1933 Argentina's capacity to import fell almost to half of its 1928 peak (CEPAL
1949). This shock in Argentina's terms of trade did not go unnoticed to the country's
authorities. Import tariffs were initially raised in 1931, but mainly driven by fiscal necessity.
In 1933 a double exchange rate system was implemented to promote domestic
manufacturing. However, at the same time the government assured minimum prices to rural
producers through the newly created agricultural regulatory boards that monopolized
foreign trade. The main boards created were the National Grain Board, the National Meats
Board and the National Cotton Board. The last one intended also to promote the growing of
cotton in the North-eastern province of Chaco to provide the basic input for the rapidly
developing textile industry.

         World War II blocked Argentina's imports, which promoted domestic manufacturing
to substitute imported goods. However, it was not until the end of World War II that the state
began playing the leading role in the country's industrial development. Shortly before
Perón's access to power in 1946, the government created IAPI ­The Argentine Institute for
the Promotion of Exchange, which held the monopoly over the country's foreign trade. In its
initial times, it was clearly anti-agricultural: IAPI withheld a percentage of the high prices the
agricultural production was being paid in the world market at the end of the war. 5 This
allowed IAPI to finance imports as well as lending money to newly created public companies
or even private industrial companies, mainly at a negative real interest rate. Together with
this, a set of typical protectionist measures were carried out: import tariffs were raised, the
multiple exchange rate system was maintained, and a scheme of import permits was created
to manage the flows of foreign currency. The State also became an active agent in the
economy as a result of the large wave of nationalizations the country witnessed in the early
Peronist years: railways, telephones, electricity, public transport and other utilities and
services became public companies between 1945 and 1950.6 The nationalization of utilities
provided also an indirect subsidy to the industrial sector. Finally, Perón also promoted the
creation and consolidation of trade unions and extended several social rights to workers.7

5 The prices paid to the producers were around 50% of those IAPI was being paid in the world market
(Gerchunoff and Antunez, 2002).
6 Together with this, a group of German owned companies were nationalized after the war ended ­ many of

them would later become part of the State owned "Fabricaciones Militares" industrial conglomeration.
7 See Galiani and Gerchunoff (2003) for a detailed account of the changes introduced in the labor market


                                                                                                     12
Overall, Peronist policies sought to redistribute income from the rural sector toward urban
workers, a point very well argued by Díaz Alejandro in his famous study of the Argentinean
economy and Smithies (1965):

        "Peronists policies present a picture of a government interested not so much in
        industrialization as in a nationalistic and populist policy of increasing the real
        consumption, employment, and economic security of the masses -and of the new
        entrepreneurs. It chose these goals even at the expense of capital formation and
        the economy's capacity to transform". Díaz Alejandro (1970, chapter 2, page
        126).

        "Perón's policy was designed to increase the size of the urban masses and win
        their political support." (Smithies 1965).

       The political economy puzzle is why did Argentinean workers massively support
protectionism and the promotion of domestic manufacturing at the end of World War II?
Galiani and Somaini (2018) develop a small open economy model in which workers are pro-
free-trade when capital is only allocated in the rural-exporting sector, but they switch to
protectionism when enough capital move to the import-competing manufacturing sector. In
the case of Argentina, the model suggests that the shocks to the terms of trade in the interwar
period were severely enough to induce such switch. That is, before the interwar period, the
country was specialized in the production of rural products for international markets and
manufactures were imported. In such a context, most of the labour force was employed in
the non-tradeable service sector and, hence, workers favoured free trade. From 1930 to
1945, however, Argentina transitioned to a more diversified economic structure and many
workers began to find good employment opportunities in the growing manufacturing sector.
As a consequence, when Perón came to power, workers were ready to embrace a
protectionist trade policy.

        There is no doubt that the mechanism stressed by Galiani and Somaini (2018) played
an important role in changing workers' stance on trade policy. However, their model does
not explain why alternative redistributive mechanisms were not chosen. In other words, why
did Perón resort to protectionism and other highly distortive policies rather employing more
efficient instruments to redistribute income? Cortés Conde (2005) suggests that Peronist
policies helped amalgamating a very succesful political coalition.

        "These policies formed one of the longest and most successful coalitions ever
        known, but they also generated one of the longest and most difficult conflicts ".
        Cortés Conde (2005, chapter 3, page 145, our own translation from Spanish).

       Following this line of reasoning, a plausible explanation is that Perón faced a trade-
off between more efficient but easier to reverse instruments versus less efficient but more
complicated to reverse redistributive policies. In fact, in 1952 there was a failed military
coup against the Peronist government and in 1955 a military coup deposed Perón. However,

institutions under Perón.

                                                                                             13
the protectionist trade policy was not abandoned until 1976. In fact, from 1955 to 1976 there
were several transitions back and forth from military governments to democracy without
any substantial change in import substitution policies. Between 1958 and 1962, a democratic
government promoted the development of the metallurgical, oil extraction and automobile
sectors. A military coup overthrew the government in 1966, but the economic policy did not
radically change. The currency was devaluated, and some import tariffs reduced, but the
same time agricultural export taxes were raised.

        The key to understand this persistence is that, to some extent, protectionism created
its own supporters among the elites. As a new industrial elite consolidated, it was more
complicated for traditional rural elites to open the economy even under autocratic
governments. From a political perspective, as Galiani and Torrens (2014) show, only military
governments willing to maintain protectionist policies were backed by the new industrial
elite. From an economic perspective, dismantling protectionism was very costly. Too much
capital was sunk in the manufacturing sector, which was really complicated to relocate to
other sectors, specially in the short run. Cortés Conde et al. (2020) reach a similar conclusion
in the epilogue of their recent volume on the Peronist Economy.

       [Despite the negative economic consequences that Peronist policies had on the
       performance of the economy, they] "lasted over time [due] to the formation of
       a coalition of corporate interests that resisted any modification that would imply
       the reconversion of that industry, when the interests of a business community
       depended on its continuity, whose profits were assured by protection and
       association with the State. It operated, too, because any change would have had
       a considerable impact on the workforce. With an institutional structure designed
       by Peronism of a single recognized official union, a union leadership was formed
       alongside that protected business community that was the most solid factor of
       power in Argentine political life in the last seven decades ." Cortés Conde et al.
       (2020, Epilogue, page 403, our own translation from Spanish).

        Summing up, the new economic structure born in the interwar period and raised in
the Peronist years created an elite invested in the import competing sector and, hence,
interested in keeping tariffs high. Workers benefited from industrial protectionism, but they
could have been much better off reaching a long-term credible agreement with the elites to
keep redistribution in place and financed it using more efficient instruments than trade
policy. Traditional elites should have also had more imagination to envision the required
institutional changes to implement such agreement. They could have avoided decades of
economic isolation and decline.

6      Conclusion
       We have provided a theoretical environment under which an inefficient reallocation
scheme, such as protectionist trade policy, can be politically optimal in some circumstances.
In particular, a pro-worker government in the present can incentivize capital investment in
the labor-intensive, import-competing sector. This aligns the interests of the future pro-
capital government more closely with the interests of workers, resulting in persistent

                                                                                             14
protectionist policies. The story in the model is supported by the case of Argentina, which
saw protectionism continue from Perón's pro-worker regime and into the regimes that
followed the coups that deposed him. Other Latin American countries, including Brazil, Chile,
Colombia, and Mexico, saw similar protectionist spells that could be explained, at least in
part, by this political instability mechanism.

        Our theory indicates that even in the presence of multiple regimes, allowing for
commitment can avoid the persistent populism and protectionism. Neither workers nor
capital owners are terribly happy with the inefficient outcome, and allowing a constitution
or other similarly-binding contract lets the two groups implement a better policy ­ in this
case, a non-distorionary income tax-funded redistribution scheme. This is no surprise, as
strong institutions are expected to produce better economic outcomes.

         Why were other countries able to avoid this populism and protectionism trap?
Countries with similar political and economic characteristics, both in Latin America and
elsewhere, can help shed more light on this situation, and can potentially provide a path to
better outcomes for currently developing countries. It is also useful to study how the
countries that did fall into persistent protectionism eventually got out, and how countries
still in the trap can follow suit.

References
1. Acemoglu, D. 2003. Why Not a Political Coase Theorem? Social Conflict, Commitment, and
   Politics. Journal of Comparative Economics, 31(4).

2. Acemoglu, D., G. Egorov and K. Sonin. 2013. A Political Theory of Populism. Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, 128(2): 771-805.

3. Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. Robinson. 2005. Institutions as a Fundamental Cause of
   Long-Run Growth. in P. Aghion and S. Durlauf (eds.), Handbook of Economic Growth,
   North-Holland.

4. Acemoglu, D., and J. Robinson. 2001. Inefficient Redistribution. American Political Science
   Review, 95: 649-61.

5. Besley, T., and T. Persson. 2009. The Origins of State Capacity: Property Rights, Taxation,
   and Politics. American Economic Review, 99 (4): 1218-44.

6. Cortés Conde, R. 2005. La Economía Política de la Argentina en el Siglo XX, Edhasa.

7. Cortés Conde, R., J. Ortiz Batall, L. D'amato, and G. Della Paolera. 2020. Epilogo in R. Cortes
   Conde, J. Ortiz Batall, L. D'amato y G. Della Paolera (eds.) La Economía de Perón: Una
   Historia Económica (1946-1955), Edhasa.




                                                                                               15
8. Economic Commission for Latin America and the Carribean (CEPAL). 1949. Economic
   Survey of Latin America 1949. Estudio Económico de América Latina, United Nations,
   Department of Economic Affairs, New York.

9. Díaz Alejandro, C. F. 1970. Essays on the economic history of the Argentine Republic. New
   Haven: Yale University Press.

10. Fergusson, L., and G. Suárez. 2010. Política Fiscal: Un Enfoque de Tributación Óptima.
    Ediciones Uniandes.

11. Galiani, S., and P. Gerchunoff. 2003. The Labor Market, in G. Della Paolera and A. Taylor
    (eds.), A New Economic History of Argentina, Cambridge University Press.

12. Galiani, S., N. Schofield, and G. Torrens. 2014. Factor Endowments, Democracy and Trade
    Policy Divergence. Journal of Public Economic Theory, 16(1): 119.156.

13. Galiani, S., and G. Torrens. 2014. Autocracy, Democracy and Trade Policy. Journal of
    International Economics, 93(1): 173-193.

14. Galiani, S., and P. Somaini. 2018. Path Dependent Import Substitution Policies: The case
    of Argentina in the XX Century. Latin American Economic Review, 27 (Special Issue).

15. Gerchunoff, P., and D. Antunez. 2002. De la Bonanza Peronista a la Crisis de Desarrollo.
    Nueva Historia Argentina. Los años peronistas (1943-1955).

16. Grossman, G. 1983. Partially Mobile Capital: A General Approach to Two-sector Trade
    Theory. Journal of International Economics, 15(1-2):1-17.

17. Magee, S. 1980. Three Simple Tests of the Stolper-Samuelson Theorem. In Alan V.
    Deardor, Robert Mitchell Stern, and Sundari R. Baru, editors, The Stolper-Samuelson
    Theorem: A Golden Jubilee, chapter 8. University of Michigan Press.

18. Mayer, W. 1974. Variable Returns to Scale in General Equilibrium Theory: A Comment.
    International Economic Review, 20:225-235.

19. Mussa, M. L. 1984. The Economics of Content Protection. NBER Working Paper Series.

20. Neary, J. P. 1978. Short-run Capital Specificity and the Pure Theory of International Trade.
    The Economic Journal, 88:488-510.

21. Rodrik, D. 2018. Populism and the Economics of Globalization. Journal of International
    Business Policy, 1:12-33.

22. Smithies, A. 1965. Argentina and Australia. The American Economic Review, 55:17-30.



                                                                                             16
Appendix to "Populism, Protectionism, and Political Instability"
This Appendix proofs all the Lemmas and Propositions in the paper.

Lemma 1 Suppose that at the beginning of period 2 there is a switch to an investor controlled
government. Let 1 =  (, ) -  (, ). Then:
1. If [1 = ] or [1 =  and  < 1 ], then (2        ( ),  ( ))
                                                   1 2      1  = (, ).
2. If 1 =  and   1, then (2         (),  ())
                                          2       = (, ).

Proof. Suppose that 1 =  . Then, when there is a switch to an investor controlled
government,  selects (2      (),  ())
                                 2       = argmax2 ,2 { (2 , 2 ) - (, 2 )} . Due to
Assumption 1,  (, ) >  (, ) for all (, )  (, ) . Moreover, if 2 =  , then
(, 2 ) = 0. Therefore, (2  (),  ())
                              2       = (, ). Suppose that 1 = . Then, when there
is a switch to an investor controlled government,  selects (2           (),  ())
                                                                            2    =
argmax2,2  2 , 2 - (, 2 . Due to Assumption 1,  (, ) >  (, ) >
            {   (    )        )}
 (, ). Moreover, if 2 = , then (, 2 ) = 0. Thus, if  selects 2 = , the best 
can do is to choose 2 = , which implies that the payoff of  will be given by  (, ).
Due to Assumption 1,  (, ) >  (, ) >  (, ) . Moreover, if 2 =  , then
(, 2 ) =  . Thus, if  selects 2 =  , the best  can do is to choose 2 =  , which
implies that the payoff of  will be given by  (, ) -  . Therefore, if  < 1 =
 (, ) -  (, ) , then (2           (),  ())
                                      2        = (, ) , while if   1 , then
(2  (),  ())
         2       = (, ). 

Lemma 2 1
         ()    ()
            = 1   = .

Proof. We must consider two possible cases.
Case 1. Suppose that 1 = . If 1 =  and the government remains under the control of
workers, then 2 =  and 2 = . From Lemma 3.1, if 1 =  and there is a switch to an
investor controlled government, then (2 , 2 ) = (2 (),  ())
                                                       2      = (, ) . Therefore, if in
period 1,  selects 1 = , its expected discounted payoff is given by:
                           (, ) - (, )
                                   (),  ())            ())]
               (, ) = {[ (2             2       - (, 2      }
                          (1 - )[ (, ) - (, )]
              = (1 + ) (, )
On the contrary, if  selects 1 = , its expected discounted payoff is given by:
                                (, ) - (, )
                                         (),  ())             ())]
                     (, ) = {[ (2             2      - (, 2          }
                               (1 - )[ (, ) - (, )]
Due to Assumption 1,  (, ) >  (, ) for all (, )  (, ). Moreover, (, ) =  .
Thus,  (, ) >  (, ), which implies 1         ()
                                                =  .

Case 2. Suppose that 1 = . If 1 =  and the government remains under the control of
workers, then 2 =  and 2 = . From Lemma 1, if 1 =  and there is a switch to an

                                                                                          17
investor controlled government, then (2 , 2 ) = (2
                                                  (),  ())
                                                       2      = (, ) . Therefore, if in
period 1,  selects 1 = , its expected discounted payoff is given by:
                           (, ) - (, )
                                   (),  ())            ())]
               (, ) = {[ (2           2        - (, 2       }
                          (1 - )[ (, ) - (, )]
              =  (, ) +  (, ) + (1 - ) (, )
On the contrary, if  selects 1 = , its expected discounted payoff is given by:
                                (, ) - (, )
                                        (),  ())              ())]
                     (, ) = {[ (2             2      - (, 2          }
                               (1 - )[ (, ) - (, )]
Due to Assumption 1,  (, ) >  (, ) and  (, )   (2                  (),  ())
                                                                         2     . Thus,
 ) >  ), which implies 1
  (,         (,                     ()
                                       = . 

Lemma 3 If  < 1, then 1
                      
                        =  .

Proof. Suppose that workers select 1
                                   
                                     = . Then, the expected discounted payoff obtained
by workers will be given by:
                                       ())
                                  (, 1
                                      ()),    ()))]
                       () = {+ [ (2 (1    2 (1      }
                                                   ())]
                                  +(1 - )[ (, 1
Due to Lemma 3.2, 1   ()
                           =  . Therefore:
                                        (, )
                                                 (),  ())]
                              () = {+[ (2            2    }
                                       +(1 - )[ (, )]
Due to Lemma 3.1, 2   ()
                           =  and 2     ()
                                           = . Therefore:
                      () =  (, ) +  (, ) + (1 - ) (, )
Analogously, if workers select 1 
                                  = , then  () = (1 + ) (, ). Due to Assumption 1,
 (, ) >  (, ), which implies that  () >  ().

Suppose that workers select 1
                            
                              =  . Then, the expected discounted payoff obtained by
workers will be given by:
                                     ())
                               (, 1
                                       ()),    ()))]
                        () = {+ [ (2 (1    2 (1      }
                                             ())]
                                +(1 - )[ (, 1

Since  < 1 , Lemma 3.1 implies that 2
                                        ())
                                      (1    =  and 2  
                                                        (1  ())
                                                                = . Therefore:
                                                               
                 () =  (, 1 ()) +  (, ) + (1 - ) (, 1 ())
Due to Assumption 1,  (, ) >  (, ) and for  = ,  . Thus,  (, ) >
 (, 1  ())
          , which implies that  () >  (). Thus, if  < 1 , workers select 1
                                                                         
                                                                           = . 

Lemma 4 Let 2 = (1 + )[ (, ) -  (, )] - [ (, ) -  (, )]. If 1   < 2,

                                                                                    18
then 1
      ()
         = , while if  > 2, then 1
                                  ()
                                     =  .

Proof. Suppose that workers select 1     
                                           =  and   1 . Then, the expected discounted
payoff obtained by investors if they select 1 =  will be given by:
                   (, ) =  (, ) -  +  (, ) + (1 - ) (, )
On the contrary, if investors select 1 = , then:
                       (, ) =  (, ) +  (, ) + (1 - ) (, )
Thus,  (, ) >  (, ) if and only if  < 2 . Therefore, 1       ()
                                                                 =  if and only if 1 
 < 2. Otherwise, 1     ()
                           = . 

Proposition 1 Equilibrium. Suppose that the following conditions hold:
                                       1   < 2
                                       (,)+(1+-) (,)
                            (, ) >                1+
Then, the unique SPNE outcome is  = (, , , ) . In any other case, the unique SPNE
outcome is   = (, , (, , 1 - ), (, , )).

Proof. We must consider three possible cases.
Case 1. Suppose that  < 1. Then, from Lemmas 1, 2 and 3, the unique SPNE outcome is
 = (, , , ).

Case 2. Suppose that 1   < 2. Assume that workers select 1  
                                                             = . Then, from Lemmas
1 and 2, the expected discounted payoff obtained by workers will be given by  () =
 (, ) +  (, ) + (1 - ) (, ). On the contrary, if workers select 1         
                                                                            = , then,
from Lemma 3.4, the expected discounted payoff obtained by workers will be given by
 () =  (, ) +  (, ) + (1 - ) (, ). Note that  () >  () if and only if
                                      (,)+[1+(1-)] (,)
                            (, ) >             (1+)
Thus, if the above inequality holds, workers select 1
                                                    
                                                      = . Then, from Lemmas 1, 2, and 4,
the unique SPNE outcome is  = (, , , ). If the above inequality does not hold, workers
                               

select 1  
           = . Then, from Lemmas 1 and 2, the unique SPNE outcome is (, ) in period 1,
(, ) in period 2 if workers control the government, and (, ) in period 2 if investors
gain control over the government, i.e.,   = (, , (, , 1 - ), (, , )).

Case 3. Suppose that   2. Assume that workers select 1     
                                                             = . Then, from Lemmas 1 and
2, the expected discounted payoff obtained by workers will be given by  () =  (, ) +
 (, ) + (1 - ) (, ). On the contrary, if workers select 1            
                                                                      = , from Lemma 4,
we have 1   ()
                =  . Then, the expected discounted payoff obtained by workers will be given
by  () =  (, ) +  (, ) + (1 - ) (, ) . Since  (, ) >  (, ) , we have
that  () >  () . Then, from Lemmas 1 and 2, the unique SPNE outcome is   =
(, , (, , 1 - ), (, , )). 

Proposition 2 Comparative Statics.
1. An increase in  makes (3) less likely to hold, but (4) more likely to hold.
2. An increase in  makes (3) more likely if and only if


                                                                                        19
                                    (,)+ (,)                1
                          (, )                    and  < 2
                                          2
or
                               (,)+ (,)                (,)- (,)
                     (, ) <                   and <
                                   2                   (,)- (,)
and (4) more likely to hold if and only if  (, ) >  (, ) + (1 - ) (, ).
3. An increase in  (, ) and decrease in  (, ) or  (, ) makes (3) more likely to
hold.
4. An increase in  (, ) and a decrease in  (, ) or  (, ) make (4) more likely
to hold.

Proof.
Part 1. From the thresholds defined in Lemmas 1 and 4 we have:
                        (2 + ) (, ) - (1 + ) (, ) -  (, )
                                                                if  < 1/2
             2 - 1 = {-[ (, ) -  (, )]
                        0                                       if   1/2
Therefore, 2 - 1 is strictly decreasing in  for  < 1/2 (because Assumption 1
implies  (, ) >  (, )) and 2 - 1 = 0 for   1/2. Thus, an increase in  makes
(3) less likely to hold. (4) holds if and only if (1 + ) (, ) >  (, ) + (1 +  -
) (, ) or, which is equivalent, (1 + )[ (, ) -  (, )] + [ (, ) -
 (, )] > 0 . Due to Assumption 1,  (, ) >  (, ) and, hence, an increase in 
makes (4) more likely to hold.

Part 2. From the thresholds defined in Lemmas 1 and 4 we have:
                      2 (, ) -  (, ) -  (, )
                                                               if  < 1/2
           2 - 1 = {{ (, ) -  (, ) - [ (, ) -  (, )]}
                      0                                        if   1/2
We must consider two cases:

Case 1. Suppose that  (, ) < [ (, ) +  (, )]/2 . Then, [ (, ) -  (, )] >
                                   (,)- (,)
[ (, ) -  (, )]      for all   <  (,)- (,)       and   [ (, ) -  (, )] <
                                               
                                (,)- (,)
[ (, ) -  (, )] for all  >               .      Thus, 2 - 1 is increasing in  for
                                (,)- (,)
       (,)- (,)                                          (,)- (,) 1
  [0,  (,)- (,) ) ; 2 - 1 is decreasing in  for [  (,)- (,) , 2) ; and, finally,
                                                                
2 - 1 = 0 for   1/2.

Case 2. Suppose that  (, )  [ (, ) +  (, )]/2 . Then, [ (, ) -  (, )] >
                                                                         1
[ (, ) -  (, )] for all  < 1/2 . Thus, 2 - 1 is increasing in  for   [0, 2)
and 2 - 1 = 0 for   1/2.

Part 3. From the thresholds defined in Lemmas Lemmas 1 and 4 we have:
                  (2 + ) (, ) - (1 +  - ) (, ) - (1 + ) (, ) if  < 1/2
        2 - 1 = {
                  0                                                   if   1/2
Thus, 2 - 1 is increasing in  (, ) and decreasing in  (, ) and  (, ).

                                                                              20
Part 4. (4) holds if and only if (1 + ) (, ) >  (, ) + (1 +  - ) (, ) or,
which is equivalent, (1 + ) (, ) - (1 +  - ) (, ) -  (, ) > 0 , which is
more likely to hold when  (, ) is higher and  (, ) or  (, ) are lower. 

Proposition 3 Suppose that Assumption 1 holds and 1    2 . Then, in the model with
commitment, Workers and Investors will agree to implement policy .

Proof. We solve via backwards induction and show that the unique SPNE is such that
Workers offer policy  and Investors accept it.

Suppose that Investors reject the offer, regardless of which policy is offered. Then, according
to Proposition 1, Workers receive (1 + ) (, ) and Investors receive (1 +
) (, ) -  .

Suppose that Workers offer  and Investors accept. Then, according to Lemmas 1 and 4,
Investors will move to sector- and receive (1 + ) (, ) -  . This is the same payoff
as Investors receive under no commitment, so they are indifferent between accepting and
rejecting the offer.

Suppose that Workers offer policy . Then Investors will accept and stay in sector-, since
              (1 + ) (, ) > (1 + ) (, ) - , (1 + ) (, ) - .

Finally, suppose that Workers offer policy . Then Investors will accept and stay in sector-
, since
               (1 + ) (, ) > (1 + ) (, ) - , (1 + ) (, ) - .

Therefore, we must consider the following two possible cases:

Case 1: Investors accept any policy offer. Workers therefore compare their payoffs under the
three policies. They will offer policy  since  (, ) >  (, ) >  (, ).

Case 2: Investors reject  , but accept  and  . If Workers offer  , they get (1 +
) (, ) . If Workers offer  , they get (1 + ) (, ) , while if they offer  , they get
(1 + ) (, ), Since  (, ) >  (, ) >  (, ), Workers offer policy . 




                                                                                            21
