                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




EXAMINING INCOME EXPECTATIONS IN THE COLLEGE AND EARLY POST-COLLEGE PERIODS:
             NEW DISTRIBUTIONAL TESTS OF RATIONAL EXPECTATIONS.

                                          Thomas Crossley
                                             Yifan Gong
                                        Todd R. Stinebrickner
                                         Ralph Stinebrickner

                                         Working Paper 28353
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w28353


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       January 2021




    The project was made possible by generous funding from The Mellon Foundation, The Spencer
    Foundation, The National Science Foundation, and The Social Sciences and Humanities Research
    Council. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
    views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

    NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
    peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
    official NBER publications.

    © 2021 by Thomas Crossley, Yifan Gong, Todd R. Stinebrickner, and Ralph Stinebrickner. All
    rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
    explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Examining Income Expectations in the College and Early Post-college Periods: New Distributional
Tests of Rational Expectations.
Thomas Crossley, Yifan Gong, Todd R. Stinebrickner, and Ralph Stinebrickner
NBER Working Paper No. 28353
January 2021
JEL No. D84,J0

                                          ABSTRACT

Unique longitudinal probabilistic expectations data from the Berea Panel Study, which cover both
the college and early post-college periods, are used to examine young adults' beliefs about their
future incomes. We introduce a new measure of the ex post accuracy of beliefs, and two
new approaches to testing whether, ex ante, agents exhibit Rational Expectations. We show that
taking into account the additional information about higher moments of individual belief
distributions contained in probabilistic expectations data is important for detecting types of
violations of Rational Expectations that are not detectable by existing mean-based tests. Beliefs
about future income are found to become more accurate as students progress through school
and then enter the post-college period. Tests of Rational Expectations almost always reject for the
in-school period, but the evidence against Rational Expectations is much weaker in the post-college
period.

Thomas Crossley                                 Todd R. Stinebrickner
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
European University Institute                   The University of Western Ontario
Fiesole, FI                                     London, Ontario, N6A 5C2
Italy                                           CANADA
and IFS                                         and NBER
tfcrossley@gmail.com                            trstineb@uwo.ca

Yifan Gong                                      Ralph Stinebrickner
Social Science Centre                           Berea College
The University of Western Ontario               Berea, KY 40403
London, ON                                      and University of Western Ontario
Canada                                          ralph_stinebrickner@berea.edu
ygong48@uwo.ca
1     Introduction
    Whether young adults have reasonable expectations about their future incomes is impor-
tant for a variety of policy reasons. For example, whether college attendance decisions are
optimal depends on the quality of beliefs about the financial returns to college education.
Gong, Stinebrickner, and Stinebrickner (2020) show that these decisions also depend on the
second moment of beliefs (uncertainty). Beyond schooling, whether consumption and savings
decisions are optimal may depend on the quality of beliefs about future income (Sandmo,
1970; Leland, 1978; D'Haultfoeuille, Gaillac, and Maurel, 2018).
    This paper takes advantage of data from the Berea Panel Study (BPS) to study young
adults' beliefs about their future incomes. As described in Section 2, the BPS follows two
cohorts of students from college entrance to about age 30. The BPS was one of the first
longitudinal studies to use probabilistic expectations questions to elicit, for each respondent,
information about the full distribution describing beliefs (Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner,
2012). In each year, the study elicited each student's beliefs about post-college income at
particular future points in time. Subsequently, the Study then also collected each student's
actual realized earnings at those same points of time. The BPS is unique in allowing a
comparison of probabilistic expectations and outcomes for an extended period, from the
time of college entrance through the early part of the working life.
    We begin, in Section 3, by characterizing the ex post accuracy of respondents' beliefs,
which naturally involves measuring some type of average distance between a person's sub-
jective beliefs about an outcome and the realization of the outcome. We develop a novel
average belief-weighted mean squared error measure of accuracy and show how accuracy
evolved through college and into the early working lives for these young adults. Our measure
directly exploits the BPS information about belief distributions. It decomposes naturally
into a component that indicates the average mean bias and two components that indicate
whether respondents had, on average, an appropriate degree of uncertainty. Our ex post
accuracy measure suggests that beliefs become more accurate as students progress through
school and then enter the post-college period. Ex post, respondents were too optimistic
(positively biased) while in college, and they were more uncertain while in college than
afterwards.
    We turn to formally testing whether, ex ante, beliefs satisfy Rational Expectations in
Sections 4 through 6. The Rational Expectations Hypothesis requires that the distribution
describing a person's subjective beliefs about future income is equal to the actual conditional

                                               2
distribution of future income given the person's current information set. It is worth noting
that, while the concepts of ex post accuracy and ex ante rationality are closely related, they
convey different information about the quality of income beliefs. For example, if people tend
to have rational but inaccurate beliefs about future income, then policy may seek to reveal
additional information about factors such as ability that create uncertainty when they are not
completely observed. On the other hand, if beliefs tend to be irrational, then policy might
seek to help agents use the information they have more effectively, for example by providing
guidance about how known factors such as educational attainment or college major influence
the distribution of future income.
   Existing tests of Rational Expectations typically use only the mean of a respondent's
subjective belief distribution (see Pesaran and Weale, 2006, for a survey). For example,
researchers commonly use a Regression test, which focuses on the coefficients in a regression
of outcomes on mean beliefs. As such, it does not require information on higher moments of
the belief distribution. We make an important methodological contribution by recognizing
a central implication of Rational Expectations - that agents' beliefs are not only unbiased,
but also, for example, exhibit an appropriate degree of uncertainty. In Section 4, we develop
two new approaches for testing Rational Expectations on micro data when probabilistic
expectations about a continuous variable are available. Unlike many traditional tests that
are based entirely on mean beliefs, our proposed tests also assess the second and higher
moments of agents' beliefs.
   Probabilistic expectations data, which have become increasingly common, can be collected
in two ways: by eliciting percentiles of the belief distribution or by eliciting the perceived
probabilities for some partition of the realization space (Manski, 2018). We refer to the
former as the percentile format and the latter as the probability format. The BPS collects
expectations data in both ways. Our first new approach to testing Rational Expectations
develops naturally from our measure of ex post accuracy, testing whether beliefs are, on
average, unbiased, and whether subjective uncertainty captures the objective variance of
innovations. We refer to this test as the "Mean-Variance" Test. Like many existing tests of
Rational Expectations, this test requires panel data.
   Our second new testing strategy takes a quite different, and to the best of our knowledge,
entirely novel approach. It builds on the insight that, under Rational Expectations, the
distribution that results from aggregating the subjective beliefs of individuals will be identical
to the distribution of realizations (in the absence of aggregate shocks). We refer to tests based


                                                3
on this approach as "Aggregate-Distribution" tests. In addition to assessing the higher
moments of agents' beliefs, this approach has several further advantages: 1) it results in
repeated cross-section tests, so it does not require panel data; 2) when belief data is elicited
in the probability format, a fully nonparametric test can be deployed; 3) this approach is
robust to some kinds of reporting error in survey data on beliefs, unlike, for example, the
Regression test, which is quite sensitive to measurement error in mean beliefs.
   Intuitively, taking into account the additional information contained in the higher mo-
ments of individual belief distributions should allow us to detect more types of violations of
Rational Expectations. An important part of our methodological contribution comes from
demonstrating that this is true for our new tests. As one example, we show that the null
hypotheses of the Mean-Variance Test and the Aggregate-Distribution Test jointly imply the
null of the Regression Test, but that the reverse is not true.
   In Section 5, we apply our two new approaches, as well as mean-based tests from the
literature, taking advantage of the unique features of the BPS. One primary substantive
contribution comes from the finding that Rational Expectations provides a better descrip-
tion of income beliefs for the post-college period than for the in-school period. Across
different tests and different years of the in-school period, we almost always reject the null
that individuals have Rational Expectations about income at age 28. However, our conclu-
sions are substantially different in the post-college period, where we frequently do not reject
the null of Rational Expectations about income at the age of 28. The BPS data also allow
us to provide evidence about the practical importance of our theoretical results about the
relationship between our new tests, which take into account higher moments, and existing
mean-based tests. Consistent with these theoretical findings, we find that our tests reject
more often than existing mean-based tests in the post-college period.
   As with most existing tests of Rational Expectations, our proposed tests compare elicited
beliefs to realizations from a single period. It is well known that Rational Expectations tests
of this type are only strictly valid in the absence of aggregate shocks (see, e.g., Attanasio
and Augsburg, 2016). In Section 6, we extend our analysis by considering how different
tests (both ours and tests from the previous literature) of Rational Expectations can ac-
commodate the possibility of additively separable aggregate shocks. This form of aggregate
shocks is commonly assumed in the income process literature (see, e.g., Meghir and Pista-
ferri, 2011). We then apply modified versions of the tests to the BPS data. When we allow
for additively separable aggregate shocks we continue to reject the rationality of in-school


                                               4
beliefs for almost any combination of test and year of belief elicitation. These results stand
in stark contrast to the results from the post-college period, where we rarely reject the null
of Rational Expectations. Thus, importantly, the general pattern of many more rejections
of Rational Expectations during college than after college is robust to allowing for aggregate
shocks.
   Related Literature: Our analysis of students' and young adults' beliefs about future
income adds to a growing on literature on students' beliefs and expectations (for example
Zafar, 2011; Arcidiacono, Hotz, and Kang, 2012; Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner, 2012),
and more generally to the broader literature on the use of probabilistic expectations data
to study economic behaviour (see Manski, 2004; Delavande, 2008; Van der Klaauw, 2012;
Manski, 2018).
   Dominitz and Manski (1996), Dominitz and Manski (1997b) and Dominitz and Manski
(1997a) are important early papers studying survey data on probabilistic expectations about
income; Dominitz and Manski (1996) in particular focuses on students. The main focus
in those papers is to describe the respondents' belief distributions. Guiso, Jappelli, and
Terlizzese (1992) and Das and Donkers (1999) use similar data, also to characterize income
uncertainty. Dominitz (1998) employs panel data with both probabilistic expectations and
realizations of income data. He examines several implications of the Rational Expectations
Hypothesis for such data, but does not provide formal tests. He also assumes throughout that
realizations are independent, meaning that there is no possibility of aggregate shocks. Das
and Van Soest (1997) and Das, Dominitz, and Van Soest (1999) conduct similar exercises, but
with qualitative data on income expectations, rather than elicited probabilistic expectations.
   A paper that is especially relevant is D'Haultfoeuille, Gaillac, and Maurel (2018), which
also proposes a new test of the Rational Expectations Hypothesis using micro data on in-
come. That paper quantifies the consequences of deviations from Rational Expectations
in the context of a life-cycle model of consumption, providing a general motivation for the
focus on the testing of Rational Expectations in our paper. However, perhaps of more spe-
cific relevance is that our testing approaches complement their test. Traditionally, it has
been common for surveys to elicit only point expectations from respondents and researchers
often interpret an elicited point expectation as the mean of a respondent's belief distribu-
tion. Adopting this interpretation, D'Haultfoeuille, Gaillac, and Maurel (2018) develop a
repeated cross-section mean-based test that takes into account the implications of Rational
Expectations on all (cross-sectional) moments of mean-beliefs and outcomes. However, in-


                                              5
creasingly researchers and survey designers have turned to eliciting more information about
belief distributions, particularly with a goal of understanding the subjective uncertainty that
economic agents face. Our new panel test and our new repeated cross-section tests deal ex-
plicitly with this case. An important point highlighted by both the testing approaches we
develop is that elicited probabilistic expectations provide information about the rationality
of beliefs beyond that which is contained in point expectations. This is true even when
agents' information sets are not observed. In our conclusion (Section 7), we also discuss the
implications of our findings for the relevance of our findings for the design of survey questions
that elicit probabilistic expectations.



2       Data

2.1     Berea Panel Study
    Designed and administered by Todd Stinebrickner and Ralph Stinebrickner, the Berea
Panel Study (BPS) is a multipurpose longitudinal survey project, which began in 1999 and
collected detailed information for understanding a wide variety of issues related to higher
education and the early part of the post-college period. The BPS has been used to study
dropout, major choice, tasks, etc. (Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner, 2012, 2014a,b; Stine-
brickner, Stinebrickner, and Sullivan, 2019).
    The BPS took place at Berea College, which is located in central Kentucky. Berea oper-
ates under a standard liberal arts curriculum and students at Berea are similar in academic
quality, for example, to students at the University of Kentucky (Stinebrickner and Stine-
brickner, 2008).1 Further, academic decisions and outcomes at Berea are similar to those
found elsewhere. Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner (2003) shows that dropout rates are similar
to the dropout rates at other schools (for students from similar backgrounds) and Stinebrick-
ner and Stinebrickner (2014b) shows that patterns of major choice and major-switching are
similar to those found in the NLSY by Arcidiacono (2004).
    However, Berea has some features that are advantageous for research purposes. Perhaps
most prominently, Berea operates under an objective of providing educational opportunities
to "students of great promise, but limited economics resources." Generally, the low income
demographic group covered by the BPS is of particular interest to policymakers because, for
    1
   The average ACT score of students at Berea College is 23. In terms of demographic characteristics,
approximately 60% of students are female and approximately 18% of students are black.


                                                 6
example, they are much less likely to graduate from college than students from more privi-
leged backgrounds (Manski, 1992; Bowen and Bok, 1998; Bowen, Chingos, and McPherson,
2009). Further, issues related to the accuracy and rationality of beliefs studied in this paper
may be of particular importance for this group. Students at Berea may be especially likely
to suffer from information frictions since less than half (34%) of students have a parent who
completed a college degree and, on average, the income of their families is roughly $26,000
at the time of college entrance (Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner, 2014a). As always, it is
important to keep in mind that caution is warranted when thinking about exactly how our
results might generalize to, for example, students from higher income backgrounds.
   The BPS consists of two cohorts. Baseline surveys were administered to the first cohort
immediately before it began its freshman year in the fall of 2000 and baseline surveys were
administered to the second cohort immediately before it began its freshman year in the fall
of 2001. In total, 720 students answered this initial survey. The BPS was unique in its
frequency of contact with respondents. Students who completed the baseline were eligible
to participate in the 10-12 surveys that took place each year during the in-school period.
We focus on the baseline survey and the surveys that were administered at the end of each
academic year because these surveys contain the questions about income beliefs that we
use. All students in the two entering cohorts who graduated were eligible for the annual
post-college surveys that were administered in May/June until 2013, providing up to 9 years
of post-college data.


2.2       Survey Questions
In-school Income Beliefs
   The survey questions eliciting beliefs about future income while respondents were in
school are of the percentile format. Specifically, as seen in Question A1 in Appendix A, the
in-school survey questions elicited the minimum, the maximum, and the three quartiles of
the distribution describing a student's beliefs about own annual income at three different
ages (first year after graduation, age 28, and age 38).2 In this paper we focus on beliefs
about own income at age 28 because this is the age for which we have the most complete
outcome data; respondents were younger than age 38 when the post-college survey ended,
and a substantial number of students had not graduated in time to receive a post-college
survey at the age of 23.
  2
      We exclude observations for which the maximum is higher than $250,000.


                                                    7
   Detailed instructions were included with the survey. The first portion of the instructions
involved a discussion of an example that would seemingly be of particular salience to students
- beliefs about grade performance. This portion of the instructions began by noting that
students might not be certain about future outcomes of interest. It then focused on helping
students understand the concept of quartiles by, for example, describing a hypothetical set
of responses in which the first and third quartiles of a student's belief distribution (about
grade performance on a hypothetical test) are not necessarily the same distance from the
median. The second portion of the instructions described information specifically relevant
for providing information about income beliefs. Of particular note, the survey instructions
highlighted one fundamental reason that uncertainty might exist about future income by
instructing students to take into account the possibility that they would be working part-
time, working full-time or not working at all at a particular future age.
   Given data collected in the percentile format, a distributional assumption is required
to calculate moments of belief distributions. We employ a step-wise uniform distribution,
though the results reported below are robust to alternative choices. Details of these calcu-
lations are provided in Appendix B. It is worth noting that when point expectations are
collected in surveys, researchers often interpret responses as the mean (mathematical expec-
tation) of the respondent's belief distribution, but it is not clear that this is how the question
was intended by survey designers or interpreted by respondents.3 They might for example,
report the median or the mode (D'Haultfoeuille, Gaillac, and Maurel, 2018; Ben´
                                                                              itez-Silva
et al., 2008). Thus, an assumption is also required to obtain a moment, such as the mean of
the belief distribution, from point expectations questions.
   We exclude observations for which the mean of the belief distribution is more than three
sample standard deviations away from the cross-sectional sample mean of this object. Sim-
ilarly we exclude observations for which the standard deviation of the belief distribution is
more than three sample standard deviations away from the cross-sectional sample mean of
this object.
   Table 1 reports some descriptive statistics for students' in-school belief distributions. As
shown in the first three rows of the table, on average students downward adjust the minimum,
the median, and also the maximum of their belief distributions monotonically over time. The
fourth row of Table 1 shows that the interquartile range, which is a measure of uncertainty,
is also decreasing over time.
  3
      For example, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's Survey of Consumer Expectations has asked



                                                  8
Post-College Income Beliefs
   The survey questions eliciting post-college beliefs about future income differ in that they
ask about family income and in that they use the probability format.4 Specifically, as seen in
Survey Question A2 in Appendix A, the post-college survey questions elicited the perceived
probability that a respondent's annual family income in the next year would fall in each of
ten income categories and the perceived probability that a respondent's annual family income
in five years would fall in each of ten income categories. As with the in-school expectations
questions, respondents were instructed to take into account the possibility of changes in job
situations. Given the family nature of the survey question, respondents were also asked to
take into account the possibility that the number of workers in the family might change due
to, for example, marriage and the birth of children.
   A distributional assumption is again required to derive moments of each respondent's
belief distribution from their responses. As detailed in Appendix B, we again employ a step-
wise uniform distribution within bins, treating the maximum value in the top bin as 150,000
dollars. As before, we exclude observations for which the mean (or standard deviation) of
the belief distribution is more than three sample deviations away from the cross-sectional
sample mean of this object.
   We find that there are relatively few respondents who assign 100 percent probability to
one income bin and zero probabilities to other income bins. This percentage of respondents
ranges between 5% and 8% during the post-college years. Looking across all post-college
years, on average, respondents reported positive probabilities for about four income bins.
   Due to space considerations, we do not show the full descriptive statistics for all reported
probabilities. Instead, we note that, over time, individuals update, in a positive direction,
their beliefs about income in the next year and in five years. For example, over time, the
percentage of respondents who reported a positive probability for the bottom bin decreases,
from 31% in 2006 to 20% in 2013. Similarly, over time, the percentage of respondents who
reported a positive probability for the top bin increases, from 8% in 2006 to 23% in 2013.

Realizations
"What do you believe your annual earnings will be in four months?"
   4
     The choice between the probability format and the percentile format is in part a trade off between
the possibility of anchoring with the probability format (Dominitz and Manski, 1996, 1997b; Manski, 2004)
against the likelihood that the probability format is easier for subjects to comprehend. Other expectations
questions in the in-school survey (notably about grades) employed the probability format. The decision
to move to the probability format in the post-college period was motivated, in part, by feedback from
participants and in-school analyses suggesting that students were especially comfortable with this format.


                                                    9
   Annual own and spousal income are constructed from Question A3 in Appendix A, which
gave respondents flexibility over whether earnings were reported for an hourly, weekly,
monthly, or yearly period. Annual family income is then constructed by adding up own
and spousal income. All beliefs and realizations are deflated by the CPI to 2001 dollars. We
exclude observations for which realized income is more than three sample deviation away
from the cross-sectional sample mean of realized income. Descriptive statistics for income
realizations are of direct relevance to the tests that we propose. Hence, we show them along
with the empirical results of our tests in Section 5.


2.3    Data Quality
   The baseline survey, which took place immediately after students arrived for their fresh-
man year, was completed in paper format in the presence of Todd and Ralph Stinebrickner.
Before completing the survey, students received extensive classroom training, which focused
on delivering and explaining the instructions for the income expectations questions. Subse-
quent in-school surveys were distributed through the campus mail system and returned to
Ralph Stinebrickner in person. The in-school approach to surveying was motivated partly
by the potential benefit to response rates of providing students with compensation immedi-
ately after they completed surveys. However, this approach also allowed students to provide
immediate feedback about survey comprehension and to receive further encouragement to
complete the surveys in a conscientious manner.
   The spirit of this rapid review and compensation approach was carried forward into the
post-college survey period. Compensation was included in advance with the mailed surveys.
Surveys were reviewed as soon as they were returned, and interaction with respondents
followed immediately if necessary. Students had prior experience with the probability format
used in the post-college income expectations questions, as it was used, for example, to elicit
beliefs about grade performance in the in-school surveys.
   This survey approach led to high response rates. Approximately 85% of all students who
entered Berea in 2000 and 2001 completed the baseline surveys. Eligibility for subsequent
in-school surveys depended on completing the baseline survey and remaining in college, and
response rates for those surveys remained around 85%. In part because of the long-term
relationship built with respondents and in part because substantial effort was made to build
a comprehensive database of addresses, response rates remained high in the post-college
period. All individuals belonging to the initial cohorts (whether or not they completed the

                                              10
baseline survey) who graduated were eligible for the post-colleges surveys. Against this base,
the response rates for the post-college survey remained between 80% and 90% for most of
the post-college period.
   This survey approach also produced data with very little item non-response and high
internal consistency. As an example of the low item non-response, only 9 of the 722 respon-
dents did not complete the income expectations question on the baseline in-school survey.
As an example of the high internal inconsistency, we find that the percentage of respondents
who do not report probabilities that add up to 100 in their responses to post-college income
expectations questions is very close to zero in all post-college years (ranging from 2% to 5%).
   More generally, the quality of expectations data in the BPS has been documented in
previous work. As one example, Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner (2012) finds that a simple
theoretical implication related to college dropout - that the dropout decision should depend
on both a student's cumulative GPA and beliefs about future GPA - is satisfied when beliefs
are directly elicited through survey questions, but is not satisfied when beliefs are constructed
under a version of Rational Expectations. As a second example, Gong, Stinebrickner, and
Stinebrickner (2019) propose a method for characterizing the amount of classical measure-
ment error in responses to expectations questions, and find that a relatively small amount
of measurement error is present in responses to in-school income expectations questions. Of
course, as suggested by Manski and Molinari (2010), measurement error present in survey
responses might not be classical if, for example, it arises because of rounding behavior. Con-
sistent with much other research, we find some evidence of rounding. For example, pooling
together students' responses to both the 1-year ahead and 5-year ahead income expectations
questions for all post-college years, we find that, for 84% of the responses, the reported prob-
abilities associated with all ten income bins are multiples of 5; for 49% of the responses, the
reported probabilities are multiples of 10; for 20% of the responses, the reported probabilities
are multiples of 25; and for 13% of the responses, the reported probabilities are multiples of
50. Another possibility, recently investigated by Giustinelli, Manski, and Molinari (2019) is
that individuals may have imprecise beliefs. As the BPS, which began in 2000, did not have
individuals report intervals for probabilities, we are unable to assess this directly. However,
in our concluding remarks (Section 7), we discuss how belief imprecision could affect the
interpretation of our findings, and possible extensions to deal with this possibility.




                                               11
3     Descriptive Evidence on Ex Post Accuracy

3.1     A Measure of Ex Post Inaccuracy
    Let Yi denote the random variable associated with an outcome of interest. To make things
concrete, in our context, Yi will be either i's own income or i's family income at a particular
future time. For the sake of clarity, when we describe our empirical results in later sections,
we add subscripts O and F to all relevant objects to differentiate between own and family
outcomes.
    For each individual i in a sample, the realization of Yi is denoted yi . At an earlier
time t, each individual i reports information of relevance for characterizing the distribution
                                           B
describing her beliefs about yi . We let Yit denote the random variable whose distribution
describes the subjective beliefs of individual i at time t about yi .
    Our interest in this section is in examining the ex post accuracy of beliefs, in other words,
some measure of how beliefs deviate from realized outcomes. For individual i, we propose
the measure of ex post inaccuracy at time t, denoted B
                                                     it , given by:



                B             B       2
                        B [(Yit - yi ) ]
                it = EYit                                                                    (1)
                                B    B        B         2
                         B [((Yit - µit ) - (µit - yi )) ]
                    = EYit
                                B    B 2      B        2      B    B     B
                         B [((Yit - µit ) + (µit - yi ) - 2(Yit - µit )(µit - yi ))]
                    = EYit
                                B       B        2
                           B [Yit ] + (µit - yi ) ,
                    = varYit


where µB
       it = EYit
                    B    B
               B (Yit ). it is the ex post belief-weighted mean squared error in individual


i's beliefs. The last line of Equation (1) shows that this measure can be written as the sum
                                                                        B
of individual i's uncertainty (measured by the individual variance of Yit ) and her squared
ex post error (relative to her mean belief).
    Aggregating B
                it over i yields an aggregate measure of ex post inaccuracy of beliefs at

time t, which we denote B
                        t :



                                   B
                                   t = Ei {EYit
                                                    B       2
                                              B [(Yit - yi ) ]}.                             (2)


Throughout the paper, we use an i subscript whenever we take the expectation across in-
dividuals, and use the corresponding individual-specific random variable as the subscript
whenever we take the expectation over the distribution of that random variable for an indi-


                                                  12
vidual.
   A better understanding of B
                             t comes from inserting Equation (1) into Equation (2):



                             B
                             t = Ei {EYit
                                              B       2
                                        B [(Yit - yi ) ]}


                                                 B            B        2
                                            B [Yit ]] + Ei [(µit - yi ) ].
                                 = Ei [varYit                                               (3)


In the usual mean squared error way, the second term can be written as the sum of a
cross-sectional variance and a squared aggregate error:


                        B              B                  B
                        t = Ei [var (Yit )] + vari (yi - µit ) + (¯ ¯ t )2 ,
                                                                  y-µ                       (4)
                                     B                 B               B
                                     t, 1              t, 2            t, 3



      ¯t = Ei (µB
where µ         it ), and y
                          ¯ = Ei (yi ).
   Equation (3) shows that our measure of ex post inaccuracy, B
                                                              t , consists of three com-
                                                           B                B
ponents, each of which is of interest. The first component t, 1  Ei [var (Yit )] measures

the average amount of subjective uncertainty about yi at time t. The second component
B                 B                                                          B
t, 2  vari (yi - µit ) is the cross-sectional variance of innovations (yi - µit ) and measures

the dispersion of relevant new information received after t. If individuals' realizations are
i.i.d., this is the individuals' "actual" uncertainty about yi at time t. The third component,
                             B
the squared aggregate error, t, 3  (¯ ¯t )2 , captures the size of the systematic ex post
                                    y-µ
prediction error.
                                                                      B      B         B
   It is worth noting in advance that the three individual components t, 1 , t,2 , and t,3 are

useful for reasons beyond their role in the computation and understanding of B
                                                                             t . As we

discuss in detail in Section 4.2, the three separate components provide the foundation for
one of our new tests of the Rational Expectations Hypothesis. Hence, this decomposition of
B
t builds a link between the ex post accuracy and ex ante rationality of subjective beliefs.



3.2       Results
   We begin by examining the ex post accuracy of income beliefs during college. We take
advantage of the in-school survey questions described in Section 2.2 that elicit the minimum,
maximum, and the three quartiles of the subjective belief distribution about own income at
         B
age 28, YO,it . As detailed in Appendix B, fitting the elicited data to a step-wise uniform dis-
                               B               B
tribution yields values of E (YO,it ) and var(YO,it ) for each student. These objects along with

                                                 13
realizations yO,i allow us to calculate the three components of ex post inaccuracy measure,
B        B           B                                                              B
O,t, 1 , O,t,2 , and O,t,3 . Then, the inaccuracy measure for own income at age 28, O,t , can

be obtained from Equation (3).
   A unique feature of the BPS is that it elicited beliefs at the time of entrance and at the
end of each year of college. For t ranging from 10 years before age 28 (at college entrance)
                                                                               B        B
to 6 years before age 28 (around the end of college), Panel A of Table 2 shows O,t, 1 , O,t,2 ,
B            B
O,t, 3 , and O,t , where the sample for a particular t consists of students for which both

income expectations at time t and annual income at age 28 are observed.5
   Consistent with the notion that students learn about income-influencing factors during
college, Column 4 of Panel A in Table 2 shows that the ex post inaccuracy measure t
decreases in a monotonic fashion during college. A further examination of the first three
columns indicates that this is also true for all three components of t . Between college
entrance (10-year ahead) and the end of college (6-year ahead), the measure of aggregate
                        B                                               6
subjective uncertainty, O,t, 1 , drops by about 40%, from 123.6 to 72.3. Similarly, we find that
                                             B
the measure of aggregate actual uncertainty, O,t, 2 , decreases during college by roughly 60%,

from 442.9 at college entrance to 178.3 at the end of college. However, most striking is the
third column of Panel A, which shows that the systematic bias about yO,i , as characterized
    B
by O,t, 3 , falls by about 90% during college. At college entrance, students overestimate YO,i
   
by 324.1 = 18.00 thousand dollars. At the end of college, this overestimation is only

  35 = 5.92 thousand dollars.
   Given the substantial changes in the inaccuracy measure that take place even during
school, it is natural to consider also the path of inaccuracy after school, when direct involve-
ment in the job market may provide students with significant additional information. Pro-
viding evidence about inaccuracy in the post-college period necessitates taking into account
that BPS expectations questions were somewhat different in the schooling and post-schooling
periods. Perhaps most notably, the post-college questions elicit beliefs about future family
annual income rather than future own annual income. Thus, before characterizing inaccu-
racy in the post-college period, we set the stage for an informative comparison of in-school
and post-college beliefs by considering how the in-school inaccuracy measures about future
own income in Panel A can be extended to characterize in-school inaccuracy about future
   5
      We choose not to restrict our sample to those who report income expectations at all t because the sample
size would be very small (slightly more than 100 students) in this case. Nonetheless, we find qualitatively
similar results when we restrict our analysis sample in this way.
    6
      This is broadly consistent with the findings about income uncertainty in Gong, Stinebrickner, and
Stinebrickner (2019).


                                                     14
Table 1: Average Responses to In-college Expectations Questions about Own Annual Income
at Age 28

                                     Beginning of End of      End of     End of End of
      Time of Belief-elicitation
                                       Year 1     Year 1      Year 2     Year 3 College
                                        33.28      32.53       29.86      27.25   23.34
      Average Minimum
                                       (15.71)    (16.25)     (12.32)    (11.23) (10.21)
                                        47.25      46.95       42.25      39.55   34.69
      Average Median
                                       (19.32)    (19.16)     (15.41)    (14.62) (12.47)
                                        64.04      63.43       57.71      54.14   48.64
      Average Maximum
                                       (28.91)    (27.59)     (23.78)    (23.49) (19.92)
                                        14.08      14.05       12.58      12.13   11.04
      Avg. Interquartile Range
                                       (10.66)    (10.15)      (8.91)     (9.62)  (7.31)
      Sample Size                        667        581         414        371     361

Notes: All numbers are in units of 1,000s of (2001) U.S. dollars. Standard deviations are
reported in the parenthesis.




               Table 2: Ex-post Accuracy: Beliefs in School and after College

                 Item    B
                         t,        B
                                   t,               B
                                                    t,               t       Sample Size
                            1         2                3
        Panel A: In School (Own Income at 28/29)
        10-year ahead 123.6 442.9           324.1                   890.6        271
         9-year ahead 109.8 333.4           302.5                   745.7        259
         8-year ahead 101.4 310.8           169.8                   582.0        206
         7-year ahead 87.1   271.0          111.3                   469.4        202
         6-year ahead 72.3   178.3           35.0                   285.6        207
        Panel B: In School (Family Income at 28/29)
        10-year ahead 581.5 1,486.2        1,487.4                 3,555.0       299
         9-year ahead 495.4 1,208.8        1,357.7                 3,061.8       284
         8-year ahead 420.0 989.4           880.3                  2,289.7       228
         7-year ahead 380.9 986.7           631.8                  1,999.4       219
         6-year ahead 299.9 687.3           340.0                  1.327.2       227
        Panel C: After College (Family Income at 28/29)
         5-year ahead 162.3 432.1             8.5                   602.9        159
         1-year ahead 117.1 180.4             0.1                   297.6        289

Notes: The unit of annual income is $1,000 USD. Panel A reports the ex post inaccuracy
measures of students' beliefs in college about own annual income at age 28. Panel B reports the
ex post inaccuracy measures of students' beliefs in college about annual family income at age 28.
Panel C reports the ex post inaccuracy measures of students' beliefs after college about annual
family income at age 28 (or 29).




                                               15
family income.
   The in-school family income inaccuracy measure again comes from Equation (3), with
all objects of relevance now being related to the family. Realized family income at age 28,
yF,i , is observed. Then, what is required is to characterize the mean and variance of the
                                                             B
distribution describing beliefs about future family income, YF,it .
   Student i's annual family income at age 28, yF,i , is given by:


                                       yF,i = yO,i + mi yS,i .                                 (5)


where mi is a binary indicator for whether a student is married at age 28 and ys,i represents
                                                                                  B
spousal income (if present) at age 28. Our ability to characterize beliefs about yO,it were
described during the computation of Panel A. Then, what is needed is to characterize beliefs
about spousal income as captured by the second term on the right side of Equation (5).
With respect to characterizing beliefs about the first element in this product, importantly,
the BPS elicited each student's perceived probability at time t of being married at age 28,
  M                                                                  B
Pit . What remains is to characterize spousal beliefs about yS,i , YS,it . In Appendix C, we
explore the assumptions that allow us to characterize these beliefs, and therefore beliefs
                             B
about future family income, YF,it .
                            B        B       B           B
   Panel B of Table 2 shows F,t, 1 , F,t,2 , F,t,3 , and F,t for the same range of t used in Panel

A. While all of the measures are considerably larger than their counterparts in Panel A due
to the presence of additional uncertainty related to future marital status and future spousal
income, as expected, the results in Panel B exhibit the same general pattern as the results
in Panel A; all three components of inaccuracy measure are dropping monotonically during
college.
   Turning to examining inaccuracy in the post-college period, the needed mean and variance
                                                        B               B
of post-college beliefs about future family income, E (YF,it ) and var(YF,it ), can be obtained di-
rectly since students directly report beliefs about future family income. In terms of specifics,
students report beliefs about annual family income one year and five years in the future.
Thus, 5-year ahead beliefs about family income at age 28 are available for a student who
completes a survey at age 23 and 1-year ahead beliefs about family income at age 28 are
available for a student who completes a survey at age 27. Unfortunately, as noted earlier,
many students are older than 23 when they receive their first post-college survey. As a result,
we compute our 5-year ahead post-college inaccuracy measure by comparing 5-year ahead



                                                 16
beliefs elicited at age 24 to realized family income at age 29.
    The fourth column of Panel C shows that the downward trend of the ex post inaccuracy
measures that we see for in-school beliefs continues through the post-college period. Beliefs
about future family income become substantially more accurate as students make the tran-
sition from college to the labor market. The 5-year ahead measure is less than half of the
6-year ahead measure from the fourth column of Panel B. Beliefs after entering the labor
market further improve as age becomes closer to 28, as shown by the 1-year ahead measure.
    The decomposition of our ex post accuracy measure in the first three columns of Panel B
and Panel C provides evidence about why the substantial improvement in accuracy occurs
in the post-college period. Most notably, the third columns of Panel B and Panel C indicate
that the substantial overestimation of future income that is present in college dissipates
quickly after labor market entry. At the end of college, students overestimate their annual
                             
family income at age 28 by 340 = 18.44 thousand dollars, on average. At age 24, this
                              
overestimation is reduced to 8.5 = 2.92 thousand dollars on average. By age 27, the
                 
overestimation ( 0.1 = 0.32) has disappeared.
    Of course, these improvements in ex post accuracy may result from multiple causes. The
post-college beliefs are for a shorter time horizon. Nevertheless, the sharp improvement
from the 6-year ahead measure to the 5-year ahead measure strongly suggests that the
first experience in the post-college labor market has an important effect. The improvement
within the post-college period, from the 5-year ahead measure to the 1-year ahead measure
may reflect either further learning about post-college career prospects or that idiosyncratic
incomes are likely easier to predict once more is known about the aggregate state of the
economy.



4     Testing Rational Expectations: Theory
    In this section we develop two new approaches to testing Rational Expectations about
micro-level outcomes. One develops naturally from our measure of ex post accuracy. The
other takes a quite different, and to the best of our knowledge, entirely novel approach.
It builds on the insight that, under Rational Expectations, the distribution that results
from aggregating the subjective beliefs of individuals will be identical to the distribution
of realizations (in the absence of aggregate shocks). Finally, we analyze how our two tests
relate to existing tests in the literature.


                                              17
4.1      The Rational Expectations Hypothesis
4.1.1     Environment

   As above we consider a situation in which we have data on realizations, yi , of the ran-
                                                                 B
dom variable of interest, and some data on the random variable Yit describing individuals'
beliefs about yi at an earlier time t. This information may come from a balanced panel, an
unbalanced panel, or a repeated cross-section. In any case, we assume that all samples are
randomly selected from the same population. For an unbalanced panel, this implies missing
observations on beliefs or realizations are Missing Completely at Random (MCAR). Formally
we assume:

                                B                                                  B
 A1 The sample for which both Yit and yi are measured, the sample for which only Yit is
        measured, and the sample for which only yi is measured are all random samples from
        the same population.

   As noted above, survey responses to point expectations questions are often interpreted as
              B
the mean of Yit , which we will henceforth denote by µB
                                                      it . Probabilistic expectations questions

can come in the percentile format, which elicits the p-th percentile (e.g., minimum, maxi-
                         B
mum, and quartiles) of Yit for finitely many p, or the probability format, which elicits the
                   B
probability that Yit  Sk for k = 1, ..., K , where S = {S1 , ..., Sk , ..., SK } denotes a partition
                    B
of the support of Yit . Our two new tests take advantage of probabilistic expectations data,
while most earlier tests are based on point expectations data.
   We assume that Yi is determined by many underlying random variables. We decompose
these random variables into the ones that are independently distributed across individuals
(individual-specific factors), Xi , and the ones that are shared by all individuals (aggregate
                                                                                        -
factors), Z. We further denote the ones that are observed by individuals before t as Xt
                                                                                      i and

Zt- , and the ones that are observed by individuals after t as Xt +    t+
                                                                i and Z . We use lower

case versions of Xi and Z to denote their realizations.


4.1.2     Definition of Rational Expectations

   Given the environment described above, we consider the version of the Rational Expec-
tations given by:




                                                18
                                                B
Definition 1. Let FYit
                     B (y ) denote the CDF of Yit , the random variable describing individual


i's subjective beliefs about yi at t. Individual i has Rational Expectations about yi if and only
                                                              t-   t-    t-
if FYit
      B (y ) = F
                Yi |(Xt - t- t-
                      i =xi ,Z  =zt- ) (y ) for y  supp(Yi |(Xi = xi , Z    = zt- )).

This definition of Rational Expectations requires individual i's beliefs about a random vari-
able Yi to be identical to the actual distribution of Yi conditional on her information set at
       -  t-
t, (Xt
     i = xi , Z
               t-
                  = zt- ).
   In this section we follow much of the previous literature on expectations of micro outcomes
in assuming that there are no aggregate shocks observed by individuals after t, i.e., that Zt+
is degenerate for all individuals. In Section 6 we explore the robustness of our results to this
assumption.
                                                                              -
   In the case where Zt+ is degenerate, we can express Yi as a function of Xt    t+       t-
                                                                            i , Xi , and Z :
           -
Yi = Y (Xt    t+   t-
         i , Xi , Z ). Since Z
                              t-
                                 is common to all individuals and is realized before beliefs
are elicited, its presence does not affect the test of Rational Expectations. With regard to
Xi , ex ante individuals have identical distributions of Xi , but realizations vary across people,
and this produces the variation in the empirical distribution of realizations, yi .
   Turning to the variation in beliefs, this arises for two reasons. We allow the information
                                                   -
set at time t to vary across individuals, i.e., Xt
                                                 i might contain different subsets of Xi for

different i. We let the random variable i denote the type of individual i, with each possible
realization i corresponding to one possible two-set partition of the full information set Xi .
Two individuals with the same i observe the same set of random variables at t (denoted
      i ,t-
as Xi       ) and are uncertain about the remaining random variables (denoted as Xi
                                                                                    i ,t+
                                                                                          ).
                                                    i ,t-                                 B
However, they might have different realizations of Xi     . Thus, variation in beliefs (Yit )
is produced by (i) differences in what part of Xi is observed by t (realizations of i ) and
                                                          i ,t-
(ii) differences in the realizations of the variables (Xi       ) for each type, i . Throughout the
paper, we maintain the assumption that i and Xi are independent.7
   To summarize, we impose the following assumptions throughout Section 4:

  A2 Zt+ is degenerate for all individuals.
   7
     This assumption is needed because our definition of Rational Expectations (Definition 1) does not require
individuals to correctly use information contained in i . In other words, it does not require individuals to
adjust their beliefs about the distribution of unobserved factors based on the fact that these factors have not
been observed. We would not need this independence assumption if we add this requirement to Definition 1.
  This assumption is trivially satisfied if all individuals observe the same set of random variables at t (i is
degenerate). One interpretation of this assumption is that i is non-stochastic. As an example of what this
assumption rules out, it would be violated if individuals know the state of their firm at t only if the firm is
doing badly. Importantly, we note that this independence assumption is required for many existing tests of
Rational Expectations, such as the Regression Test that we will discuss in detail later in Section 4.4.

                                                      19
 A3 i and Xi are independent.


4.2    Ex Post Inaccuracy and a Mean-Variance Test of Rational
       Expectations
   As shown in Section 3.1, the aggregate measure of ex post inaccuracy can be written as
                                              B                 B
the sum of the average subjective uncertainty t, 1 = Ei [var (Yit )], the aggregate "actual"
            B                  B                                                         B
uncertainty t, 2 = vari (yi - µit ), and the squared systematic ex post prediction error t,3 =

   ¯t )2 . Theorem 1 shows that a natural test of the RE assumption can be based on these
 y-µ
(¯
three components.

Theorem 1. Under assumptions A1 to A3, if all individuals have Rational Expectations
about Yi (Definition 1), then
                                       B      B          B
                                       t, 1 = t,2 and    t, 3 = 0.


Proof. For ease of exposition, we prove the theorem for the case where i and Zt- are
degenerate. We simplify notation by suppressing the i superscript. In Appendix D we
prove Theorem 1, allowing for nondegenerate i and Zt- .
   Under the assumption that individual i has Rational Expectations about Yi , her beliefs
                  B
at t about yi , Yit , are given by:

                                                      -  t-
                                          B
                                        Yit = Yi |(Xt
                                                    i = xi ).                             (6)


   This implies that:

                                                               t-   t-
                                      µB         B
                                       it = E (Yit ) = E (Yi |Xi = xi ),                  (7)
                                                    -  t-
                                   B
                             var(Yit ) = var(Yi |Xt
                                                  i = xi ).                               (8)

                                                                            -
                                    B
   The population distribution of Yit is produced by the realizations of Xt
                                                                          i . Hence, the
                 B                 B
first component, t, 1 = Ei [var (Yit )], is given by:


                                        B                   t-
                                        t, 1 = E [var (Yi |Xi )].                         (9)


   Similarly, the population distribution of yi is produced by the realizations of Xi . Hence,




                                                   20
                      B                  B
the second component, t, 2 = vari (yi - µit ), is given by:


                  B                       t-
                  t, 2 =var [Yi - E (Yi |Xi )]

                                             -  t-                          t-   t-
                      =var{E [Yi - E (Yi |Xt
                                           i )|Xi ]} + E {var [Yi - E (Yi |Xi )|Xi ]}

                                              -
                      =var(0) + E [var(Yi |Xt
                                            i )]

                       B
                      =t, 1,                                                                  (10)


where the second line follows from the law of iterative variance.
     The second part of Theorem 1 directly follows from the law of iterative expectations:

                                                                    -
                                  B
                                  t,       ¯t = E (Yi ) - E (Yi |Xt
                                         ¯-µ
                                     3 = y                        i ) = 0.                    (11)




     Note the role of the absence of the possibility of aggregate shocks. In the second part
of Theorem 1 the absence of aggregate shocks allows us to interpret a systematic ex post
prediction error as an ex ante bias. In the first part of Theorem 1 it implies that each
individual's subjective uncertainty should equal her variance of idiosyncratic shocks, and the
appropriate average of these can be measured by the cross-sectional variance of innovations.
While generally these implications will not remain with the possibility of aggregate shocks
after belief elicitation, a modified version of the second part of Theorem 1 can still hold if
we impose some commonly-assumed structure on the aggregate shocks. We discuss this in
Section 6.
                                                                                        B
     In order to develop a statistical test, we begin by noting that the computation of t, 2 and
 B                                     B
t, 3 requires information about both Yit and yi for the same sample of individuals (a balanced

panel). We let n denote the size of this sample. Further, we let ^B denote the sample analog
                                                                       t,j
     B                                                                         B
of   t, 1   for j = 1, 2, 3, ^12 denote the sample standard deviation of var(Yit ) - [(yi - µB
                                                                                             it ) -
     ^B ]2 , and 
                 ^3 denote the sample standard deviation of yi - µB
      t,3                                                         it . Under the following

assumption on the distribution of random variables, we are able to define and characterize
the asymptotic distribution of two test-statistics using the central limit theorem.

                            B
 A4 Both yi - µit and var(Yit ) - [(yi - µB
                                          it ) - (¯ ¯B
                                                  y-µ     2
                                                      t )] have finite second moments.




                                                   21
Theorem 2. (Mean-Variance Test) Under assumptions A1 to A4, if all individuals have
Rational Expectations about Yi (Definition 1), then

                                        ^B - 
                                               ^B d
                                         t,1
                                 ^12 
                                 u            t,2 - N (0, 1),
                                         ^12 / n

                                           ^B
                                            t,3 d
                                   ^3 
                                   u        - N (0, 1).
                                       ^3 / n
   Theorem 2 suggests two different tests of the Rational Expectations Hypothesis, one
based on the asymptotic two-tailed p-value of the test statistic u
                                                                 ^12 and another based on
the asymptotic two-tailed p-value of the test statistic u
                                                        ^3 . Of course a joint test is possible,
but having two tests may help differentiate between two different types of violations of the
RE assumption. A rejection of the test based on u
                                                ^3 provides evidence of a systematic mean
bias (mean predictions about yi are not correct, on average). In contrast, a rejection of the
test based on u
              ^12 provides evidence that individuals do not have the "correct" amount of
uncertainty about yi .


4.3    Aggregate-Distribution Tests of Rational Expectations
   The Mean-Variance Test developed in Section 4.2 requires that beliefs and outcomes
be observed for the same set of individuals (a balanced panel). In this section, we propose
Aggregate-Distribution Tests that can be implemented with unbalanced panels and repeated
cross-sections. The Mean-Variance Test and the Aggregate-Distribution Tests stand apart
from other existing tests by taking advantage of information about individual-level uncer-
tainty in beliefs (and potentially other higher moments). However, the former considers
                                            B
the mean uncertainty of individual beliefs (t, 1 in equation 4) whereas the latter considers

the variance (and higher moments) of the aggregate distributions of beliefs and realizations.
These are different but related objects. For example, the variance of the aggregate distribu-
tion of beliefs is equal to the sum of mean uncertainty of individual beliefs and the variance
of individual means (vari (µB
                            it )). The latter is referred to as the heterogeneity of beliefs as in

Gong, Stinebrickner, and Stinebrickner (2019).
   As discussed in Section 4.3.1 and 4.3.2, the implementation and benefits of the Aggregate-
Distribution test depend on how probabilistic expectations are collected. When a probability
format is used, a non-parametric test that naturally takes advantage of all available informa-
tion about the shape of individuals' belief distributions can be formulated. When a percentile

                                               22
format is used, a parametric assumption is required.


4.3.1   A Nonparametric Aggregate-Distribution Test

   Beginning with the case where probabilistic expectations are elicited with the probability
format, the Rational Expectations Hypothesis defined in Section 4.1 implies an equality
                                                                                    B,k
between an individual's perceived probability that the outcome is in the set Sk , Pit   , and
the actual probability that Yi is in Sk conditional on Xii ,t- = xi
                                                                  i ,t-
                                                                        and Z t- = z t- .

Corollary 1. If individual i has Rational Expectations about Yi (Definition 1), then

              B,k                                      i ,t-    i ,t-
            Pit            B
                   P rob(Yit  Sk ) = P rob(Yi  Sk |(Xi       = xi     , Zt- = zt- )).


   Corollary 1 implies the following theorem:

Theorem 3. Under assumptions A1 to A3, if all individuals have Rational Expectations
about Yi (Definition 1), then

                          B,k
                    Ei (Pit   ) = P rob(Yi  Sk |Zt- = zt- ),       for all k.


Proof. As above, for ease of exposition, we prove the theorem for the case where i and
Zt- are degenerate. In this case, P rob(Yi  Sk |Zt- = zt- ) = P rob(Yi  Sk ). We simplify
notation by suppressing the i superscript. In Appendix D we prove Theorem 3, allowing
for nondegenerate i and Zt- .
   Let I (·) denote an indicator function that takes a value of one when the statement is true
and takes a value of zero when the statement is false. Under the assumption that individual
                                                                   B,k
i has Rational Expectations about Yi , her perceived probability Pit   is given by:

                                  B,k                   -  t-
                                Pit   =P rob(Yi  Sk |Xt
                                                      i = xi )

                                                        -  t-
                                     =E [I (Yi  Sk )|Xt
                                                      i = xi ].                             (12)

                                    B,k                                       -
   The population distribution of Pit   is produced by the realizations of Xt
                                                                            i . Hence,




                                               23
      B,k
Ei (Pit   ) is given by:

                                         B,k                          -
                                   Ei (Pit   ) = E {E [I (Yi  Sk )|Xt
                                                                    i ]}

                                              = E [I (Yi  Sk )]

                                              = P rob(Yi  Sk ),                                (13)


where the second line directly follows from the law of iterative expectations.

   Theorem 3 implies that, in our baseline environment where there are no aggregate shocks
after time t, the test of the Rational Expectations Hypothesis is equivalent to a test for the
                                                                     B,k
equality between the population mean of the perceived probability, Pit   , and the fraction
of all realizations that fall in the set Sk , P rob(Yi  Sk |Zt- = zt- ).
   We can allow the reported perceived probability P      ~ B,k to contain classical measurement
                                                            it
      k
error i :
                                             ~ B,k = P B,k +  k ,
                                             P                                                 (14)
                                               it     it     i

        k                                                   B,k             k
where i   has a mean of zero and is independent of Pit          . We allow i  to be arbitrarily
correlated across k . Then, Ei (P B,k ) is consistently estimated by the sample mean of P ~ B,k .
                                        it                                                     it
       ~ B denote the vector
We let P                                of reported perceived probabilities for person i at time t:
          it
~  (P
P B
  it
       ~ 1; P
         B,               ~ B,K -1 ).
             ~ B,2 ; ...; P
        it    it            it

   Turning to the outcome of interest, we define Qk
                                                  i to have a value of one if yi is in set Sk
                                                                                           K -1
and to have a value of zero otherwise. Let Qi denote a vector of Qk         1    2
                                                                  i : Qi  (Qi ; Qi ; ...; Qi    ).
Then, P rob(Yi  Sk |Zt- = zt- ) is consistently estimated by the sample mean of Qk
                                                                                 i.

   As mentioned earlier, this test does not require panel data. In general we allow for an
unbalanced panel (in which not all respondents report both beliefs and realizations), with
                                                                                 ~ B for all
a balanced panel and repeated cross-sections as special cases. We let PI contain P        it

individuals who report both beliefs and realizations, and let QI contain Qi for all individuals
                                                                     ~ B for all individuals who
who report both beliefs and realizations. Similarly, let PII contain P     it

only report beliefs, and we let QII contain Qi for all individuals who only report realizations.

Theorem 4. (Nonparametric Aggregate-Distribution Test) Denote the mean and
            ~ B for sample {PI , PII } as µ
variance of P                                     ^P , respectively, and denote the mean and
                                           ^P and V
              it

variance of Qi for sample {QI , QII } as µ      ^Q , respectively. Let V
                                         ^Q and V                      ^P Q and V
                                                                                ^QP denote the
                             ~ B and Qi for sample {(P
cross-covariance matrices of P                       ~ B , Qi )|P
                                                                ~ B  PI , Qi  QI }. Finally,
                               it                      it         it

we denote the number of individuals who reported both probabilities and realizations as nP Q
                                                                                         I ,


                                                     24
                                                                                        Q
and denote the number of individuals who are in PII and QII , respectively, as nP
                                                                                II and nII ,

respectively.
   Under assumptions A1 to A3, if all individuals have Rational Expectations about Yi (Def-
inition 1), then
                                         ^ -1 (^          d
                          ^p  (^
                          u    µP - µ
                                    ^Q ) V          ^Q ) - 2 (K - 1),
                                               µP - µ

      ^ =       ^
               VP           ^VQ                nP  Q
                                                                ^P Q + V
                                                                       ^QP ).
where V     nP Q  P   +   nP Q  Q   -     PQ
                                        (nI +nP
                                                 I
                                                     PQ Q      (V
             I +nII        I +nII             II )(nI +nII )


   Theorem 4 allows us to form a test of the Rational Expectations Hypothesis based on the
asymptotic right-tailed p-value associated with the test statistic u
                                                                   ^p . One assumption that
is crucial for Theorem 4 is that data are Missing Completely at Random, which requires
that the individuals for whom we observe both probabilities and realizations, the individuals
for whom we only observe probabilities, and the individuals for whom we only observe
realizations are all drawn from the same population distribution. We explore the sensitivity
of our results to different data structures (e.g., balanced panel or repeated cross-section) in
Section 5, when we apply this test to post-college income beliefs.
   To summarize, this test has several appealing features. First, the test does not require
                                                B
parametric assumptions on the distribution of Yit , and the test leverages all of the probability
information that is directly available in the data. Second, because this test does not require
a balanced panel, it is compatible with a variety of sampling schemes that are encountered
in practice. This is particularly important because much research on expectations draws on
repeated cross sections or even expectations and realizations recorded in different surveys of
the same population Manski (2004, 2018). Third, this test is robust to classical measurement
error in responses to expectations questions on surveys. In contrast, the Mean-Variance test
developed in Section 4.2 will be sensitive to measurement error because, for example, the
                                        B                  B
measured aggregate "actual" uncertainty t, 2 = vari (yi - µit ) will overstate its true value if

the measured value of µB
                       it contains classical measurement error. Ameriks et al. (2020) and

Gong, Stinebrickner, and Stinebrickner (2019, forthcoming) document a non-trivial amount
of measurement error in responses to survey expectations questions. However, we note
again that measurement error in elicited probabilistic expectations may not be classical, for
example because of rounding (Manski and Molinari, 2010).




                                                      25
4.3.2    A Parametric Aggregate-Distribution Test

   The nonparametric test developed in Section 4.3.1 cannot be directly applied when prob-
abilistic expectations are elicited with the percentile format. This is because (in contrast to
                                                           B
the probability format) averaging the same percentile of Yit across individuals does not pro-
duce the corresponding percentile of the aggregate subjective distribution. Nonetheless, we
can form an aggregate-distribution test for the percentile format if we impose parametric as-
               B                                                                     B
sumptions on Yit , which allow moments of the aggregate subjective distribution of Yit to be
obtained from the reported percentiles. Then, within our aggregate-distribution approach,
we can construct a test of Rational Expectations based on moment-by-moment equalities
between the aggregate subjective distribution and the distribution of realizations. We focus
on the mean and variance, though in principal further moments could be incorporated into
the test.
   Formally, Theorem 5 shows that a parametric aggregate-distribution test can be based
on the first and second moments of the aggregate subjective distribution and distribution
of outcomes. The proof for Theorem 5 is generally similar to the proof for Theorem 1. We
show the details in Appendix D.

Theorem 5. Under assumptions A1 to A3, if all individuals have Rational Expectations
about Yi (Definition 1), then


                    Ei (yi ) = Ei (µB                   B             B
                                    it ) and Ei (var (Yit )) + vari (µit ) = vari (yi ).



   Since the mean of the aggregate subjective distribution is equal to the population mean of
µB         B
 it = E (Yit ), an aggregate-distribution test of Rational Expectations based on the equality

between the means of the aggregate subjective distribution and the aggregate distribution
of realizations (Ei (yi ) = Ei (µB
                                 it )) is essentially the mean component of the Mean-Variance
            B
Test (      t, 3 = 0) presented in Section 4.2. The only difference is that, while the mean

component of the Mean-Variance Test in Section 4.2 requires balanced panel data, here the
mean component of the Aggregate-Distribution Test can be applied to unbalanced panels
and repeated cross-sections from a common population. We let µ
                                                             ^BM and ^BM respectively
denote the sample mean and standard deviation of µB
                                                  it for all individuals for whom we observe
  B
Yit , and let nB denote the size of this sample. Similarly, we let µ
                                                                   ^Y M and ^Y M respectively
denote the sample mean and standard deviation of yi for all individuals for whom we observe
yi , and let nY denote the size of this sample. Finally, we let  2
                                                                ^M denote the sample covariance

                                                    26
of µB                                                        B
    it and yi for all individuals for whom we observe both Yit and yi , and let n
                                                                                  BY
                                                                                     denote
the size of this sample.
   On the other hand, as noted above, the variance of the aggregate belief distribution is the
sum of mean individual uncertainty and the variance of individual mean beliefs (heterogeneity
in the terminology of Gong, Stinebrickner, and Stinebrickner, 2019). This means that the
variance component of the Aggregate-Distribution Test differs from the test presented in
Section 4.2. Nevertheless, Ei (µB                B                B
                                it ), Ei (var (Yit )), and vari (µit ) can all be constructed from
                                                                           B
cross-sectional empirical distributions under a parametric assumption on Yit . We let µ
                                                                                      ^BV
                                                               B
and ^BV denote the sample mean and standard deviation of var(Yit ) + (µB    ^BM )2 for all
                                                                       it - µ
                                  B
individuals for whom we observe Yit , respectively. Similarly, we let µ
                                                                      ^Y V and ^Y V denote
                                         ^Y M )2 for all individuals for whom we observe yi .
the mean and standard deviation of (yi - µ
                 2                                B
Finally, we let ^V denote the covariance of var(Yit ) + (µB    ^BM )2 and (yi - µ
                                                          it - µ                ^Y M )2 for all
                                       B
individuals for whom we observe both Yit and yi .
   Under the following assumptions on the distribution of random variables, we are able to
define and characterize the asymptotic distribution of two test-statistics using the central
limit theorem.

 A5 The following random variables have finite second moments: µB                B       B
                                                                it , yi , var (Yit ) + (µit -

      µB  2
                   ¯)2 , µB
       t ) , (yi - y
                                               B       B     B 2
                                                                         ¯)2 .
                          it - yi , and var (Yit ) + (µit - µt ) - (yi - y




Theorem 6. (Parametric Aggregate-Distribution Test) Under assumptions A1 to A3
and A5, if all individuals have Rational Expectations about Yi (Definition 1), then

                                        ^BM - µ
                                        µ     ^Y M                     d
                           ^M 
                           u          2         2                 2
                                                                      - N (0, 1),
                                     ^BM       ^Y          2nBY ^M
                                      nB
                                           +    nY
                                                  M
                                                      -     nB nY


                                           ^BV - µ
                                           µ     ^Y V                  d
                           ^V 
                           u          2         2                2
                                                                      - N (0, 1).
                                     ^BV       ^Y         2nBY ^V
                                      nB
                                           +    nY
                                                  V
                                                      -    nB nY

   Theorem 6 suggests that two different Aggregate-Distribution Tests of Rational Expec-
tations can be formed based on the asymptotic two-tailed p-values of the test statistic u
                                                                                        ^M
and u
    ^V , respectively.
   This version of the Aggregate-Distribution Test follows the same general approach as the
nonparametric version and retains the advantages of accommodating a wide range of data
structures (panels, repeated cross-sections) and incorporating higher-moment information

                                                      27
about belief distributions. Moreover, as we show in Section 6, it can be adjusted to ac-
commodate the possibility of aggregate shocks in some contexts where the nonparametric
version cannot. However, unlike the nonparamatric version, it does requires a paramet-
ric assumption about belief distributions. One virtue of the nonparametric version of the
Aggregate-Distribution test, applied to beliefs elicited in the probability format, is robust-
ness to classical measurement error in the reporting of probabilities. It turns out that if
the parametric version of the Aggregate-Distribution test is applied to beliefs elicited in the
probability format and if individual belief distributions are such that the aggregate belief
distribution can be calculated from average perceived probabilities, then the parametric ver-
sion of the Aggregate-Distribution test is also robust to classical measurement error in the
reporting of probabilities in the same way. The reason is that, in this case, the test is iden-
tical to one directly calculated from movements of the aggregate distribution, which average
out errors across respondents. The step-wise uniform assumption on individual belief distri-
butions that we maintain throughout for empirical application below satisfies this condition,
but it is not the only possibility.8


4.4     Existing Mean-based Tests of Rational Expectations
   Most existing tests of Rational Expectations utilize only information about the mean
     B
of Yit , µB
          it . It is important to recognize that existing mean-based tests potentially detect

different types of violations of Rational Expectations than our new tests do. We now compare
existing mean-based tests to our tests, continuing, for the time being, to focus on the scenario
where there is no possibility of aggregate shocks between the time when beliefs are elicited
and the time when outcomes are realized (i.e., Z t+ is degenerate).
   Repeated cross-section mean-based tests are based on whether moments of the distribution
of µB
    it and moments of the distribution of yi satisfy certain equalities and inequalities implied

by Rational Expectations. For example, in the absence of aggregate shocks, the sample mean
of µB
    it is asymptotically identical to the sample mean of yi . Similarly, due to the presence of

factors realized after t, Xit+ , the sample variance of µB
                                                         it is asymptotically weakly smaller than

the sample variance of yi . A repeated cross-section mean-based test that takes into account
all moments of µB
                it and yi is developed in D'Haultfoeuille, Gaillac, and Maurel (2018). It is

based on the insight that the population distribution of yi is a mean-preserving spread of
   8
    A sufficient condition is that, within each bin, the conditional density function is homogeneous across
agents.


                                                    28
the population distribution of µB
                                it . We refer to this test as the DGM test.

   Panel mean-based tests are based on the relationships between µB
                                                                  it and yi (and possibly
        -
also Xt
      i ) that should be satisfied on an individual level under Rational Expectations (Def-

inition 1). Rational Expectations implies yi is the sum of µB
                                                            it and a residual term, which is

uncorrelated with µB                                                                      B
                   it . A common approach to testing this assumption is to regress yi on µit ,

and to test whether the slope coefficient is equal to 1 and whether the intercept is equal to
0. We refer to this test as the Regression Test. A concern with the Regression Test, when
applied to micro data, is that it is potentially very sensitive to reporting error in beliefs or
to approximation error in the imputation of mean beliefs µB                          B
                                                          it . Measurement error in µit can

lead to attenuation of the estimated slope parameter, and spurious rejection of a true null
hypothesis.
   A stronger version of Rational Expectations assumes that agents use all available infor-
mation in their forecasts. This is often assessed by testing whether the correlation between
the innovation (the difference between the realization yi and the expectation µB
                                                                               it ) is orthog-

onal to factors that should be in respondents' information sets at the time when beliefs are
elicited. We refer to the test built on this condition as the Correlation Test.
   It is useful to explore the relationship between the mean-based tests of Rational Expecta-
tions (DGM, Regression) and our new tests (Mean-Variance, Aggregate-Distribution). With
respect to the DGM Test, we note that, in the limiting case where we have full information
        B
about Yit (i.e., infinitely many percentiles or probabilities), the DGM test is weaker than
our new Aggregate-Distribution Test in the absence of aggregate shocks. This is the case
because, by construction, the aggregate subjective distribution is a mean-preserving spread
of the (cross-sectional) distribution of µB
                                          it . Hence, an equality between the aggregate subjec-

tive distribution and the distribution of yi implies that the latter is also a mean-preserving
spread of the distribution of µB
                               it . However, since the number of bins or percentiles collected

in a survey question must be modest in practice, we stress that the DGM Test and our
Aggregate-Distribution Tests can both be useful.
   With respect to the Regression Test, we note that there is a tight link among (1) the
Regression Test, (2) the Mean-Variance Test, and (3) the Parametric Aggregate-Distribution
Test (based on the mean and variance). Specifically, the following theorem holds:9

Theorem 7. Any two of the following three statements imply the third statement:
    B      B             B
(1) t, 1 = t,2 , and     t, 3 = 0; (Mean-Variance Test)

  9
      See Appendix D for the proof.

                                               29
              B
(2) Ei (var(Yit )) + vari (µB                                      B
                            it ) = vari (yi ), and Ei (yi ) = Ei (µit ); (Aggregate-Distribution Test)

(3) yi = µB
          it + i , where   i   has a mean of zero and is orthogonal to µB
                                                                        it . (Regression Test)


This suggests that a joint test combining the Mean-Variance and Parametric Aggregate-
Distribution Test may be useful. As the mean component of these two tests is identical, the
joint test is a test of three moment conditions. This combination of these two tests provides
a broad assessment of the Rational Expectations Hypothesis, which encompasses the well-
known Regression Test, but also provides information beyond that test. In other words,
asymptotically, the joint test will reject Rational Expectations whenever the Regression
Test rejects, but not vice versa.



5     Testing Rational Expectations: Empirical Results
    We now turn to testing Rational Expectations about future incomes with data from the
BPS. It is worth noting that, in this section, we are in effect testing a joint null that all
respondents have Rational Expectations about future income and that there is no possibility
of aggregate shocks between the time beliefs are elicited and the time outcomes are realized.
However, our interpretation of the results abstracts from the possibility of aggregate shocks.
We then explicitly consider issues related to this possibility in the next Section (Section 6).
    One goal of this section is to examine whether Rational Expectations provides a better
description of beliefs in certain periods than in other periods. In Section 5.1 we focus on
a comparison of in-school and post-college beliefs by using our new tests to examine the
rationality of beliefs about future income at the fixed age of 28 (or 29). A second goal
of this section is to examine the practical importance of our new tests relative to existing
mean-based tests. While theoretical results in Section 4 show that our new tests, which
take into account higher moments, are able to detect more types of deviations from Rational
Expectations, exactly how important this is in practice is an open empirical question. To
provide a comparison of our tests and existing tests, we take advantage of the 1-year ahead
and 5-year ahead beliefs that were collected in the post-college period. The fact that these
beliefs were collected annually for an extended period of time provides a substantial num-
ber of observations for our comparison. The fact that these beliefs were collected using a
probability format allows us to implement our Nonparametric Aggregate-Distribution test.
Section 5.2 also complements the fixed age analysis in Section 5.1 by examining how the
rationality of beliefs about income changes over time when the time horizon is fixed.

                                                 30
5.1    A Comparison of In-school and Post-College Beliefs
Mean-Variance Test
   To compare the rationality of in-school beliefs to the rationality of post-college beliefs, we
begin by utilizing the Mean-Variance test to study beliefs about income at the fixed age of 28
(or 29). Given the link between this test and measures of ex post inaccuracy, an indication
of what we will find can be obtained by referring back to Table 2 in Section 3. The third
                  B
column shows that t, 3 is decreasing over time, indicating declining mean bias. Moreover,
                             B                                              B
mean subjective uncertainty (t, 1 ) and the variance of income innovations (t,2 ) are more

similar in the post college period. Hence, Table 2 suggests that Rational Expectations might
provide a more apt characterization of beliefs about income during the post-college period
than during the college period.
   Table 3 reports the p-values associated with the two components of our (two-tailed) Mean-
Variance test. Panel A shows results for the in-school period. The first row of Panel A shows
                              B      B
that the null hypothesis that t, 1 = t,2 , i.e., that the average subjective uncertainty is equal

to the aggregate actual uncertainty, is rejected at a 1% level for all in-school years (10-year
ahead to 6-year ahead). The second row of Panel A shows that that the null hypothesis
       B
that   t, 3 = 0, i.e., that there is no mean bias, is also rejected at a 1% level for all in-

school periods. Hence, these findings indicate that, when the students are in college, their
beliefs about future income deviate non-trivially from Rational Expectations (assuming no
aggregate shocks). They suffer from mean bias and also insufficient subjective uncertainty.
Panel B shows results for the post-college period. In contrast to the findings for the in-school
period in Panel A, Panel B shows that Rational Expectations is frequently not rejected
during the post-college period. As shown in the first row of Panel B, while we reject the null
                B      B
hypothesis that t, 1 = t,2 at a 1% level for 5-year ahead income beliefs, we do not reject this

null hypothesis even at a 5% level for 1-year ahead income beliefs. The second row of Panel
                                                              B
B shows that we do not reject the null hypothesis that        t, 3 = 0 at a 5% level for either

1-year ahead or 5-year ahead post-college beliefs about income at age 28 (29).

The Parametric Aggregate-Distribution Test
   Turning to using the parametric Aggregate-Distribution Test to examine beliefs at the
age of 28 (29), we are not limited to the balanced panel, so Table 4 presents results both
for the balanced panel and for the pooled data (all observations on beliefs and realizations
for a given year). The results are very similar to what was found for the Mean-Variance


                                               31
test. Panel A shows that, regardless of which set of observations is used, for all in-school
years we reject at a 1% level the null hypothesis that the mean of the subjective aggregate
distribution is equal to the mean of the distribution of outcomes. Similarly, Panel B shows
that, except for the final year of school (6-year ahead beliefs), we also reject the variance
component of the null hypothesis at a 1% level for both sets of observations; in this final
year, we reject this null hypothesis at a 1% level for the balanced panel, but not for the
pooled data. The last two columns of Table 4 show that, as was the case with the Mean-
Variance test, we reject Rational Expectations less often in the post-college period. Panel
A shows that, for both 1-year ahead beliefs and 5-year ahead beliefs, the mean component
of the Aggregate-Distribution Test does not reject at a 5% level using either the balanced
panel or the pooled data. Panel B shows that, for both the 1-year ahead beliefs and 5-year
ahead beliefs, the variance component rejects at a 5% level for the pooled data but not for
the balanced panel.
   In addition to results shown in Table 3 and 4, we also implemented a joint test of the
combined elements of the Mean-Variance and Parametric Aggregate-Distribution test, which
was proposed at the end of Section 4. The joint test rejects at a 1% level for all in-school
beliefs and for 5-year ahead post-college beliefs. However, it does not reject at a 10% level
for 1-year ahead post-college beliefs (with a p-value of 0.2171).
   Under the assumption that there is no possibility of aggregate shocks between belief
elicitation and income realization, the evidence against the rationality of in-school beliefs is
very strong. In contrast, the evidence for the post-college period is weaker; we reject the
joint null for some tests at some horizons, but not others. In Appendix E, we show that this
general conclusion remains when we employ existing mean-based tests.


5.2    Post-College by Income Realization Year
   The 1-year and 5-year ahead beliefs collected annually in the post-college period of the
BPS provide ten belief-realization combinations; 1-year ahead beliefs can be compared to
realizations from each of the years between 2007-2013, and 5-year ahead beliefs can be
compared to realizations from each of the years between 2011-2013. This relatively large
number of belief-realization combinations is beneficial for comparing the performance of our
tests to the performance of existing mean-based tests. In particular we are interested in
examining the practical relevance of theoretical results from Section 4 that describe the
relationship between: 1) our Nonparametric Aggregate-Distribution test and the DGM test

                                              32
            Table 3: Mean-Variance Test about Income at Age 28-29 (p-values)

                                            Panel A                            Panel B
 Year of Belief-elicitation   10-year 9-year 8-year       7-year   6-year   5-year 1-year
                               ahead  ahead ahead         ahead    ahead    ahead ahead
                                   -4
 u
 ^12 (uncertainty)            < 10    < 10-4 < 10-4       < 10-4   < 10-4   < 10-4 0.0687
 u
 ^3 (mean)                    < 10-4 < 10-4 < 10-4        < 10-4   < 10-4   0.0762 0.7077
 Sample Size                    271    259    206          202      207      159     289

Notes: Panel A reports the p-values associated with (two-tailed) test statistics u^12 and u
                                                                                          ^3
(defined in Theorem 2) for students' beliefs in college about own annual income at age 28
(or 29). Panel B reports the p-values associated with test statistics u
                                                                      ^12 and u
                                                                              ^3 for students'
beliefs after college about annual family income at age 28 (or 29).




 Table 4: Parametric Aggregate-Distribution Test about Income at Age 28-29 (p-values)

                                     10-year    9-year    8-year   7-year   6-year   5-year      1-year
 Year of Belief-elicitation
                                      ahead     ahead     ahead    ahead    ahead    ahead       ahead
 Panel A: u^M (p-value)
 All Observations                    < 10-4     < 10-4    < 10-4   < 10-4   < 10-4   0.9797      0.2790
 Common Observations                 < 10-4     < 10-4    < 10-4   < 10-4   < 10-4   0.0762      0.7077
 Panel B: u^V (p-value)
 All Observations: all               < 10-4     < 10-4    < 10-4   < 10-4   0.0035   0.0029      0.0013
 Common Observations: common         < 10-4     < 10-4    0.0001   0.0039   0.2079   0.3030      0.0797
 Panel C: Sample Size
 nBY                                   271          259    206      202      207      159         289
 nB                                    667          581    414      371      361      214         339
 nY                                    330          330    330      330      330      375         360

Notes: The first five columns of Panel A and Panel B report the p-values associated with
(two-tailed) test statistics u
                             ^M and u
                                    ^V (defined in Theorem 6) for students' beliefs in college
about own annual income at age 28 (or 29). The last two columns of Panel A and Panel B
report the p-values associated with test statistics u
                                                    ^M and u
                                                           ^V for students' beliefs after
college about annual family income at age 28 (or 29).




                                               33
and 2) our joint test (of the Mean-Variance and Parametric Aggregate-Distribution tests)
and the Regression test. The belief-realization combinations can also be used to examine
the rationality of beliefs for different realization years while holding the time horizon fixed.

A Comparison of the Nonparametric Aggregate-Distribution and DGM Tests
   In Section 4 we explained why, in the limiting case where a large number of bins/probabilities
are available, the DGM test is weaker than our new Nonparametric Aggregate-Distribution
Test in the absence of aggregate shocks. To examine the practical importance of this result,
we apply these two tests to the BPS data and compare the results.
   We begin by implementing the DGM test. We consider two sets of observations, the
pooled data (which exploits the fact that this test can be implemented with repeated cross-
sections or unbalanced panels) and the balanced panel. We find that, regardless of which
set of observations we use, for each of the ten belief-realization combinations, we do not
reject the null hypothesis of Rational Expectations at any conventional significance levels
(the smallest p-value is 0.18 for the pooled data and 0.21 for the balanced panel).10
   We next consider the Nonparametric Aggregate-Distribution Test, which fully exploits the
probability format of the belief questions in the post-college surveys. As described in Section
4.3.1, for each income interval defined by the survey question, this test compares the average
(across respondents) subjective probability reported for the interval to the proportion of
realized incomes that fall in the interval. To illustrate, the difference in these quantities is
shown in Figure 1 for 1-year ahead beliefs about family income in 2007 and 2008. Then,
because the differences are in general much smaller in 2008 (Panel (b)), we might expect the
test to be less likely to reject in this year.
   Table 5 reports the results of the tests for all belief-realization combinations, where again
we examine results for both the pooled data and the balanced panel. Panel A summarizes
the results for 1-year ahead beliefs, with asymptotic p-values reported in Panel A2. We find
that, regardless of which set of observations we use, we reject at a 5% level the null hypothesis
of Rational Expectations about 1-year ahead family income in 2007, 2009, and 2012, so that
the conclusions about 2007 and 2008 are consistent with our discussion of Figure 1. Panel B
shows that we also reject at a 5% level the null hypothesis of Rational Expectations about
5-year ahead annual family income in 2012 and 2013.
   Thus, the hypothesis of Rational Expectations is rejected for five of the ten belief-
  10
     We implement the DGM test using the R-package provided by the authors of D'Haultfoeuille, Gaillac,
and Maurel (2018).


                                                  34
                            (a) Family Income Realized in 2007




                            (b) Family Income Realized in 2008

Figure 1: Differences between Average Perceived and Actual Probability for 10 Income Bins




                                           35
Table 5: Nonparametric Aggregate-Distribution Test about Income in 2007-2013 (p-values)

 Year of Realization                  2007    2008     2009     2010     2011     2012     2013
 Panel A: 1-year ahead Beliefs
 Panel A1: Sample Size
 PI and QI                            202      262     272      296      322      327      346
 PII                                   42       53     60       42       39        46      34
 QII                                  119       84     70        68      51       51        50
 Panel A2: p-value
 {PI , PII , QI , QII }: pooled data 0.0242   0.6700 < 10-4    0.0840   0.6139   0.0114   0.5580
 {PI , QI }: balanced panel          0.0002   0.1498 < 10-4    0.3691   0.3235   0.0015   0.0914
 Panel B: 5-year ahead Beliefs
 Panel B1: Sample Size
 PI and QI                            N.A.    N.A.     N.A.     N.A.     189      240      266
 PII                                  N.A.    N.A.     N.A.     N.A.     58       74        70
 QII                                  N.A.    N.A.     N.A.     N.A.     184      138      130
 Panel B2: p-value
 {PI , PII , QI , QII }: pooled data N.A.     N.A.     N.A.     N.A.    0.0612   0.0098   0.0006
 {PI , QI }: balanced panel           N.A.    N.A.     N.A.     N.A.    0.0808   0.0167   0.0010

Notes: Panel A reports the p-values associated with (two-tailed) test statistics u^p (defined
in Theorem 4) for students' 1-year ahead beliefs after college about annual family income
realized in 2007-2013. Panel B reports the p-values associated with (two-tailed) test
statistics u
           ^p for students' 5-year ahead beliefs after college about annual family income
realized in 2011-2013.




                                              36
realization combinations when the Nonparametric Aggregate-Distribution test is employed,
but is never rejected when the DGM test is employed. This suggests that, in practice, the
consideration of higher moments may be quite important for characterizing whether beliefs
are rational.

Comparing Our Joint Test with the Regression Test
   As stated in Theorem 7, the null hypotheses of the Mean-Variance and Parametric
Aggregate-Distribution Tests jointly imply the null of the Regression Test (but not vice
versa), suggesting that the Joint Test might be more likely to reject than the Regression
Test. To examine the practical importance of this result, we apply these two tests (and the
individual components of these tests) to the BPS data and compare the results. Because the
Regression and Mean-Variance tests require a balanced panel, we focus here on that data
structure.
   We begin by implementing the Regression test. We regress realized annual family income
on the mean of the respondent's subjective income distribution in an earlier year (either 1
year prior or 5 years prior), and jointly test whether the resulting intercept is equal to zero
and whether the slope is equal to one. The results are summarized in Panel A1 and B1 of
Table 6. Among the seven 1-year ahead belief-realization combinations, we reject at a 5%
level in 2007, 2008, 2009, 2012, and 2013. For the 5-year ahead beliefs, the regression test
rejects in 2011 and 2012.
   We next consider the Joint Test (of the Mean-Variance and Parametric Aggregate-Distribution
Tests). The results are shown in the second-to-last row of Panel A and the second-to-last
row of Panel B of Table 7. Our theoretical result suggests that we are likely to reject the null
for all of the belief-realization combinations for which the Regression test rejected (1-year
ahead beliefs for 2007, 2008, 2009, 2012, and 2013 and 5-year ahead beliefs for 2011 and
2012). We find that this is the case. The theoretical results also suggests that we might find
additional rejections. We find this to be true for one belief-realization combination: 5-year
ahead beliefs for 2013.
   To provide a more in-depth view of our joint test, Figure 2 (for 1-year ahead beliefs) and
Figure 3 (for 5-year ahead beliefs) plot the components of the joint test by year. Recall
that the Mean-Variance test has two elements: the cross-sectional average of mean beliefs
                                     B
should equal average outcomes (      t, 3 = 0, no mean bias) and the cross-sectional average
                           B                                                B
of subjective uncertainty (t, 1 ) should equal the variance of innovations (t,2 ). These four

objects are plotted in Panels (a) and (b) of Figures 2 and 3. The mean component of the

                                              37
    Table 6: Regression and Correlation Tests of RE about Income in Year 2007-2013

   Year of Realization 2007     2008       2009     2010     2011      2012      2013
   Panel A: 1-year ahead Beliefs
   Panel A1: Regression Test
   Intercept            $8,610 $6,180     $4,070   $2,080    $2,750   $3,360    -$4,960
   Slope                0.7724 0.8078     0.8818   0.9647    0.9257   0.9957     1.1587
   p-value              0.0002 0.0004     0.0213   0.5514    0.1021   0.0002     0.0001
   Sample Size           200     264       269      294        320     322        344
   Panel A2: Correlation Test
   Correlation          0.0372 0.1358     0.0384   0.1228    0.0425   0.0760    0.2701
   p-value              0.6073 0.0290     0.5296   0.0371    0.4552   0.1735    < 10-4
   Sample Size           200     259       268      290        319     319       336
   Panel B: 5-year ahead Beliefs
   Panel B1: Regression Test
   Intercept             N.A.   N.A.       N.A.     N.A.    $14,170   $20,730   $6,130
   Slope                 N.A.   N.A.       N.A.     N.A.    0.6106     0.5469   0.8709
   p-value               N.A.   N.A.       N.A.     N.A.    < 10-4    < 10-4    0.2981
   Sample Size           N.A.   N.A.       N.A.     N.A.      184        237      265
   Panel B2: Correlation Test
   Correlation           N.A.   N.A.       N.A.     N.A.    -0.0033   0.0266    0.0762
   p-value               N.A.   N.A.       N.A.     N.A.    0.9643    0.6874    0.2139
   Sample Size           N.A.   N.A.       N.A.     N.A.      183       232       264

Notes: Panel A1 and A2 report the results for the Regression Test (estimated parameters
and p-value) and the Correlation Test (estimated correlation and p-value) for students'
1-year ahead beliefs after college about annual family income realized in 2007-2013,
respectively. Panel B1 and B2 report the results for the Regression Test and the
Correlation Test for students' 5-year ahead beliefs after college about annual family income
realized in 2011-2013, respectively.




                                            38
Parametric Aggregate-Distribution Test is identical to the mean component of the Mean-
Variance Test when we implement our tests on balanced panels. The variance component of
the Parametric Aggregate-Distribution Test compares the variance of realized income and
the variance of the aggregate distribution of beliefs. These two objects are plotted in Panel
(c) of Figures 2 and 3.
   Looking at the 1-year ahead beliefs in Figure 2, Panel (a) shows that average mean beliefs
(solid line) track average outcomes (dashed line) quite closely up until 2011, but respondents
became too pessimistic about their income for 2012 and 2013. Panel (b) shows that, for every
year, the variance of innovations (dashed line) exceeds the cross-sectional average of sub-
jective uncertainty (solid line), suggesting that on average respondents underestimate the
uncertainty they face. Panel (c) shows that the variance of the aggregate belief distribution
(dashed line) closely tracks the variance of realized incomes (solid line), except for the very
beginning and end of the sample period. These patterns are reflected in the p-values associ-
ated with tests of the individual components reported in the first three rows of Panel A in
Table 7.
   In terms of examining 5-year ahead beliefs shown in Figure 3, we focus on the year, 2013,
when our Joint test produces a different result than the Regression test. The fact that the
Regression test does not produce a rejection in this year is not surprising given that Panel (a)
shows that the means are quite similar in this year. Indeed, the p-value in the second row of
Panel B of Table 7 is 0.712 for 2013. The joint test differs primarily because it considers the
variance components shown in Panel (b) and (c). Panel (b) shows that respondents vastly
underestimate the amount of uncertainty associated with income for 2013. Panel (c) shows
that the variance of the aggregate subjective belief distribution is much smaller than the
variance of realized income for 2013. The statistical importance of these differences can be
seen in Row 1 of Panel B of Table 7 (p-value .0002) and Row 3 of Panel B of Table 7 (.019).
As seen in the second-to-last row of Panel B of Table 7, the variance components lead the
joint test to reject with a p-value smaller than .0001. This provides a concrete example of
the value of collecting and utilizing information beyond mean beliefs.

Correlation Test
   Finally, for completeness we consider the Correlation Test, even though, unlike other
tests, it considers a strong version of Rational Expectations. For each year in the post-
college period, we first compute the innovation, which is the difference between realized
annual family income and the mean of beliefs about this income elicited 1 year or 5 years

                                              39
     (a) Average Outcomes and Average Mean-beliefs                       (b) Variance of Innovation and Average Uncertainty




40
                                 (c) Variance of Outcomes and Subjective Aggregate Distribu-
                                 tion

                                   Figure 2: Descriptive Statistics (1-Year ahead Beliefs)
     (a) Average Outcomes and Average Mean-beliefs                       (b) Variance of Innovation and Average Uncertainty




41
                                 (c) Variance of Outcomes and Subjective Aggregate Distribu-
                                 tion

                                   Figure 3: Descriptive Statistics (5-Year ahead Beliefs)
earlier. We then compute the cross-sectional correlation between this innovation and the
realized annual family income in the year when beliefs were elicited, and test whether this
correlation is equal to zero. Panel A2 of Table 6 shows the results for 1-year ahead beliefs.
Across the seven post-college years, the null hypothesis that the correlation is zero is rejected
at a 1% level in 2013 and is rejected at a 5% level in two other years (2008 and 2010). Our
results suggest that respondents were not always using all the available information to predict
their future family income.
   As shown in Panel B2 of Table 6, the results for 5-year ahead beliefs are qualitatively
different. For all three years that we can perform the test for 5-year ahead beliefs - 2011,
2012, and 2013 - the absolute value of point estimates of the correlation are smaller than
0.1 and we cannot reject the null hypothesis of zero correlation at a 10% level. One possible
explanation of this finding is that, while current family income is highly informatively about
family income in the next year, it is less informative about family income in five years.
Hence, a Correlation Test based on current family income may have less power when the
objects of interest are 5-year ahead beliefs.

Summary
   Generally, the results in Section 5 show that 1) Rational Expectations provides a better
description of income beliefs for the post-college periods than the in-school periods, 2) our
new tests, which take into account higher moments, reject more often than existing mean-
based tests, which illustrates the practical importance of theoretical results in Section 4, and
3) across the tests that we consider, we consistently do not reject Rational Expectations in
some of the post-college years, but we do not find evidence that respondents' post-college
income beliefs are becoming more rational in a monotonic fashion. One potential reason
for finding 3) is that, while we are in effect testing a joint null of Rational Expectations
and no aggregate shocks, the interpretation given in this section abstracts away from the
possibility of aggregate shocks. In practice, these shocks may be more relevant in some years
than others. For example, it could be that aggregate shocks are always possible between
elicitation and realization (violating the second part of the joint null) but when the realized
aggregate shock is "small", then a given test does not reject in a finite sample.11 However,
  11
     Asymptotically, these tests will reject a false joint null for any realization of the aggregate shock Zt+ .
An intuition is as follows. Suppose the realization of income is additive in Zt+ and the realization of Zt+
is zero. In this case, while the realization of Zt+ does not cause mean bias, the ex ante possibility of other
values Zt+ will have the consequence that the distribution of beliefs is more disperse than distribution of
realizations and, asymptotically, the test will detect this.



                                                      42
it is also possible that the conditional distributions of factors unobserved at time t (Xt+ and
Zt+ ) vary over time, so that that joint null more accurately describes the environment in
some years than others.12 To explore these issues further, in Section 6 we consider Rational
Expectations tests which are robust to aggregate shocks.



6      Aggregate Shocks
    In previous sections, our theoretical and empirical results pertain to tests of Rational
Expectations when there is no possibility of observing aggregate shocks between the time
when beliefs are elicited (t) and the time when outcomes are realized. In this section, we
consider how tests can be extended to accommodate the possibility of aggregate shocks.
    As with most existing work on testing Rational Expectations, the tests considered in this
paper utilize data on realizations from a single period. However, in this case, if no restrictions
are imposed on the structure of aggregate shocks, it is always possible to find a distribution for
the aggregate shock and a realization from that distribution that would imply observed beliefs
are rational. In other words, without some type of restriction, it is not possible to develop
a test of Rational Expectations that has power. Acknowledging this reality, we focus on a
case where aggregate shocks are additively separable from and independent of other factors.
Formally, we express Yi as the sum of two components, YiI  YI (Xi ) and Y A  YA (Z), which
are functions of individual-specific factors Xi and aggregate factor Z, respectively. Finally,
consistent with the notion that Z is common to all individuals, we assume that respondents'
information sets with respect to aggregate factors Z at the time of belief elicitation, Zt- ,
are homogeneous. This naturally implies that Zt+ , the set of unobserved (at t) aggregate
factors, is identical across people as well. We note that other researchers have imposed similar
homogeneity assumptions when testing Rational Expectations in the presence of aggregate
shocks (e.g., D'Haultfoeuille, Gaillac, and Maurel, 2018).
    Formally, we impose the following assumptions throughout Section 6.

 A6 Yi = YiI + Y A .

 A7 i , Xi and Z are independent.

 A8 Zt- and Zt+ are homogeneous across people.
  12
    This is consistent with GARCH and Regime switching types of models where the distribution of future
outcomes change over time.


                                                  43
   The formulation in A6 is of particular interest in our substantive context of interest be-
cause the income process literature typically assumes that log-income is additively separable
in aggregate shocks (Meghir and Pistaferri, 2011). Following this literature, in this section we
use log-income as the object of interest Yi . Whenever tests require parametric assumptions
     B
on Yit , as before we assume that beliefs about income have a step-wise uniform distribution
and obtain the distribution describing beliefs about log-income accordingly.
   In the income process literature, the effect of an additively separable aggregate shock is
sometimes allowed to vary by education group or birth cohort. The tests described below
could accommodate this if they were applied separately to each group. Note that in our
empirical application we assume that the aggregate shock affects two adjacent entry cohorts
of a single college in a common additive way. This does not preclude the possibility that,
throughout the broader economy, the same shock differentially affects other age, education
or geographic groups.
   We first describe how existing mean-based tests can be modified to accommodate the
possibility of aggregate shocks, and then discuss how to extend our new tests. The proofs
for the Theorems that follow are in Appendix D.


6.1    Theory

Existing Tests
   D'Haultfoeuille, Gaillac, and Maurel (2018) show that the DGM Test is capable of ac-
commodating the presence of additively separable aggregate shocks. Roughly speaking, the
testing procedure is as follows. First, the realization of the aggregate shock can be identified
as the difference between the cross-section mean of µB
                                                     it and the cross-section mean of yi .

Then, the econometrician can test whether the distribution of yi + [Ei (µB
                                                                         it ) - Ei (yi )] is a

mean-preserving spread of µB
                           it .

   Regression Tests are based on the coefficients in the regression of realizations yi on mean-
belief µB
        it . In the presence of additively separable aggregate shocks, the innovation after t

(yi - µB
       it ) is the sum of a common aggregate shock and a residual term that is orthogonal to

µB
 it under Rational Expectations. Thus, yi is the sum of the common aggregate shock, the

mean-belief µB
             it , and the residual term. This implies that a test can be formed based on the

null hypothesis that the slope coefficient in the regression equation is equal to one.
   The Correlation Test is based on the correlation between the innovation after t and


                                              44
individual-specific factors that should be observed before t. By construction, aggregate
shocks observed after t do not affect individual-specific factors observed before t. Moreover,
as discussed above, the only effect that aggregate shocks have on the innovation is to add
a common shifter to all individuals, which does not affect the correlation between the in-
novation and any other random variables. Hence, the Correlation Test is valid even in the
presence of additively separable aggregate shocks.

Mean-Variance Test
   In the presence of aggregate shocks, the difference between the cross-sectional mean of
mean-beliefs, Ei (µB
                   it ), and the cross-sectional mean of realizations, yi , is not necessarily zero

under Rational Expectations because a deviation of the aggregate shock from its mean is
common to all individuals. That is, there will always exist some realization of the aggregate
shock that can rationalize the observed difference in means. This implies that we cannot form
a test of Rational Expectations based on the difference in means when there is a possibility
of aggregate shocks after beliefs are elicited.
   On the other hand, even in the presence of additively separable aggregate shocks, the
Rational Expectations Hypothesis has implications for the relationship between the cross-
                                          B                B
sectional mean of subjective uncertainty, t, 1  Ei [var (Yit )], and the cross-sectional variance
                B            B
of innovations, t, 1  vari (µit - yi ). Specifically, the former should be weakly larger than

the latter. This is the case because, while the variation in the aggregate shock should be
incorporated into respondents' overall subjective uncertainty, the realization of the aggregate
shock is common to all individuals, and, therefore, does not contribute to the cross-sectional
variance of innovations. Formally, a test of Rational Expectations can be based on the null
hypothesis stated in the following theorem:

Theorem 8. Under assumptions A1 and A6-A8, if all individuals have Rational Expectations
about Yi (Definition 1), then
                                          B      B
                                          t, 1 - t,2  0.


   In contrast, as discussed in Section 4, in the absence of aggregate shocks a test can be
                                  B      B
based on the null hypothesis that t, 1 = t,2 . In general, testing moment inequalities is

a complicated problem because the null hypothesis includes (infinitely) many possibilities.
This problem is especially difficult when we need to jointly test multiple moment inequalities.
However, in our context where the test-statistic is a scalar and has a normal distribution,
Karlin and Rubin (1956) states that the Uniformly Most Powerful Test for the inequality null

                                                  45
is the same as the one-sided test for the corresponding equality null. Hence, when aggregate
shocks are potentially present, instead of basing the test on the asymptotic two-tailed p-
value associated with the test-statistic u
                                         ^12 defined in Theorem 2, we base the test on the
corresponding asymptotic one-tailed p-value.

Aggregate-Distribution Test
   Our discussion above suggests that, in the presence of additively separable aggregate
                                                                                    B
shocks, the subjective aggregate distribution (i.e., the random variable YtB  Ei (Yit )) and
the distribution of outcomes (Yz  Yi |Z = z) will differ even if all agents have Rational
Expectations. In general, the means of the two distributions will be different because of the
realization of the aggregate shock. Moreover, the subjective aggregate distribution will be
more dispersed than the distribution of outcomes because the presence of aggregate shocks
                                                    B
amplifies the mean subjective uncertainty Ei [var(Yit )], but does not affect the variance
of realizations (vari (yi ) = var(Yz )). Formally, the two distributions satisfy the following
relationship under Rational Expectations.

Theorem 9. Under assumptions A1 and A6-A8, if all individuals have Rational Expectations
about Yi (Definition 1), then YtB is a mean-preserving spread of Yz + E (YtB ) - E (Yz ).

   Theorem 9 has testable implications and can be used to form an Aggregate-Distribution
Test of Rational Expectations in the presence of aggregate shocks. It is worth noting that
Theorem 9 is different from the theorem that is the basis of the DGM Test. The DGM Test
is based on the result that Yz + E (YtB ) - E (Yz ) is a mean-preserving spread of µB
                                                                                    it in the

presence of additively separable aggregate shocks. In the absence of aggregate shocks, the
null hypothesis of the Aggregate-Distribution Test encompasses the null hypothesis of the
DGM test (see Section 4.4). With an additive aggregate shock this is no longer the case,
and the two tests are complementary.
   We first consider a nonparametric test based on Theorem 9 using information about
the distribution of Yz and the average perceived probability that yi falls in outcome bin
           B,k
Sk , Ei (Pit   ) = P rob(YtB  Sk ), k = 1, 2, ..., K . Given the equivalence between mean-
preserving spread and second order stochastic dominance, checking whether YtB is a mean-
preserving spread of Yz + E (YtB ) - E (Yz ) involves computing the integral of the cumulative
probability function of YtB . However, this cumulative probability function is only partially
                                                                                        B,k
observed because there is no restriction on how the average perceived probability Ei (Pit   )
is distributed within Sk . The partial observability of the cumulative probability function

                                              46
means that a nonparametric test based on Theorem 9 requires a further restriction on that
function. In particular, if 1) the union of the outcome bins spans the real line and 2) the
                                    B,k
average perceived probability Ei (Pit   ) is positive for all k , Theorem 9 does not provide any
                                                                          B,k
additional testable restrictions on the relationship between Yz and Ei (Pit   ), k = 1, 2, ..., K .
Formally, the following theorem holds:

Theorem 10. For any combination of Yz , which is continuous and has a finite expectation,
                                            K
          B,k                                                         B,k
and Ei (Pit   ), k = 1, 2, ..., K , if 1)         Sk = R and 2) Ei (Pit   ) > 0 k , then it is always
                                            k=1
possible to find a random variable  and a constant c such that:
   (1)  is a mean-preserving spread of Yz + c,
             B,k
   (2) Ei (Pit   ) = P rob(  Sk ), for all k .

   The intuition underlying Theorem 10 is straightforward. The assumptions imposed in
Theorem 10 imply that both the highest and the lowest outcome bins are unbounded. Hence,
                          B,k
the distribution of Ei (Pit   ) within these two outcome bins can be arbitrarily dispersed.
Hence, regardless of how dispersed Yz + c is, it is always possible to find a random variable
 that is (1) more dispersed than Yz + c and (2) consistent with observed average perceived
probabilities.
   This intuition also suggests that it is possible to reject Rational Expectations based on
                                                    K
Theorem 9 if the union of outcome bins,                  Sk = R, is bounded. In this case, if a random
                                                   k=1
                                   B,k
variable  is consistent with Ei (Pit   ), k = 1, 2, .., K , its variance is bounded above. If this
upper bound is smaller than the variance of Yz , then  cannot be a mean-preserving spread
of Yz + c, which indicates a rejection of Rational Expectations. We provide one such example
in Appendix F.
   Theorem 10 suggests that, when eliciting expectations using survey questions, it would
be desirable to ensure that the union of outcome bins is bounded. This might be achieved by
combining the probability format with respondent-reported (finite) lower and upper bounds.
   In our context, the outcome of interest is log-income. As seen in Survey Question A2
in Appendix A, the lowest outcome bin, (-, log (15, 000)), is not bounded below. While
the highest outcome bin, (log (135, 000), log (1, 000, 000)), is technically bounded above, it is
not clear whether respondents treat this upper bound as a real restriction. For example,
respondents were instructed that the probabilities that they allocate to the outcome bins
should sum up to one. Hence, if a person thought there was some chance that her family
would earn more than $1, 000, 000, she would likely add the probability that this happens to

                                                        47
the highest outcome bin provided by the survey question. Further, we find that the average
perceived probabilities are positive for all outcome bins. Then, Theorem 10 implies that it
is not feasible to form an informative nonparametric test of Rational Expectations based
on Theorem 9 in our case. Therefore, we turn to a parametric version of the Aggregate-
Distribution test.
   As mentioned in Section 4.3.2, the mean component of the parametric Aggregate-Distribution
Test is essentially the same as the test that there is no difference between the cross-sectional
mean of mean-beliefs and the cross-sectional mean of realizations (no mean bias). There-
fore, as is the case with the mean component of the Mean-Variance test, it is not possible
to form a test of Rational Expectations by modifying the mean component of parametric
Aggregate-Distribution Test.
   However, consistent with our discussion above for the Mean-Variance Test, a test of
Rational Expectations can be formed by modifying the variance component of the Parametric
Aggregate-Distribution Test. Theorem 9 implies that the variance of the subjective aggregate
                        B
distribution, Ei (var(Yit )) + vari (µB
                                      it ), is larger than the variance of outcomes, vari (yi ), if

additively separable aggregate shocks are present. Thus, similar to the modified Mean-
Variance Test, we base the test on the asymptotic one-tailed p-value associated with the
test-statistic u
               ^V .


6.2     Empirical Results
   We now apply these modified tests to both in-school and post-college beliefs. In contrast
to Section 5, we now work with beliefs about, and realizations of, the logarithm of annual
family income. So the tests allow common additive shocks to log-income, consistent with
much of the income process literature. Again we note that aggregate shocks are assumed to
affect two adjacent cohorts of students from a single college in a common way. This does
not preclude differential effects on other age, education or geographic groups.
   The results are presented in Table 8, which reports test of the rationality of beliefs about
log-income at age 28 or 29 at different time horizons that cover both the in-school and
post-college periods. Throughout, we restrict attention to the balanced panel.
   Starting with Table 8, for the variance component of the Mean-Variance test (row 1),
                                                                      B      B
at each of these in-school points, we reject the null hypothesis that t, 1 - t,2  0 at a 1%

level. In contrast, in the post-college period, we cannot reject this null hypothesis at a 5%
level for either 1-year ahead or 5-year ahead beliefs about log-income at age 28/29. In some

                                                48
instances, the statistics are positive and quite large, leading to p-values close to 1.
   The Correlation Test (row 5), and the variance component of the Parametric Aggregate-
Distribution Test (row 2) produce results that are broadly similar, almost always rejecting
for the in-school period, and not rejecting in the post-college period. For example, for the
Parametric Aggregate-Distribution Test, while we cannot reject the null hypothesis that
          B
Ei (var(Yit )) + vari (µB
                        it ) - vari (yi )  0 at a 5% level for beliefs elicited at the time of

entrance, this null hypothesis is rejected at a 5% level for beliefs elicited at the end of each
of the four academic years.13 However, we cannot reject the null hypothesis at a 5% level
for 1-year ahead beliefs nor 5-year ahead income beliefs in the post college period.
   The DGM Test (row 3) and Regression test (row 4) produce different patterns. In contrast
to the results in Section 5.1, the DGM Test does not reject Rational Expectations at a 5%
level for any of the in-school beliefs once we allow for additively separable aggregate shocks
(and change the object of interest to log-income). It now fails to reject Rational Expectations
both in-school and post-college. In contrast, the Regression Test rejects at the 1% for every
time horizon, both in-school and post-college.14
   Broadly, the conclusion from Section 5.1 holds when we allow for aggregate shocks. The
evidence against the Rational Expectations Hypothesis is much stronger for the in-school
period than for the post-college period. Interestingly, after allowing for aggregate shocks,
the DGM test tends not to reject Rational Expectations in our data.15 The only rejections
we find for the post-college period are for the Regression Test. However, we note again that
measurement error in µB
                      it , arising either from reporting error in beliefs or approximation

error in computing individual means, can lead to spurious rejections with this test. On the
other hand, for the post-college period, the Parametric Aggregate-Distribution test is based
on beliefs elicited in the probability format, and so is robust to classical reporting errors as
discussed in Section 4.3.2. With this test, we cannot reject Rational Expectations in the
post-college period.
  13
     We can reject the null hypothesis at a 10% level for beliefs elicited at the time of entrance.
  14
     Note that in the presence of aggregate shocks, Theorem 7 does not apply, so the null of the regression
test is not implied by combination of the nulls of the Mean-Variance and Aggregate-Distribution tests.
  15
     We note again that our implementation of the test imputes a mean from probabilistic expectations data,
rather than interpreting a reported point belief as a mean.




                                                    49
           Table 7: Parametric Tests about Income in Year 2007-2013 (p-values)

    Year of Realization 2007    2008            2009     2010      2011      2012       2013
    Panel A: 1-year ahead Beliefs
    u
    ^12 (uncertainty)   0.0730 0.0055          0.0059   0.0459    0.0303    0.0009     0.0028
    u
    ^3 (mean)           0.4448 0.2299          0.3736   0.4750    0.3902    0.0000     0.0056
    u
    ^V (variance)       0.0137 0.3669          0.5582   0.2496    0.6849    0.1129     0.0060
    Joint               0.0007 0.0223          0.0364   0.2676    0.1926    < 10-4     0.0114
    Sample Size          200     264            269      294        320      322        344
    Panel B: 5-year ahead Beliefs
    u
    ^12 (uncertainty)    N.A.   N.A.            N.A.     N.A.     < 10-4    < 10-4    0.0002
    u
    ^3 (mean)            N.A.   N.A.            N.A.     N.A.     0.0134    0.2218    0.7128
    u
    ^V (variance)        N.A.   N.A.            N.A.     N.A.     0.8124    0.2787    0.0198
    Joint                N.A.   N.A.            N.A.     N.A.     < 10-4    < 10-4    < 10-4
    Sample Size          N.A.   N.A.            N.A.     N.A.       184       237       265

Note: Panel A reports the p-values associated with (two-tailed) test statistics u ^12 , u
                                                                                        ^)3
(defined in Theorem 2), u  ^V (defined in Theorem 6), and the joint test in Section 4.4 for
students' 1-year ahead beliefs after college about annual family income realized in
2007-2013. Panel B reports the p-values associated with (two-tailed) test statistics u  ^12 , u
                                                                                              ^ )3 ,
u
^V , and the joint test for students' 5-year ahead beliefs after college about annual family
income realized in 2011-2013.


 Table 8: Rational Expectations Tests about Income at Age 28-29 with Aggregate Shocks

                                   10-year    9-year     8-year    7-year    6-year    5-year    1-year
 Year of Belief-elicitation
                                    ahead     ahead      ahead     ahead     ahead     ahead     ahead
 Mean-Variance Test
                                    < 10-4    < 10-4    < 10-4    < 10-4    < 10-4     0.1461    0.8635
 p-value
 Aggregate-Distribution Test
                                    0.0978    0.0138    0.0014     0.0125    0.0235    0.9998    0.9940
 p-value
 DGM Test
                                    1.0000    1.0000    1.0000     1.0000    1.0000    0.1543    0.5952
 p-value
 Regression Test: Slope             0.2200    0.4132    0.3362    0.3837    0.5691     0.5855    0.8913
 Regression Test: p-value           < 10-4    < 10-4    < 10-4    < 10-4    < 10-4    < 10-4     0.0093
 Correlation Test: Correlation       N.A.     0.2320    0.1924    0.2482    0.1767    -0.0784    0.0262
 Correlation Test: p-value           N.A.     0.0001    0.0062    0.0004    0.0100     0.3435    0.6545

Notes: All tests are applied to balanced panels. The first five columns report the results for
aggregate-shock-robust tests described in Section 6.1 for students' beliefs in college about
own annual income at age 28. The last two columns report the results for
aggregate-shock-robust tests for students' beliefs after college about annual family income
at age 28 (or 29).


                                                50
7     Conclusion
    The key point of this paper is that quality of individuals' beliefs depends on the higher
moments of those beliefs, not just the means. Ex post accuracy (in a belief-weighted mean-
squared error sense) depends on uncertainty as well as bias. Similarly, ex ante rationality
implies not only that a person's beliefs are unbiased but that the entire distribution describing
a person's subjective beliefs about a future variable should equal the actual conditional dis-
tribution of that variable, given the person's information set. Particularly with a continuous
variable such as income, this requirement can be violated even if beliefs are unbiased. An indi-
vidual may have correct mean-beliefs about future income but underestimate the income risk
they face. This would violate Rational Expectations, and could lead to sub-optimal choices.
Such an individual may be insufficiently prudent in their consumption-savings choices, for
example.
    It is becoming more common to collect information in surveys about the distributions
describing individuals' beliefs. We propose a new micro-data measure of ex post accuracy,
and new tests of Rational Expectations, designed to exploit information about the distribu-
tion describing a person's beliefs. Our new tests complement tests that are based on only
the means of belief distributions, such as the well-known regression test, or the new test of
D'Haultfoeuille, Gaillac, and Maurel (2018). The latter takes account of all of the informa-
tion in the distribution of mean beliefs (across persons) and the distribution of outcomes.
Our new tests exploit the additional information in each person's belief distribution.
    We apply this measure and these tests to data on income expectations and realizations
from the BPS. The BPS is unique in allowing a comparison of probabilistic income expec-
tations and income realizations over an extended age range: from college entrance through
early experiences in the labor market. We find that individuals' beliefs about future income
become more ex post accurate through college and into the post-college period both because
the average prediction error falls, and because uncertainty resolves. Applied to the BPS data
our new tests reject ex ante Rational Expectations for college students, even when we allow
for additive aggregate shocks. Importantly, we find that our new tests reject in cases where
existing mean-based tests do not. In contrast to our findings for college students, we find
much less evidence against Rational Expectations once these students have graduated, and
most have had their first experience in the labor market.
    Our analysis offers a number of lessons for survey designers. First, this work reinforces the
value of collecting information about belief distributions, and not just point expectations.

                                               51
Second, our analysis highlights a benefit of collecting such data in the probability format,
and with common cutoffs across respondents: this design facilitates the construction of a
nonparameteric distribution test. Randomized or respondent-driven cutoffs are sometimes
advocated as a way to avoid anchoring effects (e.g., Manski, 2004), but a nonparametric
distribution test would then involve many moment inequalities, so there is a trade-off to be
considered. Finally, we demonstrated that in the presence of (additive) aggregate shocks, a
nonparametric aggregate distribution test requires informative upper and lower bounds on
the belief distribution. That is something that can be built into survey questions measuring
beliefs.
   The analyses in this paper could be extended in a number of ways. Ben´
                                                                        itez-Silva et al.
(2008) construct mean-based tests of Rational Expectations from observed innovations in
beliefs (rather than from pairings of beliefs and realizations.) An aggregate distribution test
could be constructed similarly, from a sequence of observations on beliefs.
   In a recent paper, Hahn, Kuersteiner, and Mazzocco (2019) study the estimation of the
parameters of economic models with Rational Expectations, in environments with aggregate
shocks. They show that model parameters (such as taste or technology parameters) can not
be consistently estimated with cross-sectional (or short panel) data simply by conditioning
on the realization of the aggregate shock. The aggregate distribution test we propose for
an environment with aggregate shocks does not contradict this result. Rational Expecta-
tions can still place restrictions on the data, particularly inequality restrictions, even if those
restrictions are not sufficient to identify model parameters. Nevertheless, the methods devel-
oped in Hahn, Kuersteiner, and Mazzocco (2019) might be used to combine cross-sectional
information on probabilistic expectations and individual realizations with a long time series
of realizations of the aggregate shock. This could generate additional testable implications
of Rational Expectations and more powerful tests.
   Using data from the Health and Retirement Study, Giustinelli, Manski, and Molinari
(2019) show that individuals report intervals for perceived probabilities of future events
when allowed to do so. They interpret this finding as evidence that individuals have impre-
cise beliefs, also known as ambiguity, about future outcomes. We note that having imprecise
beliefs is itself a deviation from Rational Expectations. Because the BPS was not designed
to elicit interval subjective probabilities, we are unable to directly assess the precision of re-
spondents' income beliefs. Nonetheless, our Rational Expectations tests, which are based on
point probabilities (for each interval of the range of outcomes) and/or percentiles, can have


                                                52
meaningful interpretations under additional assumptions about these point probabilities and
percentiles.16 For example, while an individual might not be able to precisely choose among
multiple possible subjective distributions, she may believe that one of these distributions is
more likely to be true than others. Then, if everyone reports probabilities/percentiles asso-
ciated with this most likely subjective distribution, our tests in effect examine whether the
most likely subjective income distributions are consistent with the implications of Rational
Expectations.
   We leave further exploration of these possible extensions for future work.



Funding
   This project was made possible by generous support from the Mellon Foundation, the
Spencer Foundation, the National Science Foundation, and the Social Sciences and Human-
ities Research Council.



Conflicts of Interest
   None.



References
Ameriks, John, G´
                abor K´
                      ezdi, Minjoon Lee, and Matthew D Shapiro. 2020. "Heterogeneity in
  expectations, risk tolerance, and household stock shares: The attenuation puzzle." Journal
  of Business & Economic Statistics 38 (3):633­646.

Arcidiacono, Peter. 2004. "Ability sorting and the returns to college major." Journal of
  Econometrics 121 (1-2):343­375.

Arcidiacono, Peter, V Joseph Hotz, and Songman Kang. 2012. "Modeling college major
  choices using elicited measures of expectations and counterfactuals." Journal of Econo-
  metrics 166 (1):3­16.
  16
    Note the distinction between point probabilities for each interval in a partition of the range of outcomes,
and the single point expectation that is sometimes interpreted as the mean of the distribution describing
beliefs.




                                                      53
Attanasio, Orazio and Britta Augsburg. 2016. "Subjective expectations and income processes
  in rural India." Economica 83 (331):416­442.

Ben´
   itez-Silva, Hugo, Debra S Dwyer, Wayne-Roy Gayle, and Thomas J Muench. 2008. "Ex-
  pectations in micro data: rationality revisited." Empirical Economics 34 (2):381­416.

Bowen, William G and Derek Bok. 1998. The Shape of the River. Long-Term Consequences
  of Considering Race in College and University Admissions. ERIC.

Bowen, William G, Matthew M Chingos, and Michael S McPherson. 2009. Crossing the finish
  line: Completing college at America's public universities. Princeton University Press.

Das, Marcel, Jeff Dominitz, and Arthur Van Soest. 1999. "Comparing predictions and
  outcomes: Theory and application to income changes." Journal of the American Statistical
  Association 94 (445):75­85.

Das, Marcel and Bas Donkers. 1999. "How certain are Dutch households about future
  income? An empirical analysis." Review of Income and Wealth 45 (3):325­338.

Das, Marcel and Arthur Van Soest. 1997. "Expected and realized income changes: Evidence
  from the Dutch socio-economic panel." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization
  32 (1):137­154.

Delavande, Adeline. 2008. "Pill, patch, or shot? Subjective expectations and birth control
  choice." International Economic Review 49 (3):999­1042.

D'Haultfoeuille, Xavier, Christophe Gaillac, and Arnaud Maurel. 2018. "Rationalizing Ra-
  tional Expectations? Tests and Deviations." (25274).

Dominitz, J and CF Manski. 1997a. "Perceptions of economic insecurity: Evidence from the
  survey of economic expectations." Public opinion quarterly 61 (2):261­287.

Dominitz, Jeff. 1998. "Earnings Expectations, Revisions, and Realizations." The Review of
  Economics and Statistics 80 (3):374­388.

Dominitz, Jeff and Charles F Manski. 1996. "Eliciting student expectations of the returns
  to schooling." The Journal of Human Resources 31 (1):1.

Dominitz, Jeff and Charles F. Manski. 1997b. "Using Expectations Data to Study Subjective
  Income Expectations." Journal of the American Statistical Association 92 (439):855­867.

                                             54
Giustinelli, Pamela, Charles F Manski, and Francesca Molinari. 2019. "Precise or Imprecise
  Probabilities? Evidence from Survey Response on Late-onset Dementia." (26125). URL
  http://www.nber.org/papers/w26125.

Gong, Yifan, Ralph Stinebrickner, and Todd Stinebrickner. forthcoming. "Marriage, chil-
  dren, and labor supply: Beliefs and outcomes." Journal of Econometrics .

Gong, Yifan, Todd Stinebrickner, and Ralph Stinebrickner. 2019. "Uncertainty about future
  income: Initial beliefs and resolution during college." Quantitative Economics 10 (2):607­
  641.

------. 2020. "Perceived and actual option values of college enrollment." Journal of Applied
  Econometrics 35 (7):940­959.

Guiso, Luigi, Tullio Jappelli, and Daniele Terlizzese. 1992. "Earnings uncertainty and pre-
  cautionary saving." Journal of Monetary Economics 30 (2):307­337.

Hahn, Jinyong, Guido Kuersteiner, and Maurizio Mazzocco. 2019. "Estimation with Aggre-
  gate Shocks." The Review of Economic Studies 87 (3):1365­1398.

Karlin, Samuel and Herman Rubin. 1956. "The theory of decision procedures for distributions
  with monotone likelihood ratio." The Annals of Mathematical Statistics :272­299.

Leland, Hayne E. 1978. "Saving and uncertainty: The precautionary demand for saving."
  In Uncertainty in economics. Elsevier, 127­139.

Manski, Charles F. 1992. Parental income and college opportunity. Democratic Study Center.

------. 2004. "Measuring expectations." Econometrica 72 (5):1329­1376.

------. 2018. "Survey measurement of probabilistic macroeconomic expectations: progress
  and promise." NBER Macroeconomics Annual 32 (1):411­471.

Manski, Charles F and Francesca Molinari. 2010. "Rounding probabilistic expectations in
  surveys." Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 28 (2):219­231.

Meghir, Costas and Luigi Pistaferri. 2011. "Earnings, consumption and life cycle choices."
  In Handbook of labor economics, vol. 4. Elsevier, 773­854.




                                            55
Pesaran, Hashem and Martin Weale. 2006. "Survey expectations." Handbook of economic
  forecasting 1:715­776.

Sandmo, Agnar. 1970. "The effect of uncertainty on saving decisions." The review of eco-
  nomic studies 37 (3):353­360.

Stinebrickner, Ralph and Todd Stinebrickner. 2008. "The effect of credit constraints on
  the college drop-out decision: A direct approach using a new panel study." American
  Economic Review 98 (5):2163­84.

------. 2014a. "Academic performance and college dropout: Using longitudinal expectations
  data to estimate a learning model." Journal of Labor Economics 32 (3):601­644.

Stinebrickner, Ralph, Todd Stinebrickner, and Paul Sullivan. 2019. "Job tasks, time alloca-
  tion, and wages." Journal of Labor Economics 37 (2):399­433.

Stinebrickner, Ralph and Todd R Stinebrickner. 2003. "Understanding educational outcomes
  of students from low-income families evidence from a liberal arts college with a full tuition
  subsidy program." Journal of Human Resources 38 (3):591­617.

------. 2014b. "A major in science? Initial beliefs and final outcomes for college major and
  dropout." Review of Economic Studies 81 (1):426­472.

Stinebrickner, Todd and Ralph Stinebrickner. 2012. "Learning about academic ability and
  the college dropout decision." Journal of Labor Economics 30 (4):707­748.

Van der Klaauw, Wilbert. 2012. "On the use of expectations data in estimating structural
  dynamic choice models." Journal of Labor Economics 30 (3):521­554.

Zafar, Basit. 2011. "How do college students form expectations?" Journal of Labor Eco-
  nomics 29 (2):301­348.




                                              56
Appendices
A        Survey Questions
Question A1. The following questions will ask you about the income you might earn in
the future at different ages under several hypothetical scenarios. We realize that you will
not know exactly how much money you would make at a particular point in time. However,
you may believe that some amounts of money are quite likely while others are quite unlikely.
We would like to know what you think. We first ask you to indicate the lowest possible
amount of money you might make and the highest amount of money you might make. We
then ask you to divide the values between the lowest and the highest into four intervals.
Please mark the intervals so that there is a 25% chance that your income will be in each of
the intervals. When reporting incomes, take into account the possibility that you will work
full-time, the possibility that you will work part-time, the possibility that you will not be
working, and (for the hypothetical scenarios which involve graduation) the possibility that
you will attend graduate or professional school. When reporting income you should ignore
the effects of price inflation.
For ALL of question 1A, assume that you graduate from Berea. Think about the
kinds of jobs that will be available for you and those that you would accept. Please write
the FIVE NUMBERS that describe the income which you would expect to earn at the
following ages or times under this hypothetical scenario.

I. Your income during the first full year after you leave school
    |                                                                                    |
lowest                                                                             highest

II. Your income at age 28 (note: if you are 20 years of age or older, give your income 10
years from now)
    |                                                                                    |
lowest                                                                             highest

III. Your income at age 38 (note: if you are 20 years of age or older, give your income 20
years from now)
    |                                                                                    |
lowest                                                                             highest


                                              57
Question A2. The total yearly earnings of your family as of today are shown in Question
A3. We know that you do not know exactly what the total yearly earnings for your family
will be one year from today because you or your spouse (if you have one) may get raises
on your current jobs, take pay cuts on your current jobs, lose your current jobs, change jobs,
quite your jobs, or take a leave from your current jobs. Taking into account uncertainty
about these possibilities, we want to know what you believe about your earnings one year
from now. Thank ahead to one year from today. Tell us the percent chance that the total
yearly earnings for your family will be in each of the following categories one year from
today. Please take into account that your jobs situations may change in the next year and
also take into account changes in the number of workers in your family sue to marriage or
the birth of new children. NOTE: Each number should each be between 0 and 100
and the numbers should sum to 100. You should enter a zero for a category if there is
zero change your total family earnings will be in that interval next year.
Earnings Interval                   Percent Chance
[$0, $15,000)
[$15,000, $30,000)
[$30,000, $45,000)
[$45,000, $60,000)
[$60,000, $75,000)
[$75,000, $90,000)
[$90,000, $105,000)
[$105,000, $120,000)
[$120,000, $135,000)
[$135,000, 1 million)

NOTE: Similar questions were asked about total yearly family income five years from
today.

Question A3. 1) How many hours do you typically work each week in your job?           (a)
2) Approximately how much do you earn in your job? NOTE: Please indicate both a dollar
amount and whether this amount is your pay per hour, per day, per week, per month, per
year etc. For example, if you earn $8.50 an hour, please write $8.50 per hour. If you earn
$30,000 per year, please write $30,000 per year. $    (b)     per     (c)

   We use the numbers in (a), (b), and (c) to compute your yearly earnings. The formula


                                             58
you should use depends on whether you reported your earnings per Year, per MONTH, per
WEEK, per HOUR etc. in (c).

If per YEAR, then your YEARLY EARNINGS is the $ amount from (b): b
If per MONTH, then your YEARLY EARNINGS is the $ amount from (b) multiplied by
12: b × 12
If per TWO WEEKS, then your YEARLY EARNINGS is the $ amount from (b) multi-
plied by 26: b × 26
If per WEEK, then your YEARLY EARNINGS is the $ amount from (b) multiplied by
52: b × 52
If per HOUR, then your YEARLY EARNINGS is the $ amount from (b) multiplied by
52 and then multiplied by the HOURS number in (a): b × 52 × a

NOTE: Similar questions were asked about total yearly spousal income.

Question A4. We are interested in whether you think you will get married and when you
think you will get married. What is the percent chance that your first marriage will take
place at each of the following ages or not at all? Note: Each number should be between
0 and 100 and the numbers should sum to 100.

Your Age                      Percent Chance of first marriage taking place at this age
At or before Age 23
At Age 24 or 25
At Age 26 or 27
At Age 28 or 29
At or after Age 30
Never get married



B      Stepwise Uniform Distribution
    Regardless of the format we use to elicit probabilistic expectations, for each respondent, we
                                                                                     B,k
obtain a set of outcome intervals and corresponding perceived probabilities {(Sk , Pit   )|k =
                                                                           B,k
1, 2, ..., K }. If the beliefs are elicited in a percentile format, then Pit   are pre-defined by
researchers and Sk are reported by the respondent. Alternatively, if the beliefs are elicited
                                                                      B,k
in a probability format, then Sk are pre-defined by researchers and Pit   are reported by the
respondent. We let Ck,l and Ck,u denote the infimum and the supremum of interval Sk .

                                               59
                                                         B
    We assume that the respondent's subjective beliefs Yit has the stepwise uniform pdf given
by:
                                               B,k
                                B            Pit            B
                         fYit
                            B (y ) =
                                it                    , if yit  Sk , for k  {1, 2..., K }.                         (15)
                                          Ck,u - Ck,l
                                                                                     B,k
                               B                   B                            K   Pit  (Ck,u -Ck,l )             B
    The mean and variance of Yit are given by E (Yit )=                         k=1        2
                                                                                                         and var(Yit )=
       B,k
  K   Pit  [(Ck,u )2 +Ck,u Ck,l +(Ck,l )2 ]           B 2
  k=1                  3
                                              - (E (Yit )) .



C      Converting Beliefs about Own Income to Beliefs
       about Family Income
                               B          B
    We begin by assuming that YO,it and YS,it are identically distributed. In our framework,
this would follow if mating were (perfectly) assortative on factors that are observed at t.
                                  B        B           M
We further initially assume that YO,it , YS,it , and Pit are mutually independent. Under these
                                  B               B                                  M       B
assumptions, we can show that E (YF,it ) and var(YF,it ) are functions of objects, Pit , E (YO,it )
         B
and var(YO,it ), which are directly available in the BPS,

                             B               M      B
                         E (YF,it ) = (1 + Pit )E (YO,it ),                                                        (16)
                           B               M       B             B
                      var(YF,it ) = (1 + Pit )var(YO,it ) + [E (YO,it )]2 Pit
                                                                            M        M
                                                                              (1 - Pit ).                          (17)


If students believe that mating will also positively sort on income-influencing factors that
                                      B          B
are still unresolved at time t, then YO,it and YS,it will be positively correlated. In this case,
                                   B                                            B
Equation (16) correctly states E (YF,it ), while Equation (17) understates var(YF,it ). This is
                      B          B                                       B
of no consequence for F,t, 2 and F,t,3 , but suggests our calculation of F,t,1 (and therefore

B
F,t ) should be viewed as a lower bound.




D       Proofs
Theorem 1. Under assumptions A1 to A3, if all individuals have Rational Expectations
about Yi (Definition 1), then
                                                B      B            B
                                                t, 1 = t,2 and      t, 3 = 0.


Proof. Consider an individual i of type i . Under the assumption that she has Rational




                                                               60
                                                      B
Expectations about Yi , her beliefs at t about yi , Yit , are given by:

                                               i ,t-      i ,t-
                                   B
                                 Yit = Yi |(Xi       = xi       , Zt- = zt- ).                       (18)


   Under the assumption that i and Xi are independent (A3), i = i does not provide
                                                    i ,t-
additional information about Yi , conditional on Xi       and Zt- . Hence, the following equation
holds:
                                                i ,t-    i ,t-
                              B
                            Yit = Yi |(i = i , Xi     = xi     , Zt- = zt- ).                        (19)

   This implies that:

                                                          i ,t-      i ,t-
                        µB         B
                         it = E (Yit ) = E [Yi |(i = i , Xi     = xi       , Zt- = zt- )],           (20)
                                                  i ,t-      i ,t-
                        B
                  var(Yit ) = var[Yi |(i = i , Xi       = xi       , Zt- = zt- )].                   (21)

                                                                                  i ,t-
                                    B
   The population distribution of Yit is produced by the realizations of i and Xi       . Hence,
                     B                 B
the first component, t, 1 = Ei [var (Yit )], is given by:


                                                     i ,t-
                            B
                            t, 1 = E {var [Yi |(i , Xi     , Zt- )]|Zt- = zt- }.                     (22)


   Similarly, the population distribution of yi is produced by the realizations of Xi . Hence,
                      B                  B
the second component, t, 2 = vari (yi - µit ), is given by:


                              i ,t-
 B
 t, 2 =var {Yi - E [Yi |(i , Xi     , Zt- )]|Zt- = zt- }
                                 i ,t-
     =var{E {Yi - E [Yi |(i , Xi       , Zt- )]|(i , Zt- )}|Zt- = zt- }+
                                    i ,t-
         E {var{Yi - E [Yi |(i , Xi       , Zt- )]|(i , Zt- )}|Zt- = zt- }
                                                     i ,t-
     =var(0|Zt- = zt- ) + E {var{Yi - E [Yi |(i , Xi       , Zt- )]|(i , Zt- )}|Zt- = zt- }
                                    i ,t-                  i ,t-
     =E {var{E {Yi - E [Yi |(i , Xi       , Zt- )]|(i , Xi       , Zt- )}|(i , Zt- )}|Zt- = zt- }+
                                       i ,t-                i ,t-
         E {E {var{Yi - E [Yi |(i , Xi       , Zt- )]|(i , Xi     , Zt- )}|(i , Zt- )}|Zt- = zt- }
                                                               i ,t-
     =E {var[0|(i , Zt- )]|Zt- = zt- } + E {E {var[Yi |(i , Xi       , Zt- )]|(i , Zt- )}|Zt- = zt- }
                         i ,t-
     =E {var[Yi |(i , Xi       , Zt- )]|Zt- = zt- }
      B
     =t, 1,                                                                                          (23)


where the second and fourth lines follow from the law of iterative variance.


                                                      61
   The second part of Theorem 1 directly follows from the law of iterative expectations:

                                                            i ,t-
       B
       t, 3 = y ¯t = E (Yi |Zt- = zt- ) - E {E [Yi |(i , X
              ¯-µ                                         i       , Zt- )]|Zt- = zt- } = 0.   (24)




Theorem 2. (Mean-Variance Test) Under assumptions A1 to A4, if all individuals have
Rational Expectations about Yi (Definition 1), then

                                         ^B - 
                                                ^B d
                                          t,1
                                  u
                                  ^12          t,2 - N (0, 1),
                                          ^12 / n

                                            ^B
                                             t,3 d
                                    ^3 
                                    u        - N (0, 1).
                                        ^3 / n
Proof. Theorem 2 trivially follows from the standard central limit theorem.

Theorem 3. Under assumptions A1 to A3, if all individuals have Rational Expectations
about Yi (Definition 1), then

                          B,k
                    Ei (Pit   ) = P rob(Yi  Sk |Zt- = zt- ),           for all k.


Proof. Let I (·) denote an indicator function that takes a value of one when the statement
is true and takes a value of zero when the statement is false. Consider an individual i of
type i . Under the assumption that she has Rational Expectations about Yi , her perceived
              B,k
probability Pit   is given by:

                        B,k                    i ,t-      i ,t-
                      Pit   =P rob(Yi  Sk |(Xi       = xi       , Zt- = zt- ))
                                                i ,t-    i ,t-
                            =E [I (Yi  Sk )|(Xi       = xi     , Zt- = zt- )].                (25)


   Similar as before, the independence between i and Xi implies that:

                    B,k                          i ,t-      i ,t-
                  Pit   =P rob(Yi  Sk |(i = i , Xi     = xi       , Zt- = zt- ))
                                                    i ,t-      i ,t-
                        =E [I (Yi  Sk )|(i = i , Xi       = xi       , Zt- = zt- )].          (26)

                                    B,k                                             i ,t-
   The population distribution of Pit   is produced by the realizations of i and Xi       .



                                                 62
             B,k
Hence, Ei (Pit   ) is given by:

                          B,k                             i ,t-
                    Ei (Pit   ) = E {E [I (Yi  Sk )|(i , Xi     , Zt- )]|Zt- = zt- }

                                  = E [I (Yi  Sk )|Zt- = zt- ]

                                  = P rob(Yi  Sk |Zt- = zt- ),                                                        (27)


where the second line directly follows from the law of iterative expectations.

Theorem 4. (Nonparametric Aggregate-Distribution Test) Denote the mean and
            ~ B for sample {PI , PII } as µ
variance of P                                     ^P , respectively, and denote the mean and
                                           ^P and V
              it

variance of Qi for sample {QI , QII } as µ      ^Q , respectively. Let V
                                         ^Q and V                      ^P Q and V
                                                                                ^QP denote the
                             ~ B and Qi for sample {(P
cross-covariance matrices of P                       ~ B , Qi )|P
                                                                ~ B  PI , Qi  QI }. Finally,
                               it                      it         it

we denote the number of individuals who reported both probabilities and realizations as nP Q
                                                                                         I ,
                                                                                        Q
and denote the number of individuals who are in PII and QII , respectively, as nP
                                                                                II and nII ,

respectively.
   Under assumptions A1 to A3, if all individuals have Rational Expectations about Yi (Def-
inition 1), then
                                         ^ -1 (^                        d
                          ^p  (^
                          u    µP - µ
                                    ^Q ) V          ^Q ) - 2 (K - 1),
                                               µP - µ

      ^ =       ^
               VP           ^VQ                 nP  Q
                                                                  ^P Q + V
                                                                         ^QP ).
where V     nP Q  P   +   nP Q  Q    -            I
                                         (nI +nII )(nP
                                           PQ  P       Q  Q      (V
             I +nII        I +nII                     I +nII )


                                                  ~ B as µP and VP , respectively, and
Proof. Denote the population mean and variance of P it

denote the population mean and variance of Qi as µQ and VQ , respectively. Let VP Q and
                                                       ~ B and Qi .
VQP denote the population cross-covariance matrices of P                     it
                           nP Q
                                               nP                                                       ~B
   We rewrite µ
              ^P as     nP Q
                            I
                             P     ^I
                                   µ P   +   nP
                                                II
                                                Q P    ^II
                                                       µ P ,   where   ^I
                                                                       µP       ^II
                                                                            and µ P are the averages of Pit for
                         I +nII               I +nII
                                                                                    nP Q
                                                                                                         nQ
sample PI and PII , respectively. Similarly, we rewrite µ
                                                        ^Q as                      PQ
                                                                                     I
                                                                                  nI +nQ
                                                                                              ^I
                                                                                              µ Q + nP Q +nQ µ
                                                                                                         II
                                                                                                             ^II
                                                                                                               Q , where
                                                                                         II          I        II
^I
µ       ^II
  Q and µ Q are the averages of Qi for sample QI and QII , respectively.

                                                                                  ^P - µ
   Under the null of Rational Expectations, we have µP = µQ . Hence, we can write µ    ^Q
                           ^I
as a linear combination of µ          ^II
                             P - µP , µ          ^I
                                        P - µP , µ              ^II
                                                   Q - µQ , and µ Q - µQ as follows.

                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                   ^I
                                                                                                   µ P - µP
                                                                             
                      nP Q
                                 nP
                                             n PQ
                                                          nQ      µ^
                                                                   P
                                                                     II
                                                                        - µ P
                                                                             
             ^Q = ( P Q I P , P Q II P , - P Q I Q , - P Q II Q ) 
        ^P - µ
        µ                                                                    .                                        (28)
                   nI + nII nI + nII      nI + nII    nI + nII       I
                                                                   µ
                                                                   ^
                                                                   Q    - µ Q
                                                                             
                                                                                                  ^II
                                                                                                  µ Q - µQ




                                                          63
                                                                                                   nP Q               nP                  nP Q                  nQ
   Under the assumption of Missing Completely at Random, ( nP QI+nP , nP Q II
                                                                           +nP
                                                                               , - nP QI+nQ , - nP Q II
                                                                                                     +nQ
                                                                                                         )
                                                                                               I          II      I        II         I          II         I        II
converges in probability to a certain vector, which we denote as R.
                                                            ^I
   Under the MCAR assumption, other than the combination of µ            ^I
                                                              P - µP and µ Q - µQ , the

                                           ^I
cross-covariance matrix between any two of µ          ^II
                                             P - µP , µ          ^I
                                                        P - µP , µ              ^II
                                                                   Q - µQ , and µ Q - µQ is

zero. Hence, the central limit theorem implies that the asymptotic distribution of the vector
 µI
(^          ^II
   P - µP , µ          ^I
              P - µP , µ          ^II
                         Q - µQ , µ Q - µQ ) is given by:

                                                                                        VP Q
                                                                                                               
                                                               VP
                             ^I
                             µ - µP                           nP Q           0          nP Q              0
                               P                               I                         I                 
                                                                         VP
                                    
                            II
                               -             0                                           0                0
                         µ                                                                                 
                          ^
                          P      µ  
                                   P d                                   nP
                                     - N (0,  VQP
                                                                          II
                                                                                         VQ
                                                                                                           ).                                         (29)
                            I
                          ^ Q - µQ                                           0                            0
                         µ                    nP Q
                                                                                                           
                                              I                                         nP
                                                                                         I
                                                                                           Q
                                                                                                           
                            II                                                                           VQ
                         µ^ Q - µQ           0                               0           0               nQ
                                                                                                          II



   Hence, the Slutsky's theorem implies that:
                                                                                    VP Q
                                                                                                          
                                                            VP
                                                           nP Q          0          nP Q             0
                                                            I                        I                
                                                                     VP
                                           0                                        0                0
                                                                                                      
                                  d                                  nP
                         µ    ^Q - N (0, R 
                         ^P - µ             VQP
                                                                      II
                                                                                     VQ
                                                                                                       R ).                                           (30)
                                                                         0                           0
                                                                                                      
                                            nP Q                                    nP Q
                                            I                                        I                
                                                                                                    VQ
                                           0                             0           0              nQ
                                                                                                     II



  Replacing R, VP , VQ , VP Q , and VQP with their consistent estimators, Equation (30)
implies that:

                                                        d      ^ ),
                                               ^P - µ
                                               µ    ^Q - N (0, V
                                                                                     ^P                           ^P Q
                                                                                                                  V
                                                                                                                                     nP Q 
                                                                                     V                                                   I
                                                                                    nP Q             0            nP  Q          0   nP Q
                                                                                                                                          +nP
                                                                                     I                              I                 I       II 
                                                                                                                                        nP
                                                        
                                                                                                   ^P
                                                                                                   V                                      II
                                                                                                                                                 
               nP Q
                               nP               nP Q    0          nQ                                              0             0   nP Q +nP 
                                                                                                                                    
      ^ =(      I               II               I                  II                             nP
where V            ,         , -          , -         )                                             II                                I       II
                                                         ^                                                                                       
                                                                                                                   ^Q
                                                                                                                                   
            PQ       PQ           PQ   Q       PQ   Q  V                                                           V                     nP  Q
                 P        P
                                                                                                                                                 
           nI + nII nI + nII     nI + nII     nI + nII  QPPQ                                         0                           0 
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                    - nP Q +nQ 
                                                                                                                                           I
                                                         nI                                                       nP
                                                                                                                   I
                                                                                                                     Q
                                                                                                                                     I Q II 
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                ^Q
                                                                                                                                V        n
                                                                                                                                                 
                                                        0                                            0                0         nQ
                                                                                                                                    - nP Q II  Q
                                                                                                                                 II         +n
                                                                                                                                             I         II

               ^P
               V                   ^Q
                                   V                      nPI
                                                              Q
                                                                                  ^P Q + V
                                                                                         ^QP ).
        =                +                -                                      (V                                                                   (31)
            nP
             I
               Q
                 + nP
                    II       nP
                              I
                                Q
                                  + nQ
                                     II       (nP
                                                I
                                                  Q
                                                    +   nP
                                                         II )(nI
                                                                PQ
                                                                     + nQ
                                                                        II )




   We conclude that µ^P - µ
                          ^Q is a K - 1 dimensional vector that converges to a multivariate
normal distribution with zero mean and V ^ variance. This implies that:


                                            ^ -1 (^          d
                             ^p  (^
                             u    µP - µ
                                       ^Q ) V          ^Q ) - 2 (K - 1).
                                                  µP - µ                                                                                              (32)


                                                              64
Theorem 5. Under assumptions A1 to A3, if all individuals have Rational Expectations
about Yi (Definition 1), then


                  Ei (yi ) = Ei (µB                   B             B
                                  it ) and Ei (var (Yit )) + vari (µit ) = vari (yi ).



Proof. The first part of Theorem 5 is the same as the second part of Theorem 1, which we
have already proved above. Here we prove the second part of Theorem 5.
                                                                  i ,t-    i ,t-
   Recall from the proof of Theorem 1 that µB
                                            it = E [Yi |(i = i , Xi     = xi     , Zt- = zt- )].
                                                                                         i ,t-
                                           B
As above, the population distribution of Yit is produced by the realizations of i and Xi       .
Hence, the term vari (µB
                       it ) is given by:


                                                      i ,t-
                      vari (µB
                             it ) = var {E [Yi |(i , Xi     , Zt- )]|Zt- = zt- }.           (33)

                                                           i ,t-
                                   B
   Theorem 1 states that Ei (var(Yit )) = E {var[Yi |(i , Xi     , Zt- )]|Zt- = zt- }. Hence, the
                 B
sum of Ei (var(Yit )) and vari (µB
                                 it ) is given by:


                                                             i ,t-
                       B
             Ei (var(Yit )) + vari (µB
                                     it ) =E {var [Yi |(i , Xi     , Zt- )]|Zt- = zt- }+
                                                              i ,t-
                                             var{E [Yi |(i , Xi     , Zt- )]|Zt- = zt- }

                                           =var(Yi |Zt- = zt- )

                                           =vari (yi ),                                     (34)


where the second last line follows from the law of iterative variance.

Theorem 6. (Parametric Aggregate-Distribution Test) Under assumptions A1 to A3
and A5, if all individuals have Rational Expectations about Yi (Definition 1), then

                                        ^BM - µ
                                        µ     ^Y M                     d
                          ^M 
                          u           2         2                 2
                                                                      - N (0, 1),
                                     ^BM       ^Y          2nBY ^M
                                      nB
                                           +    nY
                                                  M
                                                      -     nB nY


                                           ^BV - µ
                                           µ     ^Y V                  d
                           ^V 
                           u          2         2                2
                                                                      - N (0, 1).
                                     ^BV       ^Y         2nBY ^V
                                      nB
                                           +    nY
                                                  V
                                                      -    nB nY

Proof. We note that, in terms of mathematical content, Theorem 6 is in essence a one
dimensional special case of Theorem 4. Hence, the proof for Theorem 6 follows the same
structure as the proof for Theorem 4.

                                                      65
Theorem 7. Any two of the following three statements imply the third statement:
    B      B             B
(1) t, 1 = t,2 , and     t, 3 = 0; (Mean-Variance Test)
              B
(2) Ei (var(Yit )) + vari (µB                                      B
                            it ) = vari (yi ), and Ei (yi ) = Ei (µit ); (Aggregate-Distribution Test)

(3) yi = µB
          it + i , where      i   has a mean of zero and is orthogonal to µB
                                                                           it . (Regression Test)

            B               B
Proof. Let vit denote var(Yit ). We start by rewriting the three statements as follows:
         B
(1) Ei (vit ) = vari (yi - µB                         B
                            it ), and Ei (yi ) - Ei (µit ) = 0;
         B
(2) Ei (vit ) + vari (µB                                      B
                       it ) = vari (yi ), and Ei (yi ) = Ei (µit );

(3) cov (yi - µB     B                       B
               it , µit ) = 0, and Ei (yi - µit ) = 0.

   It is easy to see that the second components of these statements are identical. Hence, it
suffices to prove that any two of the following three equalities imply the third:

                 B
            Ei (vit ) = vari (yi - µB         B                          B                  B
                                    it ) Ei (vit ) = vari (yi ) + vari (µit ) - 2cov (yi , µit ),   (35)
          B
     Ei (vit ) + vari (µB                      B                          B
                        it ) = vari (yi ) Ei (vit ) = vari (yi ) - vari (µit ),                     (36)

               cov (yi - µB     B                   B            B
                          it , µit ) = 0 cov (yi , µit ) = var (µit ).                              (37)


   Taking the difference between Equation (35) and Equation (36), we find that 0 = 2vari (µB
                                                                                           it )-

2cov (yi , µB
            it ), which is the same as Equation (37).

   Equation (37) implies that var(µB                  B              B
                                   it ) - 2cov (yi , µit ) = -vari (µit ). Hence, Equation (35)

and Equation (36) are identical if Equation (37) holds.



Theorem 8. Under assumptions A1 and A6-A8, if all individuals have Rational Expectations
about Yi (Definition 1), then
                                               B      B
                                               t, 1 - t,2  0.


Proof. Consider an individual i of type i . Under the assumption that she has Rational
                                                      B
Expectations about Yi , her beliefs at t about yi , Yit , are given by:

                                            i ,t-      i ,t-
                                B
                              Yit = Yi |(Xi       = xi       , Zt- = zt- )
                                            i ,t-    i ,t-
                                    = YiI |Xi     = xi     + Y A |Zt- = zt- ,                       (38)


where the second line follows from the assumptions that i , Xi , and Z are independent (A7).
   Under these independence assumptions, i = i does not provide additional information



                                                      66
                              i ,t-
about YiI , conditional on Xi       . Hence, the following equation holds:

                                             i ,t-      i ,t-
                        B
                      Yit = YiI |(i = i , Xi       = xi       ) + Y A |Zt- = zt- .                (39)


   Taking the mean and variance of both sides, the independence assumptions imply that:

                                                  i ,t-      i ,t-
                µB         B          I
                 it = E (Yit ) = E [Yi |(i = i , Xi     = xi       )] + E (Y A |Zt- = zt- ),      (40)
                                           i ,t-      i ,t-
                B
          var(Yit ) = var[YiI |(i = i , Xi       = xi       )] + var(Y A |Zt- = zt- ).            (41)

                                                                                  i ,t-
                                    B
   The population distribution of Yit is produced by the realizations of i and Xi       . Hence,
                     B                 B
the first component, t, 1 = Ei [var (Yit )], is given by:


                                               i ,t-
                      B
                      t,               I
                         1 = E {var [Yi |(i , Xi     )]} + var(Y A |Zt- = zt- ).                  (42)


   Similarly, the population distribution of yi is produced by the realizations of Xi . Hence,
                      B                  B
the second component, t, 2 = vari (yi - µit ), is given by:


                                               i ,t-
         B
         t,                    I       I
            2 = var(i ,Xi ) {Yi - E [Yi |(i , Xi     )] + Y A |Z = z - E (Y A |Zt- = zt- )}.      (43)


   Note that Y A |Z = z - E (Y A |Zt- = zt- ) is a constant across individuals, hence it does
not contribute to the cross-sectional variance of yi - µB
                                                        it . It implies that:


     B            I       I       i ,t-
     t, 2 =var {Yi - E [Yi |(i , Xi     )]}
                                       i ,t-                                      i ,t-
         =var{E {YiI - E [YiI |(i , Xi       )]|i }} + E {var{YiI - E [YiI |(i , Xi     )]|i }}
                                              i ,t-
         =var(0) + E {var{YiI - E [YiI |(i , Xi     )]|i }}
                                          i ,t-            i ,t-
         =E {var{E {YiI - E [YiI |(i , Xi       )]|(i , Xi       )}|i }}+
                                           i ,t-            i ,t-
           E {E {var{YiI - E [YiI |(i , Xi       )]|(i , Xi       )}|i }}
                                                 i ,t-
         =E [var(0|i )] + E {E {var[YiI |(i , Xi       )]|i }}
                              i ,t-
         =E {var[YiI |(i , Xi       )]}.                                                          (44)


where the second and fourth lines follow from the law of iterative variance.




                                                   67
                                 B        B
   Taking the difference between t, 1 and t,2 , we conclude:


                                                      t-
                                B
                                t,     B           A
                                   1 - t,2 = var (Y |Z   = zt- )  0.                            (45)




Theorem 9. Under assumptions A1 and A6-A8, if all individuals have Rational Expectations
about Yi (Definition 1), then YtB is a mean-preserving spread of Yz + E (YtB ) - E (Yz ).

Proof. Under Rational Expectations, the subjective aggregate distribution YtB is given by:

                                B
                     YtB  Ei (Yit )
                                                 i ,t-      i ,t-
                          = Ei [YiI |(i = i , Xi       = xi       ) + Y A |Zt- = zt- ]
                                            i ,t-
                          = E [YiI |(i , Xi       )] + Y A |Zt- = zt-

                          = YiI + Y A |Zt- = zt- ,                                              (46)

                                                                               B
where the third line follows from the fact that cross-sectional variation in Yit is produced by
                             i ,t-
the realizations of i and Xi       , and the fourth line follows from the law of total probability.
   The distribution of outcomes Yz is given by:


                                        Yz  Yi |Z = z

                                             = YiI + Y A |Z = z,                                (47)


where the second equality follows from the independence of Xi and Z (A7).
   Then, Yz + E (YtB ) - E (Yz ) is given by:


  Yz + E (YtB ) - E (Yz ) = YiI + Y A |Z = z + E (YiI + Y A |Zt- = zt- ) - E (YiI + Y A |Z = z)

                           = YiI + E (Y A |Zt- = zt- ).                                         (48)


   Hence, it is easy to verify that YtB is equal to the sum of Yz + E (YtB ) - E (Yz ) and
Y A |Zt- = zt- - E (Y A |Zt- = zt- ). Since Y A |Zt- = zt- - E (Y A |Zt- = zt- ) has a mean of
zero, we conclude that YtB is a mean-preserving spread of Yz + E (YtB ) - E (Yz ).

Theorem 10. For any combination of Yz , which is continuous and has a finite expectation,
                                            K
          B,k                                                         B,k
and Ei (Pit   ), k = 1, 2, ..., K , if 1)         Sk = R and 2) Ei (Pit   ) > 0 k , then it is always
                                            k=1
possible to find a random variable  and a constant c such that:

                                                      68
   (1)  is a mean-preserving spread of Yz + c,
             B,k
   (2) Ei (Pit   ) = P rob(  Sk ), for all k .

Proof. We prove this theorem by construction.
   By assumption, there are K outcome bins, Sk . Among them, S1 and SK are unbounded
                                             c
and all other outcome bins are bounded. Let f  ( ) be an arbitrary positive-valued function
                   c              B,k                                                       c
such that    Sk
                  f  ( )d = Ei (Pit   ) for k = 2, 3, ..., K - 1. A simple example of such f  ( ) is
                                                       B,k
                                                 Ei (Pit   )
a step function that takes the value           sup Sk -inf Sk
                                                                for   Sk . Let µc
                                                                                 denote            K -1        fc
                                                                                                                  ( )d
                                                                                                          Sk
                                                                                                   k=2
           c                      B,1          
and let   F  ( )   denote   Ei (Pit   )   +         f c ( )d .
                                              inf S2 
   We let c =      µc
                        - E (Yz ) and let     Yzc denote Yz +     c. The PDF and CDF of Yzc are denoted
as fYzc (y ) and FYzc (y ), respectively. Because Yzc is a continuous random variable, there exist
                                              B,1                              B,K
unique yl and yr
               
                 such that FYzc (yl ) = Ei (Pit                
                                                  ) and FYzc (yr ) = 1 - Ei (Pit   ). We define
fl
   ( ; Wl ) = fYzc ( + Wl ) for   yl - Wl and fr                                 
                                                 ( ; Wr ) = fYzc ( - Wr ) for   yr + Wr .
                           -W
                         yl                                                 
   Let µl
         denote          -
                              l
                                  fl
                                     ( ; Wl )d and let µr
                                                         denote              +W
                                                                           yr   r
                                                                                    fr
                                                                                       ( ; Wr )d . It implies
             yl                                          
                                        B,1                                     B,K
that µl
       =    - Yz
                f c ( )d - Wl Ei (Pit       ) and µr      f Yz
                                                      = yr    c ( )d + Wr Ei (P
                                                                               it   ). We note
            yl                    
that both -     fYzc ( )d and y fYzc ( )d are finite because Yzc has finite first moment.
                                  r

Hence, for any Wl , there exists a unique Wr such that µl          r
                                                            + µ = 0. We denote this unique
                                             
                                            yl                
                                 B,1                                              B,K
mapping as Wr (Wl )  [Wl Ei (Pit     ) - -     fYzc ( )d - y fYzc ( )d ]/[Ei (Pit     )].
                                                               r
                                                                            yr
                                                                            y
                                                                                   c (y )dy
                                                                                 FYz
   We let Wl be an arbitrary real number such that 1) Wl >                   l
                                                                                  B,1
                                                                             Ei (Pit  )
                                                                                              , 2) yl - Wl < inf S2 ,
                         
3) Wr (Wl ) > 0, and 4) yr + Wr (Wl ) > sup SK -1 . It is easy to verify that all these constraints
are finite lower bounds for Wl . Hence, since Wl is not bounded, there always exists such a
Wl that is large enough to satisfy all the constraints.
   Now we construct a random variable  as follows. Let F ( ) denote the CDF of . It is
then given by:
                            
                             FYzc ( + Wl ),                if  < yl - Wl
                            
                                   B,1
                                                           if yl - Wl   < inf S2
                             Ei (Pit   ),
                            
                  F ( ) =    Fc
                                ( ),            if inf S2   < sup SK -1        .                                   (49)
                                      B,K                          
                            1 - Ei (Pit   ),    if sup SK -1   < yr + Wr (Wl )
                            
                            
                            FY c ( - W  (Wl )), if y  + W  (Wl )  
                            
                               z        r           r     r


   We claim that  satisfies the conditions that 1)  is a mean-preserving spread of Yzc , and
         B,k
2) Ei (Pit   ) = P rob(  Sk ), for all k . It is easy to verify that 2) holds by construction, so

                                                          69
we will focus on proving 1) below.
                                                                                       x
    To prove 1), it suffices to show that a) E () = E (YzC ) and b)                    -
                                                                                           F (x ) - FYzc (x )dx  0
for all x. Note that E () = µl       c       r   c         C
                              + 0 + µ + 0 + µ = µ and E (Yz ) = E (Yz ) + c =

E (Yz ) + µc             c
            - E (Yz ) = µ . Hence, a) is satisfied.

    For any x < yl , we know that F (x) - FYzc (x) = min(FYzc (x + Wl ), FYzc (yl )) - FYzc (x)  0
                                                                         x
because FYzc (x) is monotonically increasing. Hence,                     -
                                                                             F (x ) - FYzc (x )dx  0 for any
x < yl .
                      
    Consider yl  x < yr . We have:

              x                    -W
                                 yl                               
                                                                 yl                         x
                                      l
                  F (x )dx =              F (x )dx +                     F (x )dx +             F (x )dx
             -                  -                                 -W
                                                                yl                          
                                                                                           yl
                                                                     l
                                  
                                 yl                                                x
                                                                B,1
                            =         F (x )dx +
                                       Yzc             Wl Ei (Pit   )      +           F (x )dx
                                -                                                  
                                                                                  yl
                                  
                                 yl                          
                                                            yr
                            >         FYzc (x )dx +              FYzc (y )dy + 0
                                -                           
                                                           yl
                                  
                                 yl                         x
                                      FYzc (x )dx +             FYzc (y )dy
                                -                           
                                                           yl
                                 x
                            =         FYzc (x )dx .                                                          (50)
                                -

                                                                              
                                                                             yr
                           
    Lastly we consider x  yr . We have shown above that                      -
                                                                                  F (x ) - FYzc (x )dx > 0. Since
                                                                                          
E () = E (Yzc ), we know that         -
                                          F (x ) - FYzc (x )dx = 0. Note that for any x  yr , we
                                                        
have F (x) - FYzc (x) = max(FYzc (x - Wr (Wl )), FYzc (yr )) - FYzc (x)  0. This implies that
 x                                                            
 -
     F (x ) - FYzc (x )dx is monotonically decreasing for x  yr . Therefore, we conclude that
 x                                        
 -
     F (x ) - FYzc (x )dx > 0 for all x  yr .
                                                                             x
    Combining the arguments above, we have shown that                        -
                                                                                  F (x ) - FYzc (x )dx > 0 for all
x. This concludes the proof for Theorem 10.



E      Existing Mean-based Tests
    We apply the existing mean-based tests (DGM, Regression and Correlation) to beliefs
about income at age 28 (or 29). DGM and Regression Tests only utilize data on beliefs and
realizations. In contrast, since the Correlation Test concerns a strong version of Rational
Expectations Hypothesis, this test requires specifying variables in the agent's information set
at the time of belief elicitation. Given the strong serial correlation of income documented in


                                                      70
the literature, one piece of information that respondents should use to predict future income
is current income. For the post-college period, we first compute the "innovation", which
is the difference between realized annual family income at age 28 (or 29) and the mean of
beliefs about family income at 28 (or 29) elicited 1 or 5 years earlier. We then compute
the cross-sectional correlation between this innovation and realized annual family income
in the year when beliefs are elicited, and test whether this correlation equals zero. Many
students have little income, so for the in-school period we considered the correlation between
the innovation in own income (the difference between beliefs and realized income) and the
cumulative college GPA at the time of belief elicitation.
   Detailed results for these tests are shown in Table 9. For the in-school period, the three
tests produce rejections of the null at a 5% level for almost every year.17 In contrast, in the
post-college period these tests reject much less frequently. In particular, the DGM test does
not reject at conventional significance levels; the Regression test rejects for 5-years ahead
beliefs but not 1-year ahead; and the correlation test rejects for 1-year ahead beliefs but not
5-year ahead.

              Table 9: Rational Expectations Tests about Income at Age 28 (29)
                                            10-year      9-year    8-year    7-year    6-year    5-year      1-year
   Year of Belief-elicitation
                                             ahead       ahead     ahead     ahead     ahead     ahead       ahead
   DGM Test (pooled data): p-value           0.002      < 10-4    0.0100    0.0180     0.0581   0.9840       0.3928
   DGM Test (balanced panel): p-value       0.0120      0.0140    0.0301    0.0361     0.0922   0.3066       0.7916
   Regression Test: Intercept               $24,140     $19,366   $22,032   $20,938   $13,098   $11,622       $480
   Regression Test: Slope                   0.0884      0.1937    0.1597    0.2037     0.4379   0.6822       0.9956
   Regression Test: p-value                 < 10-4      < 10-4    < 10-4    < 10-4    < 10-4     0.0006      0.9276
   Correlation Test: Correlation              N.A.      0.2109    0.2283    0.2165     0.1236   -0.0473      0.1644
   Correlation Test: p-value                  N.A.      0.0006    0.0007    0.0016     0.0769   0.5574       0.0050

Note: All tests are applied to balanced panels. The first five columns report the results for
existing mean-based tests described in Section 4.4 for students' beliefs in college about own
annual income at age 28. The last two columns report the results for existing mean-based
tests for students' beliefs after college about annual family income at age 28 (or 29).

  17
    The only exceptions are the DGM Test and the Correlation Test for end-of-college income beliefs, where
the null of Rational Expectations are rejected at a 10% level.




                                                   71
F      Nonparametric Test of Rational Expectations with
       Aggregate Shocks: an Example
                                    K
    We consider the case where           Sk = R is finite. Specifically, we consider the following
                                   k=1
example:

Example 1. There are three outcome bins, which are S1 = (-5, -0.5], S2 = (-0.5, 0.5],
and S3 = (0.5, 5]. The distribution of Yi is N (1, 1) truncated to (-2.5, 4.5). The aggregate
                                           B,1           B,3                  B,2
perceived probabilities are given by Ei (Pit   ) = Ei (Pit   ) = 0.005, Ei (Pit   ) = 0.99.

    In Example 1, because adding a constant c to random variable Yi does not change its
variance, the variance of Yi + c is 0.9939 for all c. The aggregate subjective distribution is
concentrated on S2 . Below we derive a bound for the variance of any distribution that is
consistent with the observed aggregate perceived probabilities in this example.
    Consider an arbitrary random variable  such that P rob(  S1 ) = P rob(  S3 ) =
0.005 and P rob(  S2 ) = 0.99. Let µ denote E () and µk denote E (|  Sk ) for

k = 1, 2, 3. The variance of  is given by:


var() = E ( - µ )2

        = E ( - µ   2          2           2
                 2 ) + E ( - µ ) - E ( - µ2 )

        = E ( - µ   2                        
                 2 ) + E (2 - µ - µ2 )(µ2 - µ )

        = E ( - µ   2          2
                 2 ) - (µ2 - µ )

         0.99E [( - µ   2                         2                           2
                     2 ) |  S2 )] + 0.005E [( - µ2 ) |  S1 )] + 0.005E [( - µ2 ) |  S3 )]

         0.99E [( - µ   2                          2
                     2 ) |  S2 )] + 0.005(-5 - 0.5) + 0.005[5 - (-0.5)]
                                                                       2


                [0.5 - (-0.5)]2
         0.99                   + 0.1512
                       4
        = 0.3987,                                                                             (51)


where the second last line follows from Popoviciu's inequality.
    Hence, we conclude that any random variable that is consistent with the observed aggre-
gate perceived probabilities must have a variance that is smaller than the variance of Yi + c.
It implies that it is impossible to find a pair of  and c such that both (1) and (2) of Theorem
9 are satisfied. Thus, we reject Rational Expectations for Example 1.


                                                  72
