                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      LIVING AND DYING IN AMERICA:
       AN ESSAY ON DEATHS OF DESPAIR AND THE FUTURE OF CAPITALISM

                                     Christopher J. Ruhm

                                     Working Paper 28358
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28358


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2021




I thank Adam Leive, Kosali Simon and Sebastian Tello-Trillo for helpful comments on an earlier
draft of this paper and the Virginia Bankard Fund for financial support for this research. A
longer version of this manuscript, including a discussion of some of the policy recommendations
in Deaths of Despair and the Future of Capitalism, is forthcoming in the Journal of Economic
Literature. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Christopher J. Ruhm. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Living and Dying in America: An Essay on Deaths of Despair and the Future of Capitalism
Christopher J. Ruhm
NBER Working Paper No. 28358
January 2021
JEL No. I12,I14,I18,J11,J18

                                           ABSTRACT

This essay reviews Deaths of Despair and the Future of Capitalism (DEATHS), by Anne Case
and Angus Deaton, a fascinating account of life and death in the United States during the late
20th and early 21st centuries. While primarily targeted towards a popular audience, the volume
will be of interest to many economists and other social scientists. It postulates how public and
private policies currently practiced in the United States, combined with and partly causing the
declining economic and social circumstances of less educated, have led to increased mortality
from drugs, suicide, and chronic liver disease. After describing the material in DEATHS in
considerable detail, I suggest a variety of research questions that need to be answered to confirm
or refute Case and Deaton's arguments and describe challenges to their key hypotheses. Among
the latter are the ability of the postulated relationships to explain the sharply differing mortality
trajectories of non-Hispanic whites, compared with other groups, and the timing of the observed
mortality changes. Along the way, I raise doubts about the usefulness of the "deaths of despair"
conceptualization, with its strong implications about causality.


Christopher J. Ruhm
Frank Batten School of
Leadership and Public Policy
University of Virginia
235 McCormick Rd.
P.O. Box 400893
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4893
and NBER
ruhm@virginia.edu
1. Introduction
In 2015, Anne Case and Angus Deaton published the landmark article "Rising morbidity
and mortality in midlife among white non-Hispanic Americans in the 21st century" (Case
and Deaton 2015). The analysis demonstrated that the mortality rates of 45-54 year old
U.S. non-Hispanic whites (hereafter simply "whites", unless otherwise noted) rose from
1999-2013, an almost unprecedented increase that was not replicated for other races or in
other countries. The increased mortality was concentrated among the non-college educated,
with poisonings (almost all due to drugs), suicide, and chronic liver disease playing
important roles.
Their 2017 follow-up paper (Case and Deaton 2017), addressed some issues with the original
study (e.g. the lack of age-adjustment for key groups) and substantially expanded the
analysis to consider broader age categories, sub-national estimates and cohort differences,
while again focusing on the particularly adverse trends of those with a high school degree
or less. That article also began to develop a set of potential explanations for the results. In
it, Case and Deaton largely reject the primary importance of explanations based on changes
in incomes or other economic factors and instead emphasize the role of slow-acting social
forces leading to cumulative disadvantage that resulted, as one manifestation, in increased
death rates for midlife less educated whites.
Deaths of Despair and the Future of Capitalism (DEATHS), (Case and Deaton 2020) draws
heavily upon the two aforementioned papers and describes three stories of American life in
the late 20th and early 21st century. The first discusses how in the United States, the benefits
of economic growth have primarily been delivered to the wealthy and advantaged. The
second is of the increasingly difficult economic and social circumstances facing Americans
without college degrees. These take many forms including the precarious economic situation
just mentioned, social isolation, and the disintegration of structures previously supporting
mental and physical health. The third story is one of declining life expectancy for less
educated midlife whites, with particular attention paid to rising mortality rates from drugs,
suicide and chronic liver disease. The evidence provided for each of these stories is
convincing to varying degrees but sometimes missing are the essential elements that tie
them together and future research is needed to better understand to what extent they
explain the striking mortality trends that motivated Case and Deaton's initial research on
the topic.
DEATHS is written for a general audience and contains an enormous amount of useful and
often fascinating information. For instance, Case and Deaton provide fairly detailed
discussions of the measurement of levels and trends in mortality rates, self-reported health
and a variety of morbidities. Economists familiar with this material may be able to skim it,


                                             Page 1
or efficiently gain much of the same information by reading the two research papers
mentioned above. However, these concepts and much other material in the volume will be
new to many. For example, despite having studied the fatal drug epidemic for several years,
I found the account of the opium wars between Britain and China during the mid-19th
century and the subsequent post-civil war opium epidemic in the U.S. to be absorbing and
informative. The multiple failures of the American healthcare system are well summarized
and the discussion of them will be particularly useful for those with limited background in
this area. The chapter on the opioid epidemic is a must-read for those interested in
understanding its history and sources, and who do not wish to undertake book-length
explorations (e.g. Quinones, 2016; Lembke 2016; Macy 2018) of these issues. The description
of America's current "Sheriff of Nottingham" redistribution of resources from the poor to
the rich is noteworthy, although possibly less compelling to some readers.
Below, I provide a more detailed outline of the material presented in DEATHS. I then
describe challenges to the hypotheses presented by Case and Deaton, as well as specific
research questions that might help to confirm or refute them, and provide some concluding
thoughts.


2. DEATHS: By the Chapters
2a. Things Come Apart
After an introduction, the first seven chapters of DEATHS convincingly argue that the
something important has changed in the life experiences of middle-aged whites. Chapter 1
begins by defining life expectancy and mortality, briefly discusses mortality patterns over
the lifecycle (being highest in infancy and for the elderly and lower in-between) and then
explains how the leading causes of mortality changed from being dominated by infectious
diseases at the beginning of the 20th century, to now being primarily due to conditions or
illness such as cancer, heart disease and Alzheimer's disease. The importance of lifestyles
and health behaviors are emphasized. The key take-away is illustrated in a figure showing
that the mortality rates of 45-54 year old whites fell by between 0.4 and 1.5 percent yearly
between 1900 and 2000, with almost continual reductions except for a short-lasting spike
during the 1918 influenza epidemic and periods of stagnation in the 1920s and 1960s. The
authors point out that other groups also benefited from declining mortality during the 20th
century and that alternative measures of health also improved.
The second chapter, after which this section is named, demonstrates the dramatic change
in this pattern for 45-54 year old whites in the 21st century. Specifically, Case and Deaton
show that age-adjusted mortality rates for this group stopped declining around 1999 and
modestly rose between that year and 2017. Rather than focusing on the relatively small


                                           Page 2
increase in all-cause mortality, however, they emphasize the additional deaths compared to
a counterfactual two percent annual mortality reduction, representing the average decrease
in annual fatalities rates for all (not just non-Hispanic) white 45-54 year olds from 1970-
2000. They conclude that approximately 600,000 deaths among this group would have been
avoided if mortality rates had continued to decline at this rate through 2017. Importantly,
they point out that the death rates of 45-54 year olds in other wealthy countries, such as
France, the United Kingdom and Sweden, continued to decrease over this period, making
the U.S. an outlier. They also note that while the mortality rates of 45-54 year old whites
increased in all but six states, the largest growth occurred in those such as West Virginia,
Kentucky, Arkansas and Mississippi, that have relatively low average levels of education.
Chapter 3 introduces "deaths of despair" which is how Case and Deaton characterize
fatalities resulting from drugs, suicide and alcohol.1 In their empirical implementation, the
last of these is proxied by chronic liver disease mortality, an important distinction because
these both exclude many alcohol-related deaths and include fatalities that are unrelated to
drinking.2 For this reason, and to avoid the presumption of causality, I refer to these as
drug, suicide and (chronic) liver disease mortality, frequently abbreviated as DSL below.
In connecting these deaths, Case and Deaton write: "the three causes of death are deeply
related ... All the deaths show great unhappiness with life, either momentary or prolonged.
It is tempting to classify them all as suicides." (p. 39). They distinguish accidental drug
poisonings from other types of accidental deaths arguing that "People who seek out such
drugs [heroin and fentanyl] are not seeking death ... but the high risk of death is no
deterrent." (p. 39)



1
  Interestingly, the term "deaths of despair" does not appear anywhere in their original research on this topic
(Case and Deaton 2015) but is referred to 24 times in their follow-up paper (Case and Deaton 2017).
2
  The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention define a set of 54 acute and chronic causes of death that
are partially or fully due to alcohol and provide a formula using these to calculate the total of fatalities and
lost life years attributable to alcohol (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2020a). They classify the
causes into those that are: 100 percent due to alcohol; directly attributable to alcohol but at less than 100
percent; and indirectly attributable, generally at much lower percentages. Chronic liver disease, includes ICD-
10 codes K70, K73 and K74, which correspond, respectively, to "alcoholic liver disease", "chronic hepatitis
not elsewhere classified" and "fibrosis and cirrhosis of the liver". According to the CDC, the attributions of
alcohol to these three categories are 100 percent, <2 percent and <40 percent, respectively. Thus, the last
two of these causes should, at most, be only partially included in the total of alcohol-related deaths. On the
other hand, there are numerous other ICD-10 causes that are 100 percent attributable to alcohol ­ such as
alcoholic psychosis, alcohol dependence syndrome, alcohol polyneuropathy, alcoholic gastritis and alcohol-
induced chronic pancreatitis ­ and others, such as chronic pancreatitis, that while not 100 percent due to
drinking, have a much higher attribution (84 percent in this case) than fibrosis and cirrhosis of the liver, or
chronic hepatitis.


                                                    Page 3
After highlighting the increases in DSL deaths for white 45-54 year olds since 1999, Case
and Deaton also point to the simultaneous slowdown in progress reducing heart disease
mortality in the U.S., in contrast to the continued declines in other wealthy countries.3
While they are unable to identify the reasons for the unfavorable U.S. experience, they note
that "drugs and alcohol associated with deaths of despair may make people more likely to
die from heart disease" (p. 43) and so raise the possibility that some of these deaths might
also reflect despair. With that said, they note that smoking, which remains high in some
parts of the country, and increases in obesity may also be undermining progress in reducing
heart disease mortality. They conclude the chapter by relating that DSL mortality rate
were increasing even faster for younger whites than for those in midlife, although levels
remained higher for the latter group.
Chapter 4 focuses on differences in the experiences of education subgroups, arguing that
there is a clear separation in quality of life for those with and without a Bachelor's degree.
College graduates earn more, and the disparity has dramatically increased since the late
1970s, they are more likely to be employed, and have lower risk of unemployment. The
differences go well beyond economic circumstances. Highly educated individuals marry later,
less often get divorced, live in areas with better schools and report higher life satisfaction.
Case and Deaton argue that the increasing economic inequality has led to a harsher
atmosphere in corporations and advantage seeking strategies among the privileged that are
socially destructive.
The less educated also die earlier, in part due to less healthy behaviors such as higher
smoking rates. Case and Deaton provide evidence that the mortality rates of 45-54 year
old white men and women without a college-degree increased much more in absolute terms
than for their more educated counterparts. Finally, they show that age-specific mortality
rates were higher for later than earlier birth cohorts at virtually all ages analyzed, and that
the absolute size of the cohort differences was much larger for people without than for those
with a bachelor's degree.4
The fifth chapter focuses on the heterogeneous experiences of (non-Hispanic) blacks and
whites. Case and Deaton provide evidence of faster mortality rate declines for 45-54 year
old blacks than whites from 1970-2013, although starting from much higher levels and
without achieving full convergence. The decrease in black mortality rates slowed in the


3
 Although, progress also largely stopped in other rich English-speaking countries (Ireland the UK, Canada
and Australia) after 2010.
4
  A caveat to this last finding is that Case and Deaton show absolute but not relative changes in cohort
mortality rates. This could matter since more educated groups have much lower death rates so that similar
percentage increases would result in smaller absolute changes for them.


                                                 Page 4
1980s, largely due to the crack and HIV epidemics, but with rapid reductions resuming in
the mid-1990s, just as white progress stopped. An important source of this latter difference
is that there was no increase, and in some periods actually a reduction, in black DSL
mortality rates prior to 2014, when the emergence of fentanyl led to rapid increases in death
rates for blacks without a college degree.
In attempting to explain these sharp racial differences, Case and Deaton argue that the
slowdown in progress reducing mortality for blacks in the 1980s foreshadowed what would
occur for whites 25 years later. They emphasize how inner-city African Americans were
especially harmed by declines in manufacturing and transportation industries and the social
disintegration that accompanied them. They note both similarities and differences between
the crack cocaine epidemic of the 1980s and the current opioid epidemic stating: "A
fundamental force in both cases was the lack of working-class jobs ... In both epidemics,
drugs that could ease psychological or physical pain were available ... to populations that
were hungry for the escape they seemed to offer." (p. 69). However, they caution against
overstating the similarities noting that patterns of suicides differ markedly by race.
Since mortality is not the only indicator of health problems, the next two chapters focus on
morbidity (ill-health) and pain. After discussing difficulties in assessing health among the
living, chapter 6 provides evidence that 25-60 year old whites were more likely to self-report
their health as poor or fair (rather than good, very good or excellent) in 2017 than in earlier
years, with particularly large deterioration in self-reported health for those with less than a
Bachelor's degree. Severe mental distress also rose for less educated 25-70 year old whites,
and working-age whites without a college degree reported increasing difficulty engaging in
activities such as walking, climbing stairs, shopping or socializing with friends. One possible
consequence is that the share of prime-age whites without a college degree reporting that
they were unable to work rose steadily after the early 1990s.
Chapter 7 discusses pain, which Case and Deaton point out is hard to measure but strongly
associated with suicides. The key results are that the fraction of U.S. whites reporting pain
during the previous day is: marginally higher for 40-65 year olds than in 19 comparison
countries; greater for U.S. 60 year olds than at later ages; lower for those with a bachelor's
degree than for those with less schooling; and that pain increased over time for less educated
whites but possibly not for those with a 4-year degree.
The sources of this growth in pain are somewhat mysterious. Case and Deaton believe that
increases in obesity may account for around one-quarter of the change but they are unable
to explain the remainder of it and note that the shift from manufacturing to service




                                            Page 5
employment seems likely to operate in the opposite direction.5 However, they also point out
that geographic areas with relatively high levels of self-reported pain tend to also have
elevated DSL mortality rates, raising the possibility of a connection between the two.
2b. DSL Mortality: Details
The next two chapters provide a more granular discussion of mortality from drugs, suicide
and chronic liver disease. A key hypothesis in Chapter 8 is that all three sources of death
can be thought of as a form of suicide. Thus, Case and Deaton write: "Suicides are deaths
of despair. But the circumstances that can lead to suicide find less extreme forms when
people turn to drugs or alcohol to seek refuge from pain, loneliness, and anxiety ... grouping
deaths from suicide, alcohol, and drugs captures a common underlying cause ­ despair ­
that is not easily captured when they are treated separately ... [and] there was nothing
unintentional about the use of intoxicating substances. Therefore, the resulting fatal drug
overdoses or interactions were not true accidents." (p. 95-97) They emphasize the difficulty
in correctly categorizing the cause of mortality on death certificates and that fatal overdoses
are classified as accidents, unless there is clear evidence that death was the intended result.6
The remainder of the chapter focuses on the role of social turmoil in contributing to suicide
and alcohol deaths. Case and Deaton highlight the rise in suicides for whites since the late
1990s, emphasizing that while there is no simple theory identifying who will kill themselves,
growth over time in social causes such as pain, loneliness, depression, or joblessness provide
one reason why suicide rates may have increased. They note that the highest suicide rates
occur in sparsely populated parts of the country, where firearms are also common and
reports of pain are the highest, while cautioning that these patterns could reflect
confounding factors. Importantly, they emphasize that the negative association between
white suicide rates and education is a relatively recent phenomenon. The chapter concludes
with a discussion of alcohol, first highlighting the many health problems heavy drinking can
cause and then pointing out that while the use of any alcohol is positively associated with
education in the U.S., more dangerous binge and heavy alcohol consumption are more
common for the less educated, particularly for more recent birth cohorts.
Chapter 9 provides a brilliant discussion of opioids, starting with the Opium war between
China and Britain in the early 19th century and extending through their current key
contribution to recent increases in DSL mortality. Case and Deaton describe the different


5
  A recent analysis by Cutler et al. (2020) finds that knee pain (the most common musculoskeletal
complaint) declines with education, with greater pain levels among the less educated largely explained by
higher rates of obesity, more physically demanding jobs, and interactions between the two.
6
  This is not quite correct. A significant fraction of overdose deaths are classified as being of undetermined
intent.


                                                     Page 6
types of opioids, the mechanisms through which they operate and cause addiction, and the
sources of the current opioid epidemic. The latter include changes in medical practices
related to the treatment of pain and the promotion of opioids for this treatment, particularly
after the introduction of OxyContin in 1996. The led to growth in opioid involved overdose
fatalities, often in combination with other drugs such as benzodiazepines. Prescription
opioid deaths peaked around 2011, resulting from the reformulation of OxyContin to a more
abuse-resistant version and other measures to reduce prescribed opioids. However, when
combined with changes in illicit drug markets, this led to the substitution of prescribed
opioids with cheaper but more dangerous heroin. After 2013 heroin and other street drugs
were increasingly adulterated with still more powerful and hazardous fentanyl, further
accelerating the rise of fatal overdoses.
Nevertheless, Case and Deaton view these supply-side factors as "misbehavior that poured
fuel on the fire" to make the epidemic of despair worse than it would have otherwise being,
rather than being a root cause of it. Instead, DEATHS primarily focuses on the demand-
side of the white working class "whose already distressed lives were fertile ground for
corporate greed, a dysfunctional regulatory system, and a flawed medical system" (p. 126).
2c. It's Not (Just) the Economy
In Chapter 10, Case and Deaton argue that economic conditions were directly responsible
for the rise in DSL mortality. Money does buy access to healthcare and eases many financial
worries, particularly in the U.S with its weak social safety net. But while noting a correlation
between economic inequality and death rates, they argue that these are joint consequences
of broader forces damaging to the white working class, rather than being central to their
main story. They highlight the absence of any consistent pattern of poverty growth at the
end of the 20th and beginning of the 21st century, when DSL mortality rates were rising, or
of corresponding correlations between poverty and DSL rates across geographic regions.
Importantly, trends in DSL mortality rates among white 45-54 year olds were essentially
unaffected by the Great Recession of 2008 and 2009, rising at virtually the same rate during
that period as before or after it. Nor was there any substantial growth in DSL deaths during
the Great Recession in European countries that suffered far greater declines in economic
output and implemented more severe austerity measures than the U.S.
Chapter 11 emphasizes the growing divide in the circumstances of life ­ both living
standards and the accompanying social disintegration ­ between those with and without a
Bachelor's degree. Case and Deaton point to rising inequality in the U.S. where the benefits
of growth, which slowed dramatically at the end of the 20th century, predominantly went to
those who were already most advantaged. One consequence was that white males with less
than a BA degree earned less, after adjusting for inflation, than previous cohorts whereas



                                             Page 7
there were substantial earnings increases among those with college degrees. Such stagnation
in long-term economic progress did not occur in other industrialized countries. Moreover,
the probability of working at all declined substantially for 25-54 year old white men after
1990, and even more so subsequent to 2000 for those with without a college degree.7 It is
not just earnings or employment rates that changed for the less educated Americans, but
also the nature of the work itself. Here, Case and Deaton emphasize the decline of unions,
which gave workers a voice, and the increased difficulty for these individuals to work their
way up to managerial positions.8
The arguments in chapters 10 and 11, just described, are not fully reconciled. However, a
unifying theme is that economic conditions were not directly determinative but may have
led to a longer-term disintegration of a way of life for less educated whites that ultimately
led to rising DSL mortality rates. Indeed, in chapter 12, Case and Deaton explicitly argue
that the reductions in the labor market opportunities for less educated whites resulted in
declining marriage rates, increases in nonmarital childbearing and decreases in community
participation over dimensions such as voting, union membership and weekly church
attendance.9 They conclude by restating their hypothesis that declining material
disadvantage worked through its effects on family, community and religion, rather than
directly. They suggest that changes over time, not just levels, may have been important
when noting that although blacks do worse than whites on most indicators, their lives were
improving in many dimensions, while those of whites were worsening, possibly explaining
the racial differences in DSL mortality experiences during the 21st century.
2d. American Capitalism Today
Chapters 13 through 15 document how the form of capitalism practiced in the U.S. today
is failing less educated Americans. Case and Deaton characterize the American healthcare
system as the "leading villain" in their story but not the only one. In the first of these
chapters, they do not emphasize the overprescription of opioids, the absence of treatment,
or medical mistakes, but rather the indirect harms resulting from excessively high medical
costs. They document that large expenditures have not led to superior health outcomes,


7
  The patterns of wages and employment-to-population ratios are less clear for white women due to the
large increases in female labor force participation rates occurring during the second half of the 20th century.
8
  They also make arguments that some may find questionable. For instance, when discussing the change in
the nature of work for the less educated, they contrast jobs in the post-World War II period stating "Now
the man went to the factory, where he ... found meaning in the dignity of his difficult and productive labor
rather than in the size of his paycheck." (p. 164), with the less desirable work by later cohorts in services
such as healthcare, cleaning and security.
9
  It is worth pointing out that some of these outcomes may have positive, as well negative, aspects and that
their trends do not always differ systematically by education or race.


                                                    Page 8
that Americans are not happy with their health care system, and that the major drivers the
differences in U.S. medical care costs, relative to other countries, are higher prices.10 They
point to the practice of "surprise billing" ­ where emergency department and other medical
services are outsourced to companies outside the patient's network ­ and to reductions in
hospital competition resulting from mergers. They indicate that hospitals are now run as
profit centers managed by corporate executives (rather than medical practitioners) and
emphasize the various ways that health care providers of all types work together to raise
prices, including through extensive and growing lobbying efforts. The resulting high costs
reduce the percentage of income available for other purposes, including wages of the less
educated, particularly with existing tax distortions that encourage an excessive share of
total compensation in the form of health insurance.
Chapter 14 provides evidence that many markets have become less competitive and then
describes three threats to low-wage workers ­ immigration, globalization, and automation.
They argue that these are not alone the cause of rising DSL deaths; however, compared to
other industrialized countries, their effects may be magnified by the weak social safety net
which, in turn, reflects the American tradition of individualism, its unique history
connecting race with immigration, and the historical accident by which health insurance
came to be dominated by employers.
The 15th chapter documents increased concentration in many industries, resulting from
growth in mergers and a declining number of startups. Profit rates have also risen, although
this may partially reflect a greater role for large firms due to increasing returns to scale.
Interestingly, while they believe that growth in market power has caused higher prices and
lower wages in healthcare and possibly airlines and financial institutions, they not think
this has occurred more generally. It is difficult to reconcile this conclusion with the concerns
highlighted in the remainder of the chapter. These include the increased monopsony power
of employers, partly due to the growth of noncompete agreements and outsourcing, with
the consequential downgrading of work by large employers, and the dramatic weakening of
private sector unions. They also emphasize changes in the ways firms are run, with Board
of Director's frequently believing their sole obligation is to shareholders ­ rather than also
to employees, customers and communities ­ and how very wealthy individuals and
corporations, often through their lobbying efforts, have increased influence in implementing
policies that support the already advantaged.
The last chapter provides Case and Deaton's policy recommendations. With regard to the
opioid crisis, they discuss medically assisted treatment, state Medicaid expansions, and
opioid prescribing regulations. They mention potential broader health system changes

10
     These issues are well known and have been extensively studied (e.g. Reid 2010; Rosenthal 2017).


                                                     Page 9
related to universal health insurance coverage and health care cost controls. Minimum
wage and income support policies are then covered, as are reforms to the American
education system. Finally, they turn to potential modifications in policies related to
corporate governance.


3. Research Questions and Challenges to Key Hypotheses
DEATHS argues that the declining economic and social circumstances of less educated
whites, brought on in large part by a system of American capitalism that tilts the playing
field in favor of the wealthy and advantaged, has led to increases in despair and death
among this group and possibly others. The theory is audacious, provocative, and upsetting.
Case and Deaton provide an array of arguments and evidence in favor of various aspects of
it. However, much additional research is needed to confirm or refute the key connections,
address substantial challenges to the model as articulated, and to evaluate how well its
predictions conform to the data, compared to plausible alternatives. These issues are
discussed next.
3a. Counterfactual Mortality Rates
Case and Deaton's foundational proposition is that the accumulation of the excesses of
American capitalism during the last half century or so have led to the plight of non-college
educated midlife whites. The initial discussion does not focus on the modest growth in
mortality rates experienced by this group at the beginning of the 21st century but rather on
the much larger difference between the change in actual death rates and a counterfactual
estimate of reductions that would have occurred if prior trends had continued. Specifically,
they calculate that if the mortality rates of white 45-54 year olds had declined by two
percent annually, this group would have experienced 600,000 fewer deaths from 1999-2017
than actually occurred.
The assumptions underlying these counterfactual trends are fairly strong. One justification
for them is that fatality rates for midlife adults have continued to fall in other industrialized
countries, although not necessarily by two percent per year.11 But it is unclear how relevant
these comparisons are for the U.S. where, for example, smoking rates began to fall much
earlier than in most of Europe (D. M. Cutler and Glaeser 2009; OECD 2019). This raises
the possibility that the mortality reductions from tobacco-related problems, such as lung
cancer and cardiovascular disease, may have been mostly complete by 1999 in the U.S. but
not yet elsewhere. Other non-despair related factors could also more negatively affect the


11
  For instance, the mortality rates of 45-54 year olds in the United Kingdom declined at a slower rate from
1999-2017.


                                                  Page 10
life expectancy of midlife whites in the U.S., relative to those in other wealthy countries,
such as the particularly elevated U.S. obesity rates (OECD 2017).
Nor is the counterfactual two percent annual mortality rate decline for the U.S. fully
convincing. It is based on 1970-2000 trends for all whites of this age, including Hispanics,
whereas the excess deaths from 1999-2017 refer only to non-Hispanic whites.12 This matters
because Hispanics had relatively low and falling mortality rates (Ruiz, Steffen, and Smith
2013) and their share of the population increased over time, suggesting that some of the
reductions for all whites (including Hispanics) partially reflect these compositional changes
and likely exceeded the decrease for non-Hispanic whites alone.13 The death rates of 45-54
year old whites also remained relatively flat from the mid-1950s through around 1970,
implying that the counterfactual trend reductions would have been considerably smaller if
they had based on a 1955-2000 rather than 1970-2000 trends. Finally, factors such as the
previously mentioned reductions in smoking or the introduction of widespread use of
hypertension medications late in the 20th century (Saklayen and Deshpande 2016), might
have decreased mortality trends during that period in ways that could not be duplicated at
the beginning of the 21st century.
The results are also sensitive to the starting year over which recent mortality changes are
calculated. Case and Deaton, along with many other researchers (including myself in earlier
work), use 1999 as the initial year because that is when the method of categorizing deaths
switched from the 9th to the 10th revision of the International Classification of Diseases
coding system (from ICD-9 to ICD-10 codes). This may provide a misleading indication of
the longer-term developments because it happens to coincide with the beginning of
particularly unfavorable mortality changes. For example, the death rates of 45-54 year old
whites fell by 0.8 percent per year from 1990-1995 and by 1.6 percent annually from 1995-
1999.14
Using reasonable alternative counterfactual trend assumptions dramatically changes the
conclusions about the number additional midlife white lives lost. This is illustrated in Table
1, which provides information on fatality rates in 1999 as well as actual and counterfactual
rates in 2018. Mortality rates per 100,000 increased by 27.9 (from 384.1 to 412.0) from 1999-
2018 but the growth in death rates was more than 5-times as large, 150.4 per 100,000,

12
   Hispanic origin was unavailable prior to the 1990s, so that the longer-term historical comparisons relied
on combined data for Hispanic and non-Hispanic whites.
13
   For instance, the Hispanic share of the U.S. population grew from 4.5 percent in 1970 to 12.5 percent in
2000 (U.S. Census Bureau 2012).
14
   These estimates were obtained from my analysis of death certificate data, and using bridged-race
population estimates, both available from CDC Wonder (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
2020b). Similar patterns were found for 25-34, 35-44 and 55-64 year old whites.


                                                   Page 11
relative to Case and Deaton's two percent annual counterfactual decline. However, if the
observed annual reduction in death rates from 1990-1999 were instead used as the
counterfactual, the difference shrinks more than 30 percent, to 104.2 per 100,000, and
utilizing observed trends from 1990-1995 reduces the original estimate by 53 percent, to
71.4 per 100,000.
The purpose of this exercise is not to claim that any one of these counterfactuals are
necessarily correct but rather to highlight the need for further research on this issue before
arguing for any particular choice. This is important, in part, because increases in DSL
mortality explain all or almost all of the actual rise in death rates during the 21st century
for midlife whites, as shown below, but relatively little of the difference when compared
with Case and Deaton's assumption of continued rapid fatality rate reductions. Further, as
they point out, much of the stagnation in mortality rates reflects slowing progress in
reducing coronary artery disease deaths (Mehta, Abrams, and Myrskylä 2020), but we
poorly understand why this has occurred.
3b. Do DSL Fatalities Result from Despair?
The organizing principle of DEATHS is that profound changes in the United States have
led to an "epidemic of deaths of despair".15 Beginning with the book's title and throughout
the discussion, it would be difficult to come away with the impression that DSL is anything
other than a coherent grouping of similar causes of death that reflect the consequences of
underlying distress. However, Case and Deaton actually use the term "deaths of despair" in
multiple ways. For instance, early on they state: "`deaths of despair' ... is a convenient label,
indicating a link with unhappiness, the link with mental or behavioral health, and the lack
of any infectious agent, but it is not intended to identify specific causes of despair" (pp.
40). But later in the volume they more explicitly claim: "grouping deaths from suicide,
alcohol, and drugs captures a common underlying cause ­ despair ­ that is not easily
captured when they are treated separately" (p. 96).
Thus, Case and Deaton believe that "deaths of despair" is both a convenient label and a
deeply rooted indicator of great unhappiness? I am less convinced. Moreover, I would
suggest that few can be repeatedly exposed to this term without assuming it identifies
despair as the root cause of these deaths. It is precisely to avoid this connotation that I use
the "drug, suicide and chronic liver disease" label throughout this essay. Whether or not
despair is the ultimate cause of DSL mortality can then be treated as a testable proposition.




15
  For example, the concluding chapter discusses "what the U.S. can learn from other countries so that we
might undo the epidemic of deaths of despair" (p. 259), with similar usage in multiple places elsewhere.


                                                 Page 12
I am particularly concerned with Case and Deaton's claim that "it is tempting to classify
them all as suicides". (p. 39) While some types of drug and alcohol use undoubtedly increase
the risk of death, such general categorizations seem problematic. For instance, suicide seems
a wildly inaccurate description for someone who overdoses after becoming addicted to
excessively prescribed opioids following a surgical procedure; or to an individual with a
genetic predisposition towards alcoholism, who is desperately trying but failing to stop
drinking. And what about smokers? Using the same reasoning, tobacco-related deaths could
be categorized as suicides, since the vast majority of smokers are aware of the health risks.
However, few would classify smokers as suicidal, nor would it be appropriate to do so.16
Even suicides, which unlike deaths from drugs or chronic liver disease inarguably reflect
despair, often result from transitory rather than permanent distress. An important public
health approach for reducing intentional deaths is to restrict the availability of the means
for self-harm (Yip et al. 2012). This saves lives because the vast majority of those surviving
suicide attempts do not kill themselves later (Barber and Miller 2014). Unfortunately,
suicide risk has probably risen in recent years, even holding constant overall despair, due
to the widespread availability of potentially fatal drugs, like opioids (T. R. Miller et al.
2020), and expanding presence of guns (M. Miller and Hemenway 2008).
In reality, the term "deaths of despair" conceals more than it illuminates. If the different
types of DSL fatalities resulted from the same causal factors, we would expect to observe
fairly stable relationships between them across demographic groups, time periods and
locations. But we do not. Geographic patterns of deaths from these causes vary substantially
across rural and urban areas (Stein, et al., 2017), and with distinct county-level trends in
deaths from drugs, suicide and alcohol use disorders (Dwyer-Lindgren et al. 2018). The age
profile of rising deaths differs over time markedly for the three causes, as discussed below,
and patterns of opioid fatalities vary substantially across areas of the country (Monnat et
al. 2019). There are also heterogenous responses to shocks. Case and Deaton show that DSL
mortality is tenuously related to most economic factors, with further evidence provided by
Brown and Wehby (2019) and Ruhm (2019a). However, higher minimum wages are
associated with reductions in suicides but not drug or alcohol deaths (Dow et al. 2020),
while greater exposure to international trade predicts increases in fatal overdoses but not
in suicide or liver disease mortality (Pierce and Schott 2020). There have also been
substantial changes in the age and sex groups most affected as the dominant source of fatal
overdoses shifted from prescription to illicit opioids (Ruhm 2019a).


16
  If lung cancer fatalities were included in "deaths of despair", it would at least partially undermine Case
and Deaton's arguments, since mortality from this source has continued to fall in recent years (Lewis et al.
2014).


                                                   Page 13
3c. Differential Increases in Drug, Suicide and Chronic Liver Disease Mortality
The contributions of drugs, suicide and liver disease fatalities to the overall rise in the
mortality rates of midlife whites differ dramatically. This is illustrated in Table 2, which
displays age-standardized mortality rates, per 100,000, in 1999 and 2018 for 25-54 year old
whites from all causes, DSL and, separately its three components; also included for
comparison purposes are death rates from respiratory diseases, which have also grown over
time but presumably do not reflect despair.17 Intentional overdose deaths are separated from
other self-harm fatalities since it is unclear whether they are best categorized with drug
deaths or suicides.
Two results from the table are particularly salient. First, DSL and all-cause mortality rates
increased by roughly the same amount from 1999-2018 for 25-54 year old white women (32.3
versus 29.5 per 100,000), while the rise in DSL deaths rates was 74 percent larger than that
for total mortality rates among corresponding men (60.8 versus 34.9 per 100,000). This
implies that the growth in DSL fatalities was sufficiently large to explain the entire increase
in midlife white female death rates over the period and that had DSL mortality not
increased, the all-cause death rates of 25-54 year old white males would almost certainly
have declined substantially.18 Second, non-intentional drug fatalities were by far the most
important contributor to these trends, accounting for 78 percent of the overall rise in DSL
mortality for white men and 73 percent for women. Chronic liver disease played essentially
no role for males, while mortality from this source and from non-drug suicides each
explained about one-eighth of the increase in female DSL death rates.19 Mortality rates from
respiratory disease, which do not reflect despair, rose by roughly the same magnitude as
those for chronic liver disease. This provides a warning about somewhat arbitrarily choosing




17
   Mortality rates are calculated using death certificate data from the Multiple Cause of Death files (Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention 2020b) and population data from the Surveillance Epidemiology and
End Results (SEER) program (National Cancer Institute 2020). They are age-standardized using 2018
weights for five-year population groups (25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44, 45-49, and 50-54). The analysis focuses
on 25-54 year olds because this is the age category of whites experiencing increases in mortality rates after
1999. Additional estimates for age subgroups within this category are provided in section 4d.
18
   Had DSL mortality rates not risen, there probably would have been some additional deaths from other
causes. However, given the relatively low overall fatality rates for this age group, adjusting for these
competing risks would be unlikely to change the main conclusions.
19
   The definition of chronic liver disease used here is the same as that used by Case and Deaton. If 100
percent, 40 percent and 2 percent of alcoholic liver disease, fibrosis and cirrhosis of the liver, and chronic
hepatitis were instead attributed to alcohol, as the CDC does, changes in the associated death rates per
100,000 would have been somewhat larger for males (2.3 instead of 1.5) and smaller for females (3.4 instead
of 4.1).


                                                   Page 14
the causes of death to focus upon and then providing ex post interpretations for why they
increased.
Another way of highlighting the key role of drug fatalities is to note that their growth was
sufficient to explain 135 percent of the all-cause mortality rate increase for 25-54 year old
white males from 1999-2018 and 82 percent of the rise for corresponding white females. The
importance of rising drug deaths is fully acknowledged by Case and Deaton. However, what
is less obvious is their implication that the causal mechanisms leading to these increases are
similar to those for suicide and chronic liver disease.
3d. 45-54 Year Olds vs. Other Age Groups
The evidence of rising white mortality rates presented in DEATHS focuses heavily on 45-
54 year olds. For example, nearly all of the figures and discussion in the first five chapters,
where these patterns are described, exclusively supplies information for this age group. Case
and Deaton justify this by stating that: "It is in midlife death rates pick up, and it is often
a good place to see evolving trends in mortality." (p. 25) This reasoning makes sense if the
patterns of DSL death rates for this age group are representative of those for all prime-age
whites, but there is reason to doubt that they are.
To show this, Table 3 presents findings on mortality rates corresponding to those in Table
2, except with 25-54 year olds separated into 10-year age subgroups. Three results deserve
attention. First, the increase in white male all-cause mortality rates was five times as large
for 25-34 as for 45-54 year olds, and the rise in DSL death rates was 22 percent greater.
Conversely, growth in total and DSL death rates was similar for all three age groups of
females. Second, while rising drug mortality was the dominant source of the growth in DSL
deaths for all age groups, this was particularly true for 24-44 year olds, where they account
for approximately four-fifths of the total increase. Third, and most importantly for this
discussion, the patterns for 45-54 year olds differed substantially from those of the younger
two age groups, with non-drug suicides accounting for a relatively substantial (27 percent)
share of the increase in DSL death rates for 45-54 year old males, while these and chronic
liver disease fatalities combined for 35 percent of the rise for same aged females. Deaths
from respiratory causes, which were unrelated to despair, also rose rapidly for 45-54 year
old whites but much less so for their younger counterparts.
A full examination of these age differences is well beyond the scope of this review but the
results just described emphasize that the experiences of white 45-54 year olds provide an
incomplete understanding of the composition, and probably the causes, of rising DSL




                                            Page 15
deaths.20 In particular, suicide and liver disease deaths were more important for this
agegroup than for younger whites and so, when focusing on 45-54 year olds, it may appear
that drug deaths were part of a broader phenomenon that included suicide and chronic liver
disease deaths. Conversely, the dominant role of fatal overdoses is more apparent when
focusing on 25-34 or 35-44 year olds, raising the possibility of distinct causes.
In several places, Case and Deaton incorporate information for other age groups by
examining outcomes separately by age and birth cohort.21 Their earlier work (Case and
Deaton 2017) hypothesizes that the observed patterns reflect the effects of cumulative
disadvantage, whereby later cohorts suffered from adverse social and economic consequences
for larger portions of their lives, resulting in higher mortality rates at given ages. While
such an explanation is consistent with the cohort patterns, a plausible alternative is that
the size of negative health shocks from sources such as dangerous opioids have grown over
time for all groups, and that younger cohorts have higher death rates at specified ages
because they reach them in later periods when the deleterious shocks are larger.22
3e. What about Nonwhites?
The extremely disparate race/ethnicity patterns of mortality changes among midlife adults
presents perhaps the most significant challenge to the "deaths of despair" hypothesis, as
articulated by Case and Deaton. In particular, why were the rising mortality rates observed
for whites at the beginning of the 21st century largely absent for nonwhites and Hispanics,
at least until the emergence of illicit fentanyl after 2013.
Case and Deaton briefly mention the well-known "Hispanic paradox", whereby Hispanics
have relatively low and falling mortality rates, despite being disadvantaged along many
dimensions (The Lancet 2015); however, no attempt is made to account for these patterns
within the framework of despair, nor the continuing favorable mortality trends of nonwhites
other than blacks.23


20
   Currie and Schwandt (2016), Ruhm (2018), or Woolf and Schoomaker (2019) provide more detailed
analyses of changes in age-specific mortality rates.
21
   For instance, as mentioned in the discussion of Chapter 4 above, they show that the DSL mortality rates
of 25-50 year old less educated whites were higher at virtually all of these ages for more recent than for
earlier birth cohorts.
22
   The difficulty in separating age, period and cohort effects is well known (Hobcraft, Menken, and Preston
1982; Aguiar and Hurst 2013; Bell and Jones 2013). Cutler (2017) provides a discussion specific to this
application. Masters et al. (2018) attempt to separately estimate period and cohort effects and argue that
rising drug mortality is related to period rather than cohort effects, reflecting changes in the availability and
misuse of opioid-based pain killers.
23
   Instead, what they say about this is that "Hispanics are a widely heterogeneous group ... [and] we do not
try to tell a coherent story for them" (p. 6).


                                                    Page 16
DEATHS includes a full chapter addressing differences in the mortality experiences of
whites and blacks. However, the dramatic divergence in mortality trends is not satisfactorily
explained. As discussed, Case and Deaton highlight the stagnation in black life expectancy
gains occurring during the early 1980s and early 1990s, arguing that this was a
"foreshadowing of our account of whites in the twenty-first century" (p. 67). But how so?
The slowdown of progress in reducing black mortality rates during this period is barely
perceptible in the data they show. Moreover, less educated whites and blacks were largely
buffeted by the same social and economic forces beginning in the last quarter of the 20th
century,24 so why were blacks affected so much earlier and why did their mortality rates
resume a rapid decline starting in the mid-1990s, just as white death rates began to increase?
Case and Deaton acknowledge that the twin forces driving the poor mortality performance
of blacks near the end of the 20th century were the crack and HIV/AIDS epidemics. Deaths
from crack cocaine emerged around 1980 and peaked in 1989, after which they substantially
although not completely receded (Fryer et al. 2013).25 HIV/AIDS mortality materialized
around 1981, grew rapidly through approximately 1995, and declined considerably thereafter
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2001). Both crack and HIV/AIDS had far more
deleterious mortality consequences for blacks than for whites (Blankenship et al. 2005; Coile
and Duggan 2019). The two epidemics were also intertwined as crack cocaine use was
associated with higher risk of HIV infections among poor, inner-city, and mostly black
communities (Edlin et al. 1994).26 The key point is that these two negative health shocks,
which disproportionately affected blacks, were almost certainly not primarily caused by
despair although as with the subsequent opioid epidemic, demand-side factors played a role
in which groups were most affected by the new, more risky, form of an existing illicit drug.
An unanswered puzzle in DEATHS is why nonwhites were largely immune from rising DSL
mortality from 1999 to 2013 (when fentanyl emerged) or why suicides remained so much
less frequent for blacks than for whites, even while reported patterns of pain were fairly
similar. For the first of these, the seemly anomalous racial differences can probably be
explained by recognizing the deleterious consequences of opioids and other dangerous drugs
often prescribed with them (e.g. benzodiazepines).


24
   For instance, the economic returns to education during the 1980s and 1990s were comparable for blacks
and whites, and declines in marriage rates were also fairly similar, although increases in non-marital births
did begin to rise somewhat earlier for blacks (Barrow and Rouse 2005; Parker, Horowitz, and Mahl 2016).
25
   The emergence of crack cocaine represented a supply-driven innovation, paralleling that for fentanyl later;
crack provided users with an extremely intense and addictive high that increased the profitability of sales by
drug dealers (American Addiction Centers 2019).
26
   HIV/AIDS death rates continued to fall after the turn of the century, albeit by more modest amounts
(Diamond 2018), which benefited blacks more than whites.


                                                   Page 17
During the late 1990s and first decade of the 2000's, the widespread use of opioids was
increasingly promoted as good medical practice.27 One result was that whites, who generally
receive more adequate medical care than minorities, were more often prescribed opioids
(Anderson, Green, and Payne 2009; Burgess et al. 2014; Singhal, Tien, and Hsia 2016) and
were more likely to die from them as a result. It is notable that the mortality rates of prime-
age blacks began to increase markedly when the opioid epidemic transitioned from primarily
legal to illicit drugs, particularly after 2013 when fatalities involving fentanyl exploded
(Spencer et al. 2019). Viewed as a manifestation of drug problems, rather than general
despair, this timing makes perfect sense. Deaths often occurred when fentanyl was mixed
with illicit drugs, such as heroin or cocaine, from which nonwhites had long faced relatively
high mortality risk.
None of this implies an absence of despair of among less educated white Americans today.
To the contrary, suicides, while a relatively small share of the total increase in DSL
mortality, reflect a combination of severe distress and availability of the means to self-harm.
Graham and Pinto (2019) document lower levels of optimism for less educated whites than
minorities and link this with premature mortality from DSL and closely related causes
among 35-64 year olds. Blanchflower and Oswald (2019) show that life satisfaction, which
reaches a trough for adults in their middle 40s and early 50s (the peak ages for suicide), has
fallen modestly over time for whites since the 1970s, while trending upwards for blacks.
A potential source of these racial differences in wellbeing, hinted at by Case and Deaton, is
the loss of some degree of preexisting "white privilege", resulting from reductions in
discrimination that somewhat improved the position of nonwhites relative to less educated
whites.28 This possibility is certainly deserving of further research. To the extent this has
occurred, it represents a partial success of the American economic and social system, and is
certainly not one that should be reversed.
3f. Education Categories
In the introduction to DEATHS, Case and Deaton write: "A four-year degree has become
the key marker of social status, as if there were a requirement for nongraduates to wear a
circular scarlet badge bearing the letters BA crossed through by a diagonal red line." (p. 3)
But there are multiple issues that must be addressed when determining whether the lines
are this definitive, providing fertile ground for future research.



27
   In large part this reflected aggressive marketing efforts by pharmaceutical manufacturers as well as
recommendations for aggressive therapeutic opioid use to treat "pain as the 5th vital sign" (Quinones 2016;
Baker 2017; Presidents Commission 2017).
28
   Metzl (2019) provides a more sophisticated discussion of this point.


                                                  Page 18
The first is that increases over time in schooling change the composition of education groups
(Dowd and Hamoudi 2014; Bound et al. 2015; Goldring, Lange, and Richards-Shubik 2016).
Consider a situation where educational attainment at a point in time is monotonically
increasing in individual quality (measured by some criterion). Secular increases in schooling
then imply that the marginal college graduate in a later cohort will then be less capable
than B.A. degree-holders in an earlier one and that the average quality of both educational
groups will have fallen over time.29 This increasing negative selection suggests that within-
group trend reductions (increases) in mortality rates are likely to be understated
(overestimated), although we cannot determine whether these biases will be larger for
college graduates or the less educated.
A second, technical but potentially important, concern relates to changes in the recording
of educational attainment on death certificates. Before 2003, education was coded as the
number of grades completed. Starting in 2003, and gradually phased in across states,
categorical data (e.g. bachelor's degree) were instead provided.30 The conventional
procedure, used by Case and Deaton, is to classify decedents with 16 years or more years
of education as college graduates. The issue is that some of these persons have not received
a bachelor's degree, while others with 15 or fewer years of schooling have obtained one.
We do not have direct data on the frequency of these classification problems but useful
information is available from a similar modification in the reporting of education
implemented in the Current Population Survey in 1992. Examining this change, Jaeger
(1997) finds that 7.5 percent of those with 16 or more years of education had not graduated
from college, while 2.1 percent of those with bachelor's degrees were coded as having fewer
than 16 years of schooling. On net, this implies that the college degree group was overstated
in earlier periods, when continuous rather than categorical education measures were used.
While it is again not immediately obvious how this affects relative changes in fatality rates
for the two education groups, available evidence suggests that the mortality rates of those
classified as college educated were probably overstated in the early years, with the result
that the trend reduction in their death rates was also be overestimated.31


29
   Case and Deaton point out that the fraction of 45-54 year olds with a bachelor's degree remained roughly
constant from 1990-2017, mitigating concerns for this age group. However, this is not true more generally. For
instance, the share of white 25-29 year olds with a bachelor's degree rose from 34.0 percent in 2000 to 43.5
percent in 2018, with particularly large growth, from 35.8 to 48.4 percent, for females (Snyder, De Brey, and
Dillow 2019; Table 104.20).
30
   For instance, education categories were used for 17, 53, 70, 97 and 100 percent of deaths with education
reported in 2003, 2007, 2010, 2015 and 2018.
31
   Specifically, prior research indicates that the returns to education on wages are underestimated when
using continuous years of schooling (Jaeger 1997; Frazis and Stewart 1999). This indicates substantial


                                                   Page 19
Researchers have begun to use a variety of techniques to address these issues. The results
to date are not fully consistent with Case and Deaton's conjecture of a clean demarcation
for those with and without a B.A. degree. Using, a partial identification approach to bound
changes in death rates from 1991-2015, Novosad, Rafkin and Asher (2020) find that
mortality increases were concentrated in the bottom decile of the educational distribution,
roughly corresponding to those who have not graduated high school. Leive and Ruhm (2020)
examine mortality changes, from 2001-2017, for age-sex-race-specific education quartiles.
For men, they show that the largest average mortality declines did occur for the highest
education quartile, with little difference between the bottom three quartiles. Since the higher
quartile roughly corresponds to college graduates, this is consistent with the categorization
used by Case and Deaton. However, for women, average mortality trends improve fairly
monotonically with education, which is not. Moreover, these mean differences conceal many
age-sex-race groups where less educated members experienced more favorable, or no worse,
mortality trends than their more educated counterparts.
3g. The Need for Hypothesis Testing
At this juncture, it is useful to restate the avenues postulated by Case and Deaton for rising
DSL mortality rates during the 21st century. The first step is stagnation or deterioration of
the economic circumstances facing less educated whites. These declines began by the 1970s
and were probably partially due to exogenous factors, such as skill-biased technological
change, but leavened by an unbridled capitalism that stripped away the protections that
unions, minimum wages and the like had provided. Second, declining economic conditions
led to the destruction of stabilizing social institutions, such as marriage and religious
attendance, as well as other types of social capital. Finally, the obliteration of a previous
way of life led to despair, ultimately culminating in rising DSL mortality of sufficient
magnitude to lower life expectancy.
Substantial future research is needed to formally test whether these pathways are consistent
with the evidence. Case and Deaton point to the difficulties of engaging in formal
econometric testing stating: "Such techniques have their uses, but they are of little use to
us here in describing the slowly evolving and large-scale disintegration that involves a
historically contingent set of forces, many of which interact ... Our readers will have to




negative selection into the B.A. plus group in the early years, where years of education were reported.
Assuming similar patterns of health selection, this suggests relatively high baseline mortality rates for them.
The exclusion of persons with 16 years of schooling but no B.A. from the college degree group in subsequent
periods eliminates or reduces this negative selection and will lower measured death rates, even if there were
no actual change.


                                                    Page 20
decide whether our account is persuasive without the benefit of controlled trials or anything
of the sort" (p. 190).
While I agree that strict causal identification strategies are not always achievable (Ruhm
2019b), this does not mitigate the importance of testing the empirical predictions and
arguments to the extent possible. For this application it would be feasible to examine, albeit
imperfectly, to what degree the hypothesized mechanisms plausibly account for the rise in
DSL death rates. An obvious first step would be to estimate the extent to which declining
economic conditions are associated with changes in DSL mortality.
Here, it is important to reiterate that Case and Deaton do not consider economic factors
themselves to be responsible for rising death rates among less educated whites. Instead, they
are hypothesized to operate indirectly, through their effects on the social and community
factors that are viewed as the causal drivers. Nevertheless, the inclusion of economic controls
in a regression that excludes the community and social capital variables should indicate a
statistical association since they indirectly affect the dependent variables. These
relationships may then be attenuated or eliminated with the addition of covariates for the
social capital measures that Case and Deaton view as fundamentally causal. Alternatively,
it might be possible to estimate more fully specified structural models that account for a
wide variety of factors including, for example, endogenous migration between geographic
areas which influences the composition of local populations and resulting death rates.
On the other hand, considerable care would be needed in interpreting direct regressions of
mortality outcomes on community or social capital variables, since the latter may be
influenced by many alternative factors. For instance, conservatives share many of the same
concerns about the plight of less educated whites as Case and Deaton but argue that the
causes are moral decay, including declines in social and family values, and the welfare state
itself, rather than failures of the capitalist system (e.g. Murray 2012).32 The models just
described would not distinguish between these alternatives.
Efforts are underway to conduct at least some of the empirical testing just described. These
studies generally uncover a statistical association between economic factors and DSL death
rates, but the magnitudes are too small to explain more than a limited share of the mortality
changes and some of the observed correlations probably reflect confounding factors (e.g. see
Charles, Hurst, and Schwartz 2019; Ruhm 2019a; Venkataramani et al. 2019; Pierce and
Schott 2020). Moreover, even if strong associations were obtained, there remains the vexing
question of why the mortality trends have been so different for midlife whites and nonwhites.

32
  Many other noneconomic factors could potentially also influence these trends. For instance, economists
have written about the importance of the pill (Goldin and Katz 2002), changes in the technology of home
production (Stevenson and Wolfers 2007) and legalized abortion (Gruber, Levine, and Staiger 1999).


                                                  Page 21
3h. Timing of Mortality Changes
A particular challenge for the arguments articulated by Case and Deaton is in reconciling
the hypothesized causal factors with the observed timing of DSL mortality changes. To
illustrate this, Figure 1 displays DSL and total mortality rates for 10-year age groups of
prime-age adult whites from 1990-2018; 1990 is chosen as the starting year here since this
is when Hispanic origin is first identified on death certificates. Rates are normalized to 100
in 1990, so that later entries indicate percent changes from that year.
For 45-54 year old whites, the group Case and Deaton primarily focus upon, DSL death
rates remained roughly constant from 1990-1993, increased very slightly (by 0.3 percent per
year) from 1993-1999, and then more rapidly (4.5 percent annually) from 1999-2017. The
patterns differ somewhat at other ages. Mortality rates were essentially unchanged from
1990-1999 for 25-34 year olds and declined over the same period for 55-64 year olds, after
which they rose exceptionally quickly for the younger group (6.9 percent per year from
1999-2017) and somewhat more slowly (4.4 percent annually) for the older one. DSL fatality
rates grew throughout the period for 35-44 year olds, by 2.7 percent per year from 1990-
1999 and 4.8 percent annually from 1999-2017. Death rates ticked downwards between 2017
and 2018 for all of these groups except 55-64 year olds.
The translation of changes in DSL fatalities to total death rates depended on what happened
with other sources of death. The all-cause mortality rates of 25-34 year old whites fell
substantially from 1995-1999, in large part due to reductions in homicide and HIV fatalities;
the rapid growth from 2013-2017 reflected rising heroin and fentanyl deaths. By contrast,
total mortality rates of 45-54 year olds dropped from 1990-1998, after which growth in DSL
fatalities, particularly drug overdoses, more than offset small declines in other deaths.
However, mortality rates for this group did not return to the higher 1990 levels during the
analysis period. All-cause fatality rates changed little over time for 35-44 year olds, except
for the heroin/fentanyl led growth after 2013, and they fell steadily for 55-64 year olds due
to reductions cancer, cardiovascular and other disease sources of death.
Using somewhat different methods and a longer time period, the Social Capital Project
(2019) shows that "deaths of despair" for white 45-54 year olds declined from the mid-1970s
through early-1990s and then rose, slowly at first more rapidly after 1999.33 Particularly
interesting is their evidence that suicide rates for this group fell steadily from the 1960s
through 1999, as did alcohol-related death rates from the mid-1970s through 2000.
Conversely, they uncover a consistent growth in drug fatality rates since at least the late
1950s, when their analysis begins, although the increases were modest before the 1990s.
Similarly, Masters, Tilstra, and Simon's (2018) examination of white 25-54 year olds

33
     The Social Capital Project uses a broader set of alcohol-related causes than just chronic liver disease.


                                                      Page 22
indicates that drug deaths were flat for most groups from 1980 through the early to mid-
1990s and grew rapidly starting in the late 1990s, while suicides fell from 1980 through
around 2000 and then rose slowly for most groups; alcohol-related deaths also dropped
through at least 2000 and with little evidence of substantial increases thereafter.34
In combination, these results suggest that the DSL mortality rates of midlife whites did not
begin to increase substantially until at least the late 1990s, with some evidence of modestly
rising drug fatality rates starting earlier, but with declines in suicide and liver disease death
rates observed through the end of the 20th century.
It is difficult to reconcile these patterns with the narrative in DEATHS. The story Case
and Deaton tell is one where adverse social and economic changes lead to despair and,
ultimately, to increases in DSL mortality rates for less educated midlife whites. But what
kind of lag structure is needed for this to make sense? The transformations emphasized all
began much earlier. Real median wages of less educated workers declined from 1979-1999
and have been fairly constant since (Donovan and Bradley 2019). The fraction of unionized
wage and salary workers has fallen steadily since at least 1973, with most of the reduction
occurring prior to the mid-1990s (Hirsch and Macpherson 2003, updated annually).35 Rates
of divorce and permanent separations began to rise for women without college degrees
starting in the early 1960's if not before (Cherlin 2010), and the proportion of children living
with less educated single mothers rose substantially between 1980 and 2010.36 Church
membership has been falling since the mid-1940s, although most of this reduction has
occurred during the last two decades (Jones 2019). More generally, Putnum (2000)
documents declines in social capital beginning in the 1960s or 1970s, along multiple
dimensions including political, civic and religious participation; workplace and informal
networks; mutual trust; and altruism.
These trends indicate that most of the major social forces hypothesized to explain rising
DSL mortality substantially predated the observed increases, usually by several decades. It
might be possible to construct a dynamic model consistent with these results. For instance,


34
   One exception is that the drug death rates of 35-44 year old white men increased throughout the analysis
period, which started in 1980. A weakness of both studies for understanding the mortality trends of non-
Hispanic whites is that the Social Capital Project includes all whites (whether Hispanic or non-Hispanic) for
years prior to 1999 and Masters et al. do so for all years analyzed (1980-2014). Jalal et al. (2018) present
evidence of exponentially increasing drug death rates throughout the 1979-2016 period but do not separately
analyze results for race/ethnicity or age subgroups.
35
   For instance, the percentage of unionized wage and salary (private sector nonagricultural) workers was
24.0, 14.9 and 10.5 (24.6, 10.4 and 6.4) percent in 1973, 1995 and 2018.
36
   Conversely, the proportion of children living with single mothers with college degrees remained essentially
constant over this period.


                                                   Page 23
the outcome might be a latent stock variable, ranging from despair at one extreme to
optimism and high life satisfaction on the other, that is influenced by positive or negative
flows of social and economic capital. A death from despair would then occur when this
latent variable falls below some threshold. As the negative effects of American capitalism
on less educated whites accumulated, starting in the 1970s, values of this stock variable
declined and, beginning around the late 1990s, increasingly fell below the critical threshold.
However, while such an explanation is theoretically conceivable, there are reasons to doubt
its validity. Even when the full effects of health shocks (i.e. the time it takes to move from
the old to new equilibrium level of the latent variable) occur with a delay, the period is
likely to be measured in years, not decades. Moreover, assuming an initial distribution of
values for the latent capital stock variable, negative flows would be expected to fairly
quickly lead to increases in deaths, even if the full effect occurs with a considerable lag.
Consider the example of alcohol taxes and cirrhosis deaths. Although mortality from
alcoholic cirrhosis results from a lifetime of heavy drinking, Cook and Tauchen (1982)
formulate a model similar to the one just described and empirically demonstrate immediate
reductions in cirrhosis deaths when alcohol taxes are raised, although it takes some years
for the full effects to be manifested. Conversely, we observe little change or even falling
DSL death rates through at least the mid-1990s, and even longer-lasting declines in suicides
and chronic liver disease deaths, despite the decades earlier occurrence of the preconditions
hypothesized to generate their rise.
Probably the most important reason for being skeptical about the Case and Deaton's
conceptual framework is that there is a much simpler explanation for why DSL deaths began
to rise around the mid-to-late 1990s, rather than before. We have established that drug
fatalities were by far the most important component of the increase and it is widely
understood that the drug environment changed sharply beginning around 1996, with the
approval and aggressive marketing of OxyContin (Quinones 2016; Alpert et al. 2019). The
deteriorating social and economic position of less educated Americans likely put them at
higher risk when cheap potent opioids, often accompanied by other pharmaceuticals, became
widely available and vigorously promoted but it seems improbable that they would have
experienced anywhere near the enormous growth in fatality rates without this dramatic
change in the drug environment.
Thus, rising overdose deaths probably primarily reflected a supply-driven phenomenon, with
demand-side factors influencing who was most affected. Case and Deaton's view is that
opioids fueled the fire of existing despair. An alternative framing is that the proliferation of
opioids and other dangerous drugs killed a large number of persons who were at greatest
risk for a variety of possible reasons, only one of which was despair. A key implication is



                                            Page 24
that most of these individuals would have remained alive had it not been for the supply-
side forces creating the fatal drug epidemic.
Leaving drug deaths aside, it would be useful for future research to examine whether an
appropriately constructed dynamic model, with a reasonable lag specification, could explain
observed changes in suicide and chronic liver disease fatalities. Such a model would need to
incorporate other relevant factors, such as the decline in liquor tax rates which may have
been responsible for much of the (relatively small) recent increases liver disease deaths.37
Similarly, some of the growth in suicides may be due to factors such as the wider availability
of guns (M. Miller and Hemenway 2008).
However, a serious challenge to any effort portraying despair as a key determinant of these
mortality rates is to explain why these death rates were declining over the last two decades
of the 20th century, when the mechanisms hypothesized to be leading to increased misery
were already well underway.


4. Concluding Thoughts
In this age of smart phone driven lack of concentration, it is increasingly difficult to take
the time and energy needed to read entire books. However, making the investment to
complete DEATHS will be well worth the effort for many. The volume is well written,
interesting, crackling with insights, and flows well. It covers a great deal of ground and
mostly does so seamlessly. The authors are two of the most prominent economists and their
point-of-view is well worth being exposed to, whether or not you ultimately agree with their
conclusions. They deserve enormous credit for taking on extremely difficult questions and
approaching them from many angles. Those who have heard about "deaths of despair" but
do not know what the term means will finish the volume with a much clearer understanding.
Potential readers curious to learn about any of several topics ­ trends in mortality rates
and life expectancy, the difficulties faced by the middle class and less educated, or the
increasing tilt of American capitalism towards protecting the wealthy while leaving those
less well-off to struggle ­ will find much of interest in DEATHS.
In short, DEATHS offers an attractive package for a wide variety of readers, particularly
those who want to learn about the three interlocking stories presented ­ the current status



37
  Between 1991 and 2015, inflation-adjusted average state excise tax rates on beer, distilled spirits, and
wine fell by 30, 32 and 27 percent (Naimi et al. 2018). Federal excise taxes on alcohol remained constant in
nominal terms, and so declined by 42 percent in real terms, over the same period (Alcohol and Tobacco Tax
and Trade Bureau 2020).


                                                  Page 25
of American capitalism, the hardships experienced by less educated Americans, and the
declining life expectancy of midlife whites ­ in an easily digestible form.
Economists, and other social scientists; however, should also read DEATHS with a
somewhat skeptical view, and for those working in this area, with an eye towards important
research questions. As discussed extensively above, the connections between the three
hypotheses underlying the volume are not yet fully fleshed out and alternative explanations
may be equally or more plausible.
In particular, the hypothesis that despair is the driving factor for the highlighted mortality
trends is not fully convincing, particularly considering that these added fatalities largely
reflect a drug crisis that has fairly well understood origins and consequences. There could
also be some degree of reverse causation, whereby extreme distress is a result of individuals
unwittingly becoming addicted to powerful prescribed or illicit opioids. A major challenge
to Case and Deaton's story is to explain why it is largely white Americans who have been
so adversely affected, even though the conditions for nonwhites have often been far worse
and longer lasting. Indeed, the mortality rates of African-Americans have fallen
substantially since the 1990s, just when death rates began rising for whites. Nor is it obvious
how despair can explain the falling DSL mortality rates of midlife whites through at least
the late 1990s, even though the negative transformations in the American economy and
society described in DEATHS began decades earlier.
Case and Deaton provide convincing evidence of declining economic and social capital in
the last quarter of the 20th century, particularly among some less educated groups. This
probably exacerbated a crisis that was triggered by massive increases in the availability of
opioids and other dangerous drugs starting in the late 1990s. Whatever their cause, an
important aim of public health policies is to reduce the frequency with which individuals
engage in risky behaviors and the negative consequences of doing so. In this regard, Currie
and Schwandt (2020), among others, have pointed out that while it is undoubtedly desirable
to improve underlying social and economic conditions, targeted interventions are likely to
more quickly and successfully reduce drug deaths. Conversely, an almost exclusive focus on
the need for broad systemic changes to a broken economic system, valuable as those might
be, probably diverts attention from the key cause of a current major health crisis.




                                            Page 26
                                      References
Aguiar, Mark, and Erik Hurst. 2013. "Deconstructing Life Cycle Expenditure." Journal of
       Political Economy 121 (3): 437­92.
Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau. 2020. "Historical Tax Rates." 2020.
       https://www.ttb.gov/tax-audit/historical-tax-rates.
Alpert, Abby E, William N Evans, Ethan M.J. Lieber, and David Powell. 2019. "Origins
       of the Opioid Crisis and Its Enduring Impacts." Working Paper 26500. National
       Bureau of Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w26500.
American Addiction Centers. 2019. "A Complete History of Crack Cocaine." December
       11, 2019. https://www.rehabs.com/blog/a-complete-history-of-crack-cocaine/.
Anderson, Karen O., Carmen R. Green, and Richard Payne. 2009. "Racial and Ethnic
       Disparities in Pain: Causes and Consequences of Unequal Care." The Journal of
       Pain 10 (12): 1187­1204. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpain.2009.10.002.
Baker, David W. 2017. "History of The Joint Commission's Pain Standards: Lessons for
       Today's Prescription Opioid Epidemic." JAMA 317 (11): 1117.
       https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2017.0935.
Barber, Catherine W., and Matthew J. Miller. 2014. "Reducing a Suicidal Person's Access
       to Lethal Means of Suicide: A Research Agenda." American Journal of Preventive
       Medicine 47 (3 Suppl 2): S264-272. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2014.05.028.
Barrow, Lisa, and Cecilia Elena Rouse. 2005. "Do Returns to Schooling Differ by Race
       and Ethnicity?" American Economic Review 95 (2): 83­87.
       https://doi.org/10.1257/000282805774670130.
Bell, Andrew, and Kelvyn Jones. 2013. "The Impossibility of Separating Age, Period and
       Cohort Effects." Social Science & Medicine 93 (September): 163­65.
       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2013.04.029.
Blanchflower, David G., and Andrew J. Oswald. 2019. "Unhappiness and Pain in Modern
       America: A Review Essay, and Further Evidence, on Carol Graham's Happiness for
       All?" Journal of Economic Literature 57 (2): 385­402.
       https://doi.org/10.1257/jel.20171492.
Blankenship, Kim M., Amy B. Smoyer, Sarah J. Bray, and Kristin Mattocks. 2005.
       "Black-White Disparities in HIV/AIDS: The Role of Drug Policy and the
       Corrections System." Journal of Health Care for the Poor and Underserved 16 (4
       Suppl B): 140­56. https://doi.org/10.1353/hpu.2005.0110.
Bound, John, Arline T. Geronimus, Javier M. Rodriguez, and Timothy A. Waidmann.
       2015. "Measuring Recent Apparent Declines In Longevity: The Role Of Increasing
       Educational Attainment." Health Affairs (Project Hope) 34 (12): 2167­73.
       https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2015.0481.



                                        Page 27
Brown, Ezequiel, and George L. Wehby. 2019. "Economic Conditions and Drug and
       Opioid Overdose Deaths." Medical Care Research and Review 76 (4): 462­77.
       https://doi.org/10.1177/1077558717722592.
Burgess, Diana J., David B. Nelson, Amy A. Gravely, Matthew J. Bair, Robert D. Kerns,
       Diana M. Higgins, Michelle van Ryn, Melissa Farmer, and Melissa R. Partin. 2014.
       "Racial Differences in Prescription of Opioid Analgesics for Chronic Noncancer
       Pain in a National Sample of Veterans." The Journal of Pain 15 (4): 447­55.
       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpain.2013.12.010.
Case, Anne, and Angus Deaton. 2015. "Rising Morbidity and Mortality in Midlife among
       White Non-Hispanic Americans in the 21st Century." Proceedings of the National
       Academy of Sciences 112 (49): 15078­83.
       https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1518393112.
------. 2017. "Mortality and Morbidity in the 21st Century." Brookings Papers on
       Economic Activity 2017: 397­476. https://doi.org/10.1353/eca.2017.0005.
------. 2020. Deaths of Despair and the Future of Capitalism. Princeton: Princeton
       University Press.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2001. "HIV and AIDS--United States, 1981-
       2000." MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 50 (21): 430­34.
------. 2020a. "Alcohol-Related Disease Impact - Home Page." 2020.
       https://nccd.cdc.gov/DPH_ARDI/default/default.aspx.
------. 2020b. "CDC WONDER." CDC Wonder. 2020. https://wonder.cdc.gov/.
Charles, Kerwin Kofi, Erik Hurst, and Mariel Schwartz. 2019. "The Transformation of
       Manufacturing and the Decline in US Employment." NBER Macroeconomics
       Annual 33 (January): 307­72. https://doi.org/10.1086/700896.
Cherlin, Andrew. 2010. "Demographic Trends in the United States: A Review of Research
       in the 2000s." Journal of Marriage and the Family 72 (3): 403­19.
       https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1741-3737.2010.00710.x.
Coile, Courtney C., and Mark G. Duggan. 2019. "When Labor's Lost: Health, Family Life,
       Incarceration, and Education in a Time of Declining Economic Opportunity for
       Low-Skilled Men." Journal of Economic Perspectives 33 (2): 191­210.
       https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.33.2.191.
Cook, Philip J., and George Tauchen. 1982. "The Effect of Liquor Taxes on Heavy
       Drinking." The Bell Journal of Economics 13 (2): 379.
       https://doi.org/10.2307/3003461.
Currie, Janet, and Hannes Schwandt. 2016. "Mortality Inequality: The Good News from a
       County-Level Approach." Journal of Economic Perspectives 30 (2): 29­52.
       https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.30.2.29.



                                        Page 28
------. 2020. "The Opioid Epidemic Was Not Caused by Economic Distress But by
       Factors That Could Be More Rapidly Addressed." w27544. Cambridge, MA:
       National Bureau of Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w27544.
Cutler, David M. 2017. "Comment on: Mortality and Morbidity in the 21st Century."
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2017 (1): 444­52.
Cutler, David M., and Edward L. Glaeser. 2009. "Why Do Europeans Smoke More than
       Americans?" In Developments in the Economics of Aging, 255­82. University of
       Chicago Press.
Cutler, David, Ellen Meara, and Susan Stewart. 2020. "Socioeconomic Status and the
       Experience of Pain: An Example from Knees." w27974. Cambridge, MA: National
       Bureau of Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w27974.
Diamond, Frank. 2018. "HIV/AIDS Treatment Drastically Reduces Mortality and Helps
       Limit Transmission." Managed Care (Langhorne, Pa.) 27 (11): 16­17.
Donovan, Sarah A., and David H. Bradley. 2019. "Real Wage Trends, 1979 to 2018."
       45090. Congressional Research Service Report No. 45090.
       https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R45090.pdf.
Dow, William H., Anna Godøy, Christopher Lowenstein, and Michael Reich. 2020. "Can
       Labor Market Policies Reduce Deaths of Despair?" Journal of Health Economics,
       September, 102372. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2020.102372.
Dowd, Jennifer B., and Amar Hamoudi. 2014. "Is Life Expectancy Really Falling for
       Groups of Low Socio-Economic Status? Lagged Selection Bias and Artefactual
       Trends in Mortality." International Journal of Epidemiology 43 (4): 983­88.
       https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyu120.
Dwyer-Lindgren, Laura, Amelia Bertozzi-Villa, Rebecca W. Stubbs, Chloe Morozoff,
       Shreya Shirude, Jürgen Unützer, Mohsen Naghavi, Ali H. Mokdad, and
       Christopher J. L. Murray. 2018. "Trends and Patterns of Geographic Variation in
       Mortality From Substance Use Disorders and Intentional Injuries Among US
       Counties, 1980-2014." JAMA 319 (10): 1013­23.
       https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2018.0900.
Edlin, B. R., K. L. Irwin, S. Faruque, C. B. McCoy, C. Word, Y. Serrano, J. A. Inciardi,
       B. P. Bowser, R. F. Schilling, and S. D. Holmberg. 1994. "Intersecting Epidemics--
       Crack Cocaine Use and HIV Infection among Inner-City Young Adults.
       Multicenter Crack Cocaine and HIV Infection Study Team." The New England
       Journal of Medicine 331 (21): 1422­27.
       https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJM199411243312106.
Frazis, Harley, and Jay Stewart. 1999. "Tracking the Returns to Education in the 1990s:
       Bridging the Gap between the New and Old Current Population Survey Education
       Items." Journal of Human Resources 34 (3): 629­41.


                                         Page 29
Fryer, Roland G., Paul S. Heaton, Steven D. Levitt, and Kevin M. Murphy. 2013.
        "Measuring Crack Cocaine and Its Impact." Economic Inquiry 51 (3): 1651­81.
        https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1465-7295.2012.00506.x.
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2002. "The Power of the Pill: Oral
        Contraceptives and Women's Career and Marriage Decisions." Journal of Political
        Economy 110 (4): 730­70.
Goldring, Thomas, Fabian Lange, and Seth Richards-Shubik. 2016. "Testing for Changes
        in the SES-Mortality Gradient When the Distribution of Education Changes Too."
        Journal of Health Economics 46 (March): 120­30.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2015.12.002.
Graham, Carol, and Sergio Pinto. 2019. "Unequal Hopes and Lives in the USA:
        Optimism, Race, Place, and Premature Mortality." Journal of Population
        Economics 32 (2): 665­733. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00148-018-0687-y.
Gruber, J., P. Levine, and D. Staiger. 1999. "Abortion Legalization and Child Living
        Circumstances: Who Is the `Marginal Child'?" The Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 114 (1): 263­91. https://doi.org/10.1162/003355399556007.
Hirsch, Barry T., and David A. Macpherson. 2003. "Union Membership and Coverage
        Database from the Current Population Survey: Note." Industrial and Labor
        Relations Review 56 (2): 349-354 (updated annually at unionstats.com).
        https://doi.org/10.2307/3590942.
Hobcraft, John, Jane Menken, and Samuel Preston. 1982. "Age, Period, and Cohort
        Effects in Demography: A Review." Population Index 48 (1): 4.
        https://doi.org/10.2307/2736356.
Jaeger, David A. 1997. "Reconciling the Old and New Census Bureau Education
        Questions: Recommendations for Researchers." Journal of Business & Economic
        Statistics 15 (3): 300. https://doi.org/10.2307/1392334.
Jalal, Hawre, Jeanine M. Buchanich, Mark S. Roberts, Lauren C. Balmert, Kun Zhang,
        and Donald S. Burke. 2018. "Changing Dynamics of the Drug Overdose Epidemic
        in the United States from 1979 through 2016." Science 361 (6408): eaau1184.
        https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aau1184.
Jones, Jeffrey M. 2019. "U.S. Church Membership Down Sharply in Past Two Decades."
        Gallup.Com. April 18, 2019. https://news.gallup.com/poll/248837/church-
        membership-down-sharply-past-two-decades.aspx.
Leive, Adam, and Christopher J. Ruhm. 2020. "Has Mortality Risen Disproportionately
        for the Least Educated?" NBER Working Paper #27512. National Bureau of
        Economic Research.
Lembke, Anna. 2016. Drug Dealer, MD: How Doctors Were Duped, Patients Got Hooked,
        and Why It's so Hard to Stop. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.


                                        Page 30
Lewis, Denise Riedel, David P. Check, Neil E. Caporaso, William D. Travis, and Susan S.
        Devesa. 2014. "US Lung Cancer Trends by Histologic Type." Cancer 120 (18):
        2883­92. https://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.28749.
Macy, Beth. 2018. Dopesick: Dealers, Doctors, and the Drug Company That Addicted
        America. First edition. New York: Little, Brown and Company.
Masters, Ryan K., Andrea M. Tilstra, and Daniel H. Simon. 2018. "Explaining Recent
        Mortality Trends among Younger and Middle-Aged White Americans."
        International Journal of Epidemiology 47 (1): 81­88.
        https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyx127.
Mehta, Neil K., Leah R. Abrams, and Mikko Myrskylä. 2020. "US Life Expectancy Stalls
        Due to Cardiovascular Disease, Not Drug Deaths." Proceedings of the National
        Academy of Sciences 117 (13): 6998­7000.
        https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1920391117.
Metzl, Jonathan. 2019. Dying of Whiteness: How the Politics of Racial Resentment Is
        Killing America's Heartland. First edition. New York: Basic Books.
Miller, Matthew, and David Hemenway. 2008. "Guns and Suicide in the United States."
        New England Journal of Medicine 359 (10): 989­91.
        https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMp0805923.
Miller, Ted R., David I. Swedler, Bruce A. Lawrence, Bina Ali, Ian R. H. Rockett, Nancy
        N. Carlson, and Jennifer Leonardo. 2020. "Incidence and Lethality of Suicidal
        Overdoses by Drug Class." JAMA Network Open 3 (3): e200607.
        https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.0607.
Monnat, Shannon M., David J. Peters, Mark T. Berg, and Andrew Hochstetler. 2019.
        "Using Census Data to Understand County-Level Differences in Overall Drug
        Mortality and Opioid-Related Mortality by Opioid Type." American Journal of
        Public Health 109 (8): 1084­91. https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2019.305136.
Murray, Charles A. 2012. Coming Apart: The State of White America, 1960-2010. 1st ed.
        New York, N.Y: Crown Forum.
Naimi, Timothy S., Jason G. Blanchette, Ziming Xuan, and Francis J. Chaloupka. 2018.
        "Erosion of State Alcohol Excise Taxes in the United States." Journal of Studies
        on Alcohol and Drugs 79 (1): 43­48. https://doi.org/10.15288/jsad.2018.79.43.
National Cancer Institute. 2020. "Download U.S. Population Data - SEER Population
        Data." SEER. 2020. https://seer.cancer.gov/popdata/download.html.
Novosad, Paul, Charlie Rafkin, and Sam Asher. 2020. "Mortality Change Among Less
        Educated Americans." Working Paper. Dartmouth University.
OECD. 2017. "Obesity Update 2017." Paris, France: Organization for Economic Co-
        operation and Development. https://www.oecd.org/els/health-systems/Obesity-
        Update-2017.pdf.


                                         Page 31
------. 2019. Health at a Glance 2019: OECD Indicators. Health at a Glance. OECD.
       https://doi.org/10.1787/4dd50c09-en.
Parker, Kim, Juliana Horowitz, and Brian Mahl. 2016. "On Views of Race and Inequality,
       Blacks and Whites Are Worlds Apart." Pew Research Center.
       https://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2016/06/27/on-views-of-race-and-inequality-
       blacks-and-whites-are-worlds-apart/.
Pierce, Justin R., and Peter K. Schott. 2020. "Trade Liberalization and Mortality:
       Evidence from US Counties." American Economic Review: Insights 2 (1): 47­63.
       https://doi.org/10.1257/aeri.20180396.
Presidents Commission. 2017. "The President's Commission on Combating Drug
       Addiction and the Opioid Crisis." Washington D.C.
Putnam, Robert D. 2000. Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American
       Community. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Quinones, Sam. 2016. Dreamland: The True Tale of America's Opiate Epidemic.
       Paperback edition. New York: Bloomsbury Press.
Reid, T. R. 2010. The Healing of America: A Global Quest for Better, Cheaper, and
       Fairer Health Care. New York: Penguin Press.
Rosenthal, Elisabeth. 2017. An American Sickness: How Healthcare Became Big Business
       and How You Can Take It Back. New York: Penguin Press.
Ruhm, Christopher J. 2018. "Drug Mortality and Lost Life Years Among U.S. Midlife
       Adults, 1999-2015." American Journal of Preventive Medicine 55 (1): 11­18.
       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2018.03.014.
------. 2019a. "Drivers of the Fatal Drug Epidemic." Journal of Health Economics 64:
       25­42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2019.01.001.
------. 2019b. "Shackling the Identification Police?" Southern Economic Journal 85 (4):
       1016­26. https://doi.org/10.1002/soej.12333.
Ruiz, John M., Patrick Steffen, and Timothy B. Smith. 2013. "Hispanic Mortality
       Paradox: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of the Longitudinal Literature."
       American Journal of Public Health 103 (3): e52-60.
       https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2012.301103.
Saklayen, Mohammad G., and Neeraj V. Deshpande. 2016. "Timeline of History of
       Hypertension Treatment." Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine 3: 3.
       https://doi.org/10.3389/fcvm.2016.00003.
Singhal, Astha, Yu-Yu Tien, and Renee Y. Hsia. 2016. "Racial-Ethnic Disparities in
       Opioid Prescriptions at Emergency Department Visits for Conditions Commonly
       Associated with Prescription Drug Abuse." Edited by Soraya Seedat. PLOS ONE
       11 (8): e0159224. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0159224.



                                        Page 32
Snyder, Thomas D., Cristobal De Brey, and Sally A. Dillow. 2019. Digest of Education
       Statistics 2018 (NCES 2020-009). National Center for Education Statistics,
       Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education.
Social Capital Project. 2019. "Long-Term Trends in Deaths of Despair." SCP Report No.
       4-19. Joint Economic Committee.
       https://www.jec.senate.gov/public/_cache/files/0f2d3dba-9fdc-41e5-9bd1-
       9c13f4204e35/jec-report-deaths-of-despair.pdf.
Spencer, Merianne R., Margaret Warner, Brigham A. Bastian, James P. Trinidad, and
       Holly Hedegaard. 2019. "Drug Overdose Deaths Involving Fentanyl, 2011-2016."
       National Vital Statistics Reports: From the Centers for Disease Control and
       Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics System
       68 (3): 1­19.
Stevenson, Betsey, and Justin Wolfers. 2007. "Marriage and Divorce: Changes and Their
       Driving Forces." Journal of Economic Perspectives 21 (2): 27­52.
The Lancet. 2015. "The Hispanic Paradox." The Lancet 385 (9981): 1918.
       https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60945-X.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2012. "Percent Hispanic of the U.S. Population: 1970 to 2050." 2012.
       https://www.census.gov/newsroom/cspan/hispanic/2012.06.22_cspan_hispanics_5
       .pdf.
Venkataramani, Atheendar S., Elizabeth F. Bair, Rourke L. O'Brien, and Alexander C.
       Tsai. 2019. "Association Between Automotive Assembly Plant Closures and Opioid
       Overdose Mortality in the United States: A Difference-in-Differences Analysis."
       JAMA Internal Medicine, December.
       https://doi.org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2019.5686.
Woolf, Steven H., and Heidi Schoomaker. 2019. "Life Expectancy and Mortality Rates in
       the United States, 1959-2017." JAMA 322 (20): 1996.
       https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2019.16932.
Yip, Paul SF, Eric Caine, Saman Yousuf, Shu-Sen Chang, Kevin Chien-Chang Wu, and
       Ying-Yeh Chen. 2012. "Means Restriction for Suicide Prevention." The Lancet 379
       (9834): 2393­99. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(12)60521-2.




                                          Page 33
   Table 1. Actual and Counterfactual Mortality Rates, 45-54 year old Non-Hispanic Whites

                                              Actual/Estimated            Difference vs. 1999 Mortality
                                               Mortality Rate                         Rate

      Actual Mortality Rate

                1999                                 384.1

                2018                                 412.0                              27.9

 Counterfactual 2018 Rate Basis

       2% annual reduction                           261.7                             150.4

    1990-1999 trend continues                        307.8                             104.2

    1990-1995 trend continues                        340.8                              71.4

Note: Table shows actual or counterfactual mortality rates for 45-54 year old non-Hispanic whites, and the
difference between those rates and the actual 1999 rate. All mortality rates are per 100,000. The first
counterfactual scenario assumes an annual 2.00 percent reduction starting in 1999. The second assumes a
1.16 percent annual decrease, which is the average yearly decline from 1990-1999. The final scenario assumes
a 0.80 percent annual decline, beginning in 1995, which is the trend reduction observed from 1990-1995.




                                                  Page 34
                     Table 2: Mortality Rates and Changes From Various Causes,
                                25-54 Year Old Non-Hispanic Whites
                                    Drug, Suicide & Chronic Liver Disease (DSL) Deaths
                        All                     Drug,                                                Respira-
                                                           Drug       Other
                       Causes      All DSL      Non-                             Liver                tory
                                                         Suicide     Suicide
                                               Suicide
      Males
Mort. Rate: 1999        284.8         49.0         12.4         2.2          22.7         11.7          8.6
Mort. Rate: 2018        319.8        109.7         59.5         2.3          34.8         13.1         10.3
: 2018 vs. 1999          34.9         60.8         47.1         0.1          12.1          1.5          1.7
  % of DSL                                        77.5%        0.1%         19.9%        2.4%
     Females
Mort. Rate: 1999        159.4         16.2         5.0          2.4           4.7          4.2          7.6
Mort. Rate: 2018        188.9         48.5         28.6         3.0           8.7          8.3         10.4
: 2018 vs. 1999          29.5         32.3         23.6         0.6           4.0          4.1          2.8
  % of DSL                                        73.0%        1.9%         12.5%        12.6%
Note: Table shows mortality rates per 100,000 (Mort. Rate) in 1999 and 2018, as well as changes in these rates
over these two years, and the percentage of the total change in mortality rates from drug, suicide and chronic
liver disease (DSL) accounted for by specific cause. ICD-10 underlying cause-of-death codes for non-intentional
drug deaths are: X40-44, X85, Y10-Y14. Those for intentional drug deaths, other suicides, liver disease and
respiratory disease are: X60-X64; *U03, X65-X84, Y87.0; K70, K73, K74; and J00-J98). Mortality rates are
age-adjusted using 2018-year population weights for five-year age groups.




                                                  Page 35
         Table 3: Mortality Rates and Changes in Mortality Rates from Various Causes for
                      25-54 Year Old Non-Hispanic Whites, by Age and Sex
                                      Drug, Suicide & Chronic Liver Disease (DSL) Deaths
                           All                     Drug,                                          Respira-
                                                            Drug       Other
                          Deaths        All        Non-                           Liver            tory
                                                           Suicide     Suicide
                                                  Suicide
    Males: 25-34
MR : 2018 vs. 1999          60.2        66.5        55.4         0.2         9.5         1.4         0.1
% of DSL                                           83.3%        0.3%       14.2%        2.2%
    Males: 35-44
MR : 2018 vs. 1999          33.4        61.3        49.0        -0.5        11.9         0.9         0.7
% of DSL                                           80.1%       -0.8%       19.4%        1.4%
    Males: 45-54
MR : 2018 vs. 1999          11.2        54.6        37.0         0.5        14.9         2.1         4.2
% of DSL                                           67.9%        0.9%       27.3%        3.8%
   Females: 25-34
MR : 2018 vs. 1999          30.5        29.2        24.2         0.0         3.5         1.4         0.1
% of DSL                                           83.0%        0.0%       12.1%        4.9%
   Females: 35-44
MR : 2018 vs. 1999          27.2        30.7        24.2         0.5         3.5         2.5         1.1
% of DSL                                           78.9%        1.5%       11.5%        8.1%
   Females: 45-54
MR : 2018 vs. 1999          30.7        36.8        22.4         1.4         4.9         8.0         6.8
% of DSL                                           61.0%        3.7%       13.4%       21.9%
Note: see note on Table 2. "MR : 2018 vs. 1999" indicates to the change in age-adjusted mortality rates, per
100,000, occurring between 1999 and 2018.




                                                  Page 36
       Figure 1: Mortality Rates for 25-64 Year Old Non-Hispanic Whites, Relative to 1990
                                     Fig 1A: DSL Mortality Rates




                                     Fig. 1B: Total Mortality Rates




Note: Figure shows mortality rates as a percentage of 1999 value for the specified age group. DSL mortality
rates include ICD-9 (1990-1998) underlying cause of death codes 571, 850-859, 950-959, 962, 980.0-980.5 and
ICD-10 (1999-2018) codes K70, K73-K74, X40-X44, X60-X85, Y10-Y14, Y87.0, *U03.


                                                  Page 37
