                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    SMART(PHONE) INVESTING? A WITHIN INVESTOR-TIME ANALYSIS OF NEW
                TECHNOLOGIES AND TRADING BEHAVIOR.

                                          Ankit Kalda
                                        Benjamin Loos
                                      Alessandro Previtero
                                       Andreas Hackethal

                                       Working Paper 28363
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28363


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2021




We thank Shlomo Benartzi, Juhani Linnainmaa, Ulrike Malmendier, Brian Melzer, and seminar
participants at Indiana University and BI Norwegian Business School for helpful comments and
discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Ankit Kalda, Benjamin Loos, Alessandro Previtero, and Andreas Hackethal. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Smart(Phone) Investing? A within Investor-time Analysis of New Technologies and Trading
Behavior.
Ankit Kalda, Benjamin Loos, Alessandro Previtero, and Andreas Hackethal
NBER Working Paper No. 28363
January 2021
JEL No. G11,G40,G50

                                         ABSTRACT

Using transaction-level data from two German banks, we study the effects of smartphones on
investor behavior. Comparing trades by the same investor in the same month across different
platforms, we find that smartphones increase purchasing of riskier and lottery-type assets and
chasing past returns. After the adoption of smartphones, investors do not substitute trades across
platforms and buy also riskier, lottery-type, and hot investments on other platforms. Using
smartphones to trade specific assets or during specific hours contributes to explain our results.
Digital nudges and the device screen size do not mechanically drive our results. Smartphone
effects are not transitory.

Ankit Kalda                                     Alessandro Previtero
Kelley School of Business                       Kelley School of Business
1309 E 10th St                                  Indiana University
Indiana University                              1309 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405                           Bloomington, IN 47405
akalda@iu.edu                                   and NBER
                                                aleprevi@indiana.edu
Benjamin Loos
TUM School of Management                        Andreas Hackethal
Arcissstrasse 21                                Goethe University Frankfurt
Munich 80333                                    Grüneburgplatz 1 House of Finance
Germany                                         60323 Frankfurt a.M. Germany
beni.loos@gmail.com                             hackethal@gbs.uni-frankfurt.de
1    Introduction

    Technology has dramatically changed how retail investors trade, from placing orders
using direct dial-up connections in the 1980s or Internet-based trading in the 1990s to
the more recent rise of robo-advisers. With few exceptions, the introduction of these
new technologies is generally associated with a decline in investor portfolio efficiency.
Whether good or bad for investors, it is accepted that new technologies influence investor
behavior. The empirical evidence in these studies comes from some comparisons of in-
vestor behavior before and after the adoption of the new technology, potentially contrasted
with the behavior over time of another group that did not adopt the technology. Under
the assumption that, absent the innovation, investors would have behaved in the exact
same way, a common interpretation of this evidence is that new technologies influence
investors and change their behavior. An alternative explanation is that investors, instead,
adopt the new technology because they are willing to change their trading behavior in the
first place. Even if we could randomly assign the new technology to investors, it would
still not be straightforward to conclude that the new technology changes the overall in-
vestor portfolio. If investors manage investments across different accounts or platforms,
they could decide to substitute across technologies. Therefore, observing trades on one
platform might not be informative of the overall investor trading behavior.
    While previous studies lack the data to distinguish between these alternative interpre-
tations, their implications are, however, starkly different. If the new technology influences
investor preferences and beliefs, absent the technology investors would have not changed
their trading behavior. If, instead, it fulfills untapped investor demand, then the new tech-
    For example, when moving to online trading, investors increased turnover and reduced performance
(Barber and Odean, 2002). More recent studies document, instead, that robo-advisers could reduce invest-
ment mistakes (see D'Acunto, Prabhala and Rossi, 2019; Loos et al., 2020).
    D'Acunto, Prabhala and Rossi (2019) use the randomness in investors answering their phone to the
marketing enrollment calls as a plausibly exogenous shock to the probability of joining the robo-advisor.




                                                   1
nology at best accelerates or makes less costly a change in investor behavior that would
have happened anyway. Analogously, the new technology could just fulfill substitute
demand, if investors substitute trades across different platforms. Therefore, simple com-
parisons of investor behavior pre- and post-adoption or analyses of trades on one single
platform could vastly overestimate the effects of the new technology. Furthermore, the
policy implications could not be any more different. Is the technology helping investors
to achieve their goals by facilitating their trades? Or is technology influencing adopters
in profound ways that could stray investors away from their original goals?
    In this paper, we use unique data on German households to overcome these empirical
challenges and to weigh in on the question if technology drives changes or just fulfills
untapped or substitute investor demand. Our data comes from two large German retail
banks that have introduced trading applications for mobile devices. For over 15,000
bank clients that have used these mobile apps in the years 2010-2017, we can observe all
holdings and transactions, and, more important, the specific platform used for each trade
(e.g., personal computer vs. smartphone). These unique features of the data prove fruitful
for our analyses. That is, we can conduct all our main tests comparing trades done by the
same investor in the same month across different platforms. Moreover, we can directly
test for substitution effects.
    We present four set of results. First, we study if the use of smartphones induces
differences in the riskiness of trades. Comparing trades by the same investor in the
same year-month, we find that the probability of purchasing risky assets increases in
smartphone trades compared to non-smartphone ones. Analogously, smartphone trades
involve assets with higher volatility and more positive skewness. This evidence is best
summarized by our analyses of lottery type stocks. Smartphones increase the probability
    In a 2020 article titled "Robinhood Has Lured Young Traders, Sometimes With Devastating Results", the New
York Times features a series of stories of investors that have lost substantial amount of money trading off
their mobile phones.
    Following Kumar (2009), we define as lottery-type stocks those assets with below median prices and

                                                     2
of buying lottery-type stocks by 67% of the unconditional mean for smartphone users.
   Second, we examine the effects of smartphones on the tendency to chase past returns.
We find that smartphones increase the probability of buying assets in the top decile of
the past performance distribution. Smartphones increase the probability of buying assets
in the top 10 percent of past performance by 12.0 percentage points (or 70.6% of the
unconditional mean).
   Third, we investigate if investors selectively use smartphone to execute their risky,
lottery-type, and trend-chasing trades. In this scenario, investors could simply substitute
their trades from one device to another, without any real consequences for their over-
all portfolio efficiency. Using a difference-in-differences design that compares iOS and
Android users, we find that, following the launch of smartphone apps, investors are--if
anything--more likely to purchase risky and lottery-type assets and to chase hot invest-
ments also on non-smartphone platforms. While inconsistent with substitution effects, this
evidence potentially suggests that investors are learning to become overall more biased
after their initial use of smartphones to trade.
   Last, we evaluate the mechanisms that may drive these smartphone effects. We begin
by examining whether the ability to trade anytime and everywhere via smartphones drives
our results. To evaluate the importance of this channel, we repeat our analyses, including
year-by-time-of-the-day fixed effects. In this specification, our estimates become smaller
but remain economically and statistically significant. This finding suggests that time of
trade is important in our setting, but it does not fully explain our findings. Consistent
with this interpretation, heterogeneity analyses show that smartphone effects are stronger
during after-hours (i.e. following exchange closure). Institutional differences between
trading on official exchanges and in after-hours markets do not drive this heterogeneity.
Given that individuals are more likely to rely on the more intuitive system 1 later in the
above median skewness and volatility.


                                              3
day (Kahneman,2011), stronger effects during after-hours are consistent with smartphones
facilitating trades based more on system 1 thinking.
   Alternatively, investors may use smartphones to trade different investments and this
selection of riskier asset classes may drive our results. We re-estimate our main anal-
yses, including year-by-asset-class fixed effects. We find again smaller but still strong
smartphone effects, suggesting that the choice of asset classes doesn't fully explain our
findings.
   Another possibility is that digital nudges might contribute to our results. Smartphone
trading apps in fact prominently feature stocks that have experienced dramatic positive
(and negative) performance in the recent past. If these stocks are riskier and with higher
skewness, digital nudges could mechanically influence investor behavior. To test for this
hypothesis, we re-run our main specifications separately for different asset classes: indi-
vidual stocks, mutual funds, and other investments (options, certificates, and warrants).
We find that our results are strong across all asset classes and not just for individual stocks
that can be more prominently featured in the smartphone trading app. Additionally,
we test if a physical attribute of smartphones--their smaller screen--contributes to our
findings. To explore this mechanism, we separately investigate the effects of trading via
devices with different screen sizes (iPhones vs. iPads). Given that we do not find stronger
results for trades via iPhones, we conclude that this physical attribute is not likely to drive
our findings. Last, our results do not appear to be short-lived and driven by the initial
enthusiasm or the learning curve of the new technology. Our estimates do not change
significantly between the first quarter up to the tenth quarter after the initial use of the
smartphone app.
   Our findings contribute to literature on the effects of technology on investor behavior.
Barber and Odean (2002) document that investors who switched from phone-based to
online trading start trading more frequently, but less profitably than before. Choi, Laibson,


                                              4
and Metrick (2002) document similar results in 401(k) plans. Our evidence complements
these studies by documenting that smartphones increase the purchases of lottery-type
stock and trend-chasing. More importantly, we document different behaviors within the
same investor and same month, but across platforms. This identification strategy enables
us to more convincingly address selection effects when examining how a new technology
impacts investor behavior.
   Given the large diffusion of robo-advisers in the past decade, D'Acunto, Prabhala and
Rossi (2019) and Loos et al. (2020) have investigated the effects of this innovation on
investor behavior. Both studies highlight that robo-advice has the potential to reduce
investment biases and improve portfolio performance. Our evidence provide a more
nuanced picture of the effects of new technologies on investor behavior. Smartphones
appear to foster investment biases such as investing in lottery-type and hot stocks. Our
paper contributes also to the recent literature on the effect of mobile apps on financial
behaviors. Levi and Benartzi (2020) and D'Acunto, Rossi, and Weber (2020) study the
effects of mobile applications on spending behaviors. We contribute to these studies by
investigating investment decisions. Our setting provides a nice laboratory to understand
the consequences of providing constant feedback and ease of execution of trades to retail
investors.
   More recently, a series of studies have investigated the effects of trading smartphone
apps on aggregate markets. Using data from the US retail brokerage company Robin
Hood, Welch (2020) finds that a portfolio mimicking the aggregate holdings of Robin Hood
investors did not underperform standard academic benchmarks. Using the same data,
Barber et al. (2020) document that episodes of intense buying activity by Robinhood users
are followed by negative returns. Using data from a leading investment adviser in China,
   Robin Hood operates entirely online via a website and mobile apps. The vast majority of its trades are
made using the smartphone apps.




                                                   5
Cen (2019) shows that, after the mobile app introduction, investors flows into mutual
funds become more volatile and more sensitive to short-term fund returns and market
sentiment. Our results nicely dovetail with the findings in these studies and make three
distinctive contributions. First, we focus on the consequences of smartphones on retail
investors, and not aggregate markets. Aggregate effects might mask substantial investor
heterogeneity, making it difficult to understand potential redistributive effects of this
technology. Second, our investor trading data allow to sharpen the causal interpretation
of smartphone effects and to investigate the mechanisms driving them. Third, while
Robinhood investors are Millennials with little or no trading experience, the German
investors that adopt smartphone trading are, on average, 45 years old with nine years of
experience investing with the banks. Therefore, we can capture the effects of smartphone
trading on more experienced users and a more representative sample of traders.



2     Hypotheses Development

    New technologies can change the way households make economic decisions, from
labor supply, to borrowing, to investor behavior.                Broadly speaking, we investigate if
smartphones influence financial risk-taking and investment biases. The effects of smart-
phones in both settings are not obvious ex-ante. By facilitating searching and monitoring
efforts, smartphones can reduce the participation costs in the stock market and promote
financial risk-taking. If investors are, instead, sensitive to short-term losses, the more
frequent feedback via smartphones could reduce risk-taking, as predicted in the frame-
work of myopic loss aversion by Benartzi and Thaler (1995). Consistent with myopic loss
aversion, Haigh and List (2005) document that professional option traders take less risk
     For example, Fos et al (2019), Jackson (2019) and Koustas (2018) document the effect of ride-sharing apps
on labor market decisions; Di Maggio and Yao (2019), Buchak, Matvos, Piskorski and Seru (2018) and Fuster
et al. (2018) document the effect of Fintech lending on borrowing decisions; and D'Acunto, Prahabala, and
Rossi (2019) document the effect of robo-advising on investment decisions.


                                                      6
when randomly assigned to the treatment of receiving more frequent feedback.
   Psychologists hypothesize that we have two modes of thinking: system 1, which is
fast, instinctive and emotional, and system 2, which is slower, more deliberative, and
more logical (Stanovich and West, 2000; Kahneman, 2003). By providing the ability to
almost instantaneously trade in more relaxed environments, smartphones may potentially
allow more impulsive, system 1 trades. System 1 reasoning is associated with preference
for lotteries (see Kahneman, 2011). Kumar (2009) documents that preference for gambling
are correlated with lottery-type stocks with positively skewed payoffs. Moreover, Bali
et al. (2019) find that investor preferences for lottery stocks are amplified by attention
and social interaction. Collectively, this evidence suggests that smartphones might have a
strong effects on preferences for lottery-type investments with positive skewness.
   New technologies have the potential to reduce investment biases. While human ad-
visors might make the same investment mistakes of their clients (Linnainmaa, Melzer,
and Previtero, 2020), robo-advisers are a potential cost-effective solution that could in-
crease portfolio efficiency (e.g., D'Acunto, Prahabala, and Rossi, 2019; Loos et al., 2020).
Smartphones could grant ubiquitous access to information and high speed of execution
of trades. Gargano and Rossi (2018) document the more attention to investment lead
to higher profits. On the other hand, as previously discussed smartphones could pro-
mote more intuitive/ system 1 thinking and, possibly, higher reliance on value-destroying
investment heuristics. For example, consumers are more inclined to make impulsive pur-
chases such as ordering more unhealthy food when using mobile devices. Benartzi and
Lehrer (2015) review of the effects of smartphones on consumer choices.
   Given that their effects are ambiguous, we test if smartphones influence financial risk-
taking, preferences for lottery stocks, and the well-documented investment bias to chase
past returns.




                                             7
3      Data & Empirics

    This section describes the data used in the analyses, discusses our sample and details
our empirical strategy.


3.1      Data & Summary Statistics

    We use comprehensive investor transaction-level data from two large German retail
banks. For a large random sample of clients at the banks, we observe the securities traded,
the type of trade (buys vs. sell), day and time of the trade execution, price and units of each
transaction, and, more important for our analysis, the platform used for each trade. The
customers in our data hold their primary accounts with these two banks and use them for
most of their transactions. This data covers about sixty five million transactions over the
years from 1999 to 2017 by over two hundred and twenty five thousand investors. The data
from first bank covers information on over forty five million transactions by one hundred
and ten thousand investors from 1999 to 2016. The data from the second bank covers close
to twenty million transactions by one hundred and sixteen thousand investors from 2003
to 2017. At the investor level, we observe monthly snapshots of portfolio holdings and
demographic characteristics such as gender, age, wealth, and income.
    Most of our analyses uses transaction data where we impose three sample filters. First,
we limit our sample between 2010 and 2016 for one bank and from 2013 to 2017 for the
other bank. We choose these years to reflect the earliest smartphone apps introduction
for each bank.           Second, we drop trades associated with savings plans and wealth
management services because these are automated or don't involve an active choice from
investors. Finally, we drop trades without information on the asset traded (e.g., asset
class). Applying these filters results in a sample of over twenty two million transactions
      Wealth and income are only recorded at the account opening.
      Our results are robust if we separately estimate them for each bank


                                                      8
by roughly one hundred and eighty thousand investors. Over eighteen thousand of these
investors use smartphone trading apps at least once.
   We complement the proprietary data from the two banks with publicly available data
on prices, returns, and other characteristics for all securities traded within Germany.
Table 1 reports summary statistics for variables used in our analyses within our sample.
Smartphone is a dummy variable that takes a value of one for trades executed using
smartphones. On average, 2% of trades in our sample are placed using smartphones
(standard deviation of 0.15). However, conditional on ever using them, investors execute
over 15% of their trades via smartphones. We first measure risk taking as the probability of
purchasing risky assets (i.e., direct and indirect equity holdings) . The average probability
of purchasing risky assets in our sample is 93%.We also measure risk taking as the volatility
of the assets purchased, measured as the annualized standard deviation over a trailing
12-month rolling window. The mean volatility in our sample is 17.27% with a standard
deviation of 13.14%.
   Our measures for gambling preferences include investment skewness, calculated on a
12-month rolling window, and the probability of purchasing lottery type assets. Following
Kumar (2009), we define lottery-type assets as those with below median price, and above
median volatility and skewness. The mean probability of purchasing a lottery-type asset
within our sample is 7%. To examine trend chasing, we use the probability of purchasing
assets in the top decile of the past return distribution (we use a trailing 12-month window).
Finally, we use the bank-reported risk categories of the assets purchased and the probabil-
ity of purchasing warrants or certificates. The banks' risk-categories apply to all the assets
traded by the clients and range between one and five, with higher values representing
greater risks. The average risk category for the assets purchased in our sample is 3.99.
The mean probability of purchasing a warrant is 9% (3% for a certificate).
   In Figure 1, we explore the evolution of the usage of smartphones over our sample


                                              9
period. Panel A plots the percentage of trades that occur via smartphones on the Y-axis
against calendar year on the X-axis. One of the two banks in our sample launched a
smartphone trading app in 2010. By 2017, the end of our sample, over 2.5% of all trades
were occurring over smartphones. The average usage drops in 2013 because we add to our
data a second bank which launched its own trading app in 2013. Among investors with
the bank that first introduced the trading app, 4% of all trades were via smartphones in
2017. Although the overall fraction of total trades might appear small, the adoption rates
are steadily increasing with over 10% of all investors using smartphone trading by 2017.
Panel B plots the percentage of trades that occur via smartphones only for those investors
who have used the smartphone app at least once. Among these investors, the fraction of
smartphone trades is much higher, reaching over 20% of all their trades by 2017. Thus, if
smartphone trades differ from other trades, they might have a significant impact on the
overall portfolio efficiency.
   Since investors endogenously choose to use smartphones, adopters might be inherently
different from non-adopters. In Table 2, we compare trading behavior (Panel A) and
investor characteristics (Panel B) across smartphone users and non-users. For non-users,
we compute summary statistics over all the years in our sample. For smartphone users,
instead, we use only information until their first smartphone trade. Therefore, trading
statistics for adopters do not reflect the effects of smartphones. Compare to non-users,
adopters trade more frequently (10 vs. five trades per month) and place larger trades (4,477
vs. 3,813 euros in average trades). Smartphone users are also more likely to buy riskier
assets (95% vs. 92%) and purchase more volatile assets (22% volatility vs. 16.52%). Finally,
adopters display a higher probability of buying lottery-type assets and investments in the
top decile of the past return distribution.
   Panel B reports investor-level characteristics for smartphone users and non-users.
While there are no differences in terms of income and wealth, adopters tend to be younger


                                              10
males with shorter tenure at the bank.                Specifically, smartphone users have one year
shorter tenure at the bank, are about 8 years younger, and 13% more likely to be males
compared to non-users.


3.2      Empirical Challenges and Methodology

   Investigating the effects of new technologies on trading activity poses significant em-
pirical challenges, because of selection and substitution effects. Individuals who use
smartphones to trade could be different from investors that use other platforms. In our
sample, smartphone users are more active, more likely to buy higher volatility and lottery-
type assets, and to chase past top performers. These differences highlight the importance
of conducting within-investor analyses. While a within-investor analysis could address
this type of selection, investor characteristics could also change over time. For instance,
individuals can become more sophisticated or start trading more actively over time. These
changes might drive their choice of the trading platform. Therefore, the selection effects
could operate at the investor-time level.
   Thanks to the richness of our data, we are able to go one step further in addressing
this concern. We exploit within individual-by-time variation, by including in our estima-
tions individual-by-month (or by-year) fixed effects. By comparing trades across different
platforms made by the same investor within the same month (or year), we can account for
time-varying investor characteristics and selection at the investor-time level. Specifically,
we estimate the following model:



                               , ,   =   ×                 , ,   +   ,   ( )+   , ,                       (1)

   where measures behaviors (such as risk-taking, preference for lottery stocks and trend
      Income and wealth bins are measured at the time investors begin their relationship with the bank.



                                                      11
chasing) by investor using platform during year-month .                      , ,       is an indicator
variable equal to one for investor    for smartphone trades in month .             ,    are investor-
by-month (year) fixed effects that account for time-varying unobserved differences at the
investor level. To evaluate the importance of across- and within- investor heterogeneity in
our setting, we also estimate the model without any fixed effects and with the inclusion
of investor fixed effects ( ) for all our main results. Robust standard errors are double-
clustered at the investor and year-month level.
   For estimating these regressions, we collapse our sample to the investor by month
by trading platform level. For this purpose, we categorize the trading platforms in two
groups: smartphones vs. all other devices. After collapsing the data, the unit of analysis
in our regressions is the mean value of all trades by the same investor in the same month,
using the same trading platform. This estimation strategy allows us to control for both
across- and within- investor heterogeneity that may bias estimates (by having investor-
by-time f.e.), while allowing trades within the same investor and the same month to be
correlated (by double clustering the standard errors).
   There is a potential trade-off when using investor-by-time fixed effects. We gain benefits
in term of identification at the expenses of external validity of our results. With these fixed
effects we can achieve better identification by accounting for time-varying unobserved
differences at the investor level. Nonetheless, our results come only from those investors
that trade using both platforms within the same year or month. These investors might
or might not be a representative sample of all the smartphone traders. To be transparent
about this trade-off, we run all our major analyses using different specifications. First,
we report results without any fixed effect. Then, we include investor and time fixed
effects. Last, we introduce results with investor-by-year and investors-by-month fixed
effects. As we introduce more and more restrictive specifications, we move towards better
identification but possibly away from more external validity.


                                              12
    Another concern when estimating the effects of new technologies is that investors could
use the new platform to execute specific types of trades (e.g., buying riskier investments),
substituting away from other platforms. In the presence of substitution effects, we might
mistakenly attribute variation in trading strategies to the use of smartphones, when indeed
investors are just reallocating their trades across platforms. To test for this possibility,
we conduct a difference-in-differences analysis, exploiting the staggered introduction of
mobile apps across different operating systems (iOS vs. Android). By comparing non-
smartphone trades for smartphone users before and after the launch of different trading
apps, we can establish how prevalent spillover and substitution effects are. Section 5
discusses this analysis and its results in detail.



4    Main Results

    We examine the association between the use of smartphones and three trading be-
haviors: risk-taking, preferences for lottery-type assets, and trend chasing. As discussed
in Section 2, the effects of smartphones on these behaviors are not obvious ex-ante. By
facilitating more timely information acquisition, smartphones can reduce participation
costs and, therefore, increase financial risk-taking. Analogously, by reducing monitoring
costs, smartphones can promote more efficient trades and potentially reduce investment
biases. Smartphones, however, provide also ubiquitous access and high speed of exe-
cution of trades. This constant feedback might discourage risk-taking, if investors are
very sensitive to their losses (as in the myopic loss-aversion framework by Benartzi and
Thaler, 1995). Additionally, access anywhere and anytime might foster more system 1
thinking (Kahneman,2011). System 1 has long been associated with more intuitive and
impulsive actions, preferences for gambling and, consequently, lottery-type assets and
could exacerbate biases, such as trend chasing.


                                              13
4.1      Risk Taking

    We first analyze the effects of smartphones on financial risk-taking. In table 3, we
report results for this analysis, estimating different versions of Equation 1. Our outcome
is an indicator variable that captures the probability of purchasing risky assets. We
define as risky assets direct and indirect stock holdings, that is stocks and equity mutual
funds. Bonds, bond funds or gold-related funds are treated as non-equity investments.
In Column (1) we do not include fixed effects. In this specification we find that the
probability of purchasing risky assets is five percentage points (pp) higher for trades done
using smartphones relative to other trades. This effect corresponds to an increase of 5.2%
of the unconditional sample mean for smartphone users (0.95). While we find a significant
effect of smartphones, unobservable (to us) heterogeneity between smartphone users and
non-users can drive this result. In Column (2), we control for time-invariant investor
heterogeneity by including investor fixed effects. We also account for nation-wide time
trends by including year fixed effects. Consistent with these factors playing a role, our
estimates are smaller--2.11% of the sample mean--but still statistically significant at 1%
level.
    Our estimates in Column (2) could also be biased because of omitted time-varying
investor characteristics. For example, investor risk preferences could vary over time and
this variation could be correlated with the decision to adopt smartphone trading. We
control for this possibility in Column (3) by including investor-by-year fixed effects in
our estimation. This specification compares trades done by the same investor within
the same year, using smartphones versus other platforms. Using this specification, we
find that investors are three pp more likely to purchase a risky asset when trading using
smartphones. Finally, in Column (4) we use our most stringent specification by including
    In this analysis, we omit trades in other assets such as certificates and warrants that cannot be easily
classified.



                                                    14
investor-by-month fixed effects and comparing trades done by the same investor within
the same year-month. Following the discussion in subsection 3.2, we recall that while
this more stringent specification allows for better identification, these results are based
solely on those investors that execute multiple trades across different platforms during
the same month. Using this specification, we find that the probability of purchasing a
risky asset increases by four pp--4.3% of the sample mean--when using the smartphone
versus other platforms.
   Since the unconditional mean of purchasing risky assets for smartphone users is high
(0.95), the effects previously estimated might not fully capture the increased risk taking
induced by smartphone use. Therefore, we use the volatility of the assets purchased
as a second complementary measure of risk-taking. We measure this volatility as the
annualized standard deviation of returns over the past 12 months. We report the volatility
results in Table 4. Using a specification without any fixed effects (Column 1), we find that
the volatility of assets purchased using smartphones is 12.07pp higher compared to the
volatility of other assets. This magnitude is economically large as it corresponds to 54.8%
of the sample mean. However, both across- and within- investor heterogeneity might
drive this estimate. When we control for both investor and year fixed effects in Column
(2), we estimate a smaller effect for smartphones, equal to 4.43pp. In our most stringent
specification in Column (4), we find that volatility of assets purchased using smartphones
is 9.28pp higher than the volatility of other assets purchased by the same investor within
the same year-month. This magnitude is economically large as it corresponds to 42.2% of
the unconditional mean.


4.2   Preferences for lottery-type stocks

   We start the investigation of preferences for lottery-type assets by studying the skew-
ness of the assets purchased. Retail investors generally prefer positively skewed assets

                                            15
(e.g., Kumar, 2009). We present these results in table 5. In Column (1), we find that smart-
phone use increases the skewness of investments by 19.23pp or 33.4% of the standard
deviation of the skewness for phone users (57.58). As in previous tables, this first column
does not include any fixed effects. When we add fixed effects, we estimate smaller, but still
economically and statistically significant results, consistently with previous results. For
example, in Column (4) we find that after controlling for investor-by-month fixed effects
smartphone use increases skewness of asset purchased by 14.40, or 25% of the standard
deviation of the skewness for phone users.
   In table 6, we measure more directly preferences for lottery-type assets. Following
Kumar (2009), we define as lottery-type those assets that have in their asset classes below
median prices, above median volatility, and above median skewness. In Column (1), we
find that--without including any fixed effects--smartphone trades increase the proba-
bility of purchasing lottery-type assets by 10 pp, or 83% of the unconditional mean for
smartphone users. We still find statistically and economically significant results, even after
the inclusion of the same fixed effects previously used. Under the most restrictive speci-
fication with investor-by-month fixed effects, we find that smartphone trades increase the
probability of purchasing lottery-type assets by 8 pp, or 67% of the unconditional mean.


4.3   Trend Chasing

   Smartphones allow investors to access information on their investments on a more
timely basis. We investigate if smartphone influence the tendency of investors to chase
past returns and buy "hot" investments, or assets that have performed unusually well in
the recent past. In our overall sample 68% of purchases involve assets that earned above
median returns in the recent past. Even before adopting the smartphone app, users have
17% of their trades concentrated in the top 10th percentile of past performers.
   In table 7, we find that smartphone trades increase this tendency of buying assets in top

                                             16
10th percentile of past performance. Without fixed effects, in Column (1), we find that the
probability of buying past winners goes up by 16.4 pp. After controlling for individual-by-
month fixed effects, we still find an economically and statistically significant result. Smart
phone trades increase the likelihood of purchasing past winners by 12.0 pp or 70.6% of
the unconditional mean.
   Overall, our results suggest that smartphones affect investor trades. Even comparing
trades within the same investor-month, we still find that investors buy more volatile
and higher skewness assets using smartphones. These tendencies result in a significant
increase in the probability of purchasing lottery-type assets. Moreover, investors become
significantly more likely to chase past returns.


4.4   Do investors substitute their trades using smartphones?

   While our within investor-time analyses make progress in addressing potential selec-
tion problems, investors still endogenously decide which trading platform to use for each
of their trades. They can predominantly execute on smartphones their high-volatility,
high skewness, lottery-type of trades. In this case, smartphone trades are just substituting
trades that would have occurred anyway in different platforms. In the presence of substi-
tution effects, we should expect non-smartphone trades to display lower volatility, lower
skewness, and to be less likely to involve lottery-type assets or past winners. Our data
with information on both smartphone and non-smartphone trades allow us to directly test
for substitution effects.
   To identify these spill-over effects, we use a difference-in-differences approach that
exploits the staggered adoption of the smartphone app by different clients of the two
banks. This empirical approach allows us to compare different users before and after they
start using the trading app. In practice, in this empirical design we compare early vs. late
smartphone users. Empirically, we estimate the following equation:

                                             17
                              ,   =   ×                     ,   +     +    +   , ,                       (2)

     where      measures risk-taking, volatility, skewness, preferences for lottery-type assets
and past winners for trades in non-smartphone platforms by investor during year-month
 .                       ,   is an indicator variable equal to one for investor            in the months
following the first trade using the smartphone app.                 represents investor fixed effects that
control for non time-varying unobserved differences at the investor level.                      represents
year-month fixed effects.
     We present these estimates in table 8, panel A. The coefficient of interest, , is positive
for all outcomes and statistically significant for four out of the five outcome variables
(with the sole exception being the probability of buying risky assets). After using the
smartphone app, investors start buying also on non-smartphone platforms assets with
higher volatility and more positive skewness, and become more likely to purchase lottery-
type assets and past winners. Although smaller in economic magnitude than our main
effects, we find positive spillover effects on non-smartphone trades. This evidence goes
against substitution effects and the hypothesis that investors largely select smartphones
to execute their high volatility, high skewness trades. These results are consistent with
investors learning from smartphone trading to other platforms.
     A potential concern with this design is that investors endogenously choose to adopt the
smartphone trading app. In other words, this analysis suffers from the potential selection
effects between early and late users. To overcome this limitation, we run an additional
difference-in-differences analysis that exploits the staggered launch of trading apps for
different smartphone operating systems (iOS vs. Android).                      This empirical approach
allows us to compare different users before and after the trading app for their smartphone
    This data is only available for one of the two banks in our sample. Hence, we limit this analysis to this
one bank.



                                                     18
operating system is launched. In practice, we estimate the following equation:



                        ,   =   ×                       ,       +   +    +   , ,                  (3)

   where     measures our outcome of interest for trades in non-smartphone platforms by
investor during year-month .                                ,   is an indicator variable equal to one
for investor in the months following the launch of the trading app for their smartphone
operating system.      represents investor fixed effects and            represents year-month fixed
effects. We present these estimates in panel B of table 8. Consistent with the results in
panel A, we also find positive spillover effects for all the outcome variables, with three out
of five variables being statistically significant.
   The identification assumption for this analysis is that of parallel trends, i.e. in the
absence of the app launch, the trading behavior of investors owning different types of
smartphones--iOS vs. Android devices--would have evolved in a parallel way. Al-
though this assumption cannot be fully tested, we examine its validity in the pre-period
by estimating the dynamics of smartphone effects over time. Figure 4 plots the coefficients
of specifications in which the smartphone type is interacted with event-time in quarters.
We plot estimates for the probability of purchasing risky asset (panel A), volatility (panel
B), skewness (panel C), and trend-chasing (panel D). Across all outcomes, we find no
statistically significant differences for investors owning different smartphones in the two-
year period before the app launch. After the launch, we do not detect negative effects,
a finding that is inconsistent with substitution effect. If anything, we observe delayed
positive spillover effects on non-smartphone trades. In this specification, the effects on
non-smartphone trades are further delayed by the fact that not all the investors start using
the app immediately after its launch. Moreover, if investors learn from smartphone trades,
spillover effects could take time to manifest. Overall, this evidence is consistent with in-



                                               19
vestors learning from smartphone trades and adopting similar behaviors also when not
trading using smartphones.
    Overall, our results are inconsistent with substitution effect playing a role. If anything,
our evidence suggest that there are positive spillover and that investors learn from their
smartphone trading.



5     Mechanism

    In this section we investigate what drives the differential trading behavior associated
with smartphones. First, we test if using smartphones to trade at specific times of the
day or to trade specific assets can explain our results. Then, we study if digital nudges or
the device screen size generate our results. Last, we investigate if smartphone effects are
short-lived or more permanent.


5.1   Do investors use smartphones to trade during different hours?

    Smartphones potentially allow an immediate access to trading over an extended period
of time. To evaluate if this extended access to trading drives our results, we first investigate
trading dynamics over different hours of the day. In figure 2 panel A, we plot the density
of trades per hour of the day for our entire sample, including both smartphone and non-
smartphone users. There are two peaks in trading activity. They coincide with the opening
(9:00 to 10:00am) and the closing of the financial markets in Germany (4:00 to 5:00pm). In
panel B we plot the same density separately for smartphone and non-smartphone users.
The two density plots largely overlap, with smartphone users marginally more likely to
trade around closing hours. In panel C, we limit our analysis to smartphone users and
plot separately their smartphone vs. non-smartphone trades. Again, there is no apparent
difference in the two density plots. Traders use with similar frequency smartphones and

                                              20
other trading platforms during the day.
   In table 9, we investigate more formally the effects of trading hours on our results, by
including in our analyses both investor-by-month and trading hour-by-year fixed effects.
This specification allows us to compare also trades made during the same hour of the
day (e.g., 9:00am) in the same year. All our previous results are robust to this additional
specification. Investors on smartphone are more likely to buy risky, lottery-type, and
top-performing assets, and invest in more volatile and higher skewness assets. Compared
to our previous results in tables 3 to 7, the economic magnitudes are attenuated. They
range from 35% of the previous estimate for the probability of purchasing risky assets
(1.4pp vs. 4pp) to 52.6% for the volatility of the assets purchased (7.6% vs. 14.4)%).
All the results remain economically significant. For example, the probability of buying
lottery-type assets via smartphone increase by 3.2 pp, or 26.7% of the unconditional mean
for smartphone users (12%).
   Although investors do not use smartphones more frequently than other platforms at
specific hours of the day, the effects of smartphones on trading appear mitigated when we
compare trades executed during similar hours (by including trading hour-by-year fixed
effects). This evidence suggests that the effects of smartphones might vary across different
hours of the day. We directly test this hypothesis by rerunning our main specifications
separately for trades during market-hours (9am to 5pm) vs. trades during after-hours
(5pm to 10pm). We define the after-hour window based on the fact that local German
market makers allow investors to trade between 5pm and 10pm, even if national stock
exchanges are closed. We report the results of this analysis in table 10. The effects of
smartphones vs. other trading platforms are significantly stronger during after-hours
(panel B) as compared to market-hours (panel A). Averaging across all outcomes, our
estimates are 80% higher during after-hours, ranging from a 27% increase for skewness of
assets purchased to a 175% increase for the probability of buying lottery stocks.


                                            21
   Stronger effects during after-hours are consistent with smartphones facilitating trades
based more on system 1 thinking (Kahneman,2011). During after-hours, investors are
more likely to be out of the workplace and in more informal locations such at home or
at restaurants. Moreover, later in the day investors are also more prone to the effects of
decision fatigue (Baumeister et al., 1988). For these reasons, investors could be more likely
to rely on the more immediate and automatic system 1 thinking and to avoid system 2
thinking that requires more conscious effort, energy and attention. Smartphones appear
to facilitate or foster this higher reliance on system 1.
   A potential concern with this interpretation of our evidence is that institutional features
could be systematically different when trading during market hours vs. after-hours, when
markets are closed. These different institutional features--and not a higher reliance on
system 1--could drive our results. To help address this concern, we run a falsification
test by estimating smartphone effects in the morning, between 8am and 9am. During this
hour markets are still closed in Germany. Nonetheless, earlier in the morning investors
are less likely to be in more relaxed environments and should not suffer decision fatigue.
If institutional features drive our results we would expect to find similar results during
after-hours and this morning hour. Alternatively, if higher reliance on system 1 drives
our results, we would expect stronger smartphone effects during after-hours. Consistent
with this latter interpretation, we document in panel C that smartphone effects are very
similar in the morning hour and in market hours, but weaker than the effects of trades
during after-hours.
   Although investors do not trade via smartphones more frequently at specific hours, the
effects of this new technology are stronger in trades during after-hours, when investors
rely more on system 1 thinking. Collectively, this evidence suggests that hours-of-the-day
effects can contribute to explain, but not fully account for our evidence. That is, even
within the same trading hours, investors are more likely to buy riskier, lottery-type, and


                                              22
hot assets.


5.2    Do investors use smartphones to trade different asset classes?

    Investors could use smartphones to trade specific asset classes. This selection effect
could drive our results. We test for this possibility by including in our main specifications
asset-class-by-year fixed effects. For this analysis, we classify assets into six categories:
individual stocks, bonds, mutual funds, warrants, certificates, and options. While the
economic magnitudes are attenuated, smartphone effects are economically and statistically
significant also in trades within the same asset class, in the same year. For example, the
volatility of the assets purchased increases by 2.5% or 11.4% of the unconditional mean
for smartphone users (22%). Analogously, the probability of buying lottery-type assets
increases by 2.4 pp, or 20.0% of the unconditional mean. Although important, asset-class
effects cannot fully account for our results. Even within the same asset class, investors
when using smartphones are more likely to purchase assets that are riskier, with lottery-
type characteristics, and that have recently performed very well.


5.3    Do digital nudges drive our results?

    Choice architecture and nudges can significantly affect economic decisions, from per-
sonal investments to saving for retirement, from credit cards to mortgages (for a review see
Thaler and Sunstein, 2008). Smartphone apps are very effective in nudging consumers and
changing their consumption and spending behaviors (Levi and Benartzi, 2020; D'Acunto,
Rossi, and Weber, 2020). Analogously, investing apps can influence behaviors by using
push notifications or by giving more salience to specific information. For example, the
      When we run specifications with both hour-of-the-day and asset-class fixed effects, we find smaller but
still economically and statistically significant smartphone effects. We report these results in the Appendix
Table A3.



                                                     23
Robinhood trading app prominently features the winning and losing stocks of the previ-
ous day.     Welch (2020) and Barber et al. (2020) document that Robinhood investors are
more likely to buy top winners and top losers. Thus prominently displaying "top mover"
stocks in the app could contribute to generate these trading patterns. Similarly, in our
setting information displayed in the smartphone app could mechanically generate trades
that favor riskier and lottery-type assets, and past winners.
   To directly test for the effects of digital nudges on our results, we would need to
observe how information is displayed on the mobile apps vs. on other platforms. This
information is only partially available to us.        Therefore, we overcome this data limitation
by running a falsification test. Given that smartphone apps tend to prominently feature
only individual stocks, we investigate if our smartphone effects are present also in other
asset classes such as mutual funds and options. If digital nudges drive our results, we
would expect smartphone effects to be stronger or only present in individual stocks and
weaker or not present at all in the other asset classes.
   Our findings in table 11 document that the inclusion of asset-class-by-year fixed effects
does not fully explain our results. While this evidence is consistent with not one specific
asset class driving our results, we cannot rule out that smartphone effects are stronger in
individual stocks vs. other asset classes. In table 12, we more directly test for these hetero-
geneous effects. In practice, we run our main specifications with investor-by-month fixed
effects separately for different asset classes: individual stocks, mutual funds, and other
classes (certificates, options and warrants). In panel A, we document that smartphone
effects are economically and statistically significant for all our outcomes in trades related
to individual stocks. More importantly, in panel B, we document similarly strong--if
     Under the recent news, Robinhood display the "Top Movers" list which presents the four stocks with
highest absolute return since the market close of the previous day. By clicking on the "Show More" option,
the investors could see an expanded list of the 20 stocks with the largest price movements.
     While we are able to observe the current app for one of the two banks, we don't know the information
display when the app was first introduced and if any meaningful change has happened.


                                                   24
anything stronger--effects for trades in mutual funds. This evidence suggests that digi-
tal nudges, such as saliently featuring winner stocks, are not likely to drive our results.
Evidence from trades in other asset classes such as options and warrants confirm this
interpretation. Although our sample is limited to few thousand observations and only
one of the results (volatility of assets purchased) is statistically significant at the 1% level,
our point estimates are all positive and similar in magnitude to the estimates in other asset
classes.
   Collectively, these findings suggest that digital nudges do not drive the smartphone
effects we document. One could argue that even if these nudges were to mechanically
drive our results, they are features of the smartphone app and, ultimately, just the channel
through which smartphones influence trading behavior. While documenting this chan-
nel would still be interesting, showing that smartphones have effects above and beyond
automatic nudges has more profound implications. First, given that each smartphone
app has specific features and potentially employs different nudges, our results--not being
driven by any specific nudge--are more likely to generalize to smartphone trading apps
in general. Second, the policy implications are starkly different. If digital nudges drive
trading behavior, regulating them could limit the effects of smartphones. Alternatively, if
these nudges are not the only major driver of trading behaviors, any policy intervention
regulating the choice architecture in these apps might not be as effective as hoped.


5.4   Does device screen size drive our results?

   Smartphones have a smaller screen, where information can be more difficult to navigate
and where more prominent features can capture much of the investor attention. This
physical attribute of smartphones can exacerbate existing trading biases or create new
ones (for a review see Benartzi and Lehrer, 2015). Therefore, we test if smartphone smaller
screen size contributes to our results.

                                               25
   For the years 2010 to 2014 for one bank, we can observe if trades occur through
smartphone (iPhone), iPad, or desktop, thus providing variation in the device screen size.
In this analysis, we estimate the effect of smartphones and iPads separately by comparing
them to other platforms.        We report our results in table 13. In panel A we include
individual and year fixed effects, while in panel B we include only year fixed effects. We
do not have enough power to include individual-by-month fixed effects as in our previous
analyses, because such estimates would be based only on those investors who trade in the
same month using at least three platforms, that is a smartphone, an iPad, and a desktop
(or other platform). The estimates in panel A are less restrictive as they use only variation
from those investors who make at least one trade across the three different platforms
anytime during our sample period. Using this specification, we find that both iPhones
and iPads increase the likelihood of buying riskier and lottery-type assets, and trend
chasing. The magnitudes are very similar for risky assets and, possibly, stronger in iPad
trades for lottery-type assets and past winners.
   The estimates in panel A are identified by comparing trades of the same investors
across devices with different screen sizes. Nonetheless, investors that use three different
platforms could be a non-representative sample of the other traders at the two banks. In
other words, gains in terms of identification could come at the expense of external validity
of these results. To address this trade-off, in Panel B we include only year fixed effects
and we exploit both within- and across-individual variation. Consistent with out results
in panel A, we find also in this specification that the effects of iPhones and iPad are very
similar across all our outcome variables.
   Collectively, this evidence suggests that the smaller screen size of smartphones does
not drive our main results. Our findings are consistent with evidence in Liao et al. (2020)
that differences in the devices' physical attributes per se do not drive investor behavior in
   In our main analyses, the smartphone platform included both smartphones and tablets such as iPads.


                                                 26
a peer-to-peer lending platform.


5.5   Are smartphone effects transitory?

    Last, we investigate the dynamics of smartphone effects. Do investors get excited about
this new technology and temporarily change their behavior? Or are smartphone effects
persistent over time? If investors heavily rely on this new technology just in the few
months after the adoption, our estimates might overstate the relevance of smartphone
effects. By relying on investor-by-time fixed effects, our results reflect in fact only trading
behavior in those months when investors actively use smartphones to trade.
    We provide a graphical representation of the results of this analysis in figure 4. We plot
the interaction of the indicator for smartphone trades in equation 1 with indicators for the
quarters after the adoption of smartphone trading. We include in all our specifications
investor-by-month fixed effects. In panel A, we report results for the probability of buying
risky assets. The effects of smartphones are stable from the first quarter of usage up to
quarter nine or afterwards. The effects on volatility (panel B) and skewness of trades
(panel C), and probability of purchasing past winners (panel D) are also stable over time.
    Overall, this evidence suggests that investors' initial excitement or willingness to ex-
periment riskier and more gambling-type trades via smartphones are not driving our
results. The effect of smartphones does not appear to be short-lived and transitory.



6     Conclusion

    Smartphones represent one of the most widely used technologies, with over 250 million
devices in the US alone. Large online brokers report that over 20% of all retail investor
annual trades have been executed using mobile devices and estimate this percentage to



                                              27
double in the next few years.
   Using a novel data set from two large German retail banks, we investigate if and how
smartphones influence investors. Comparing trades done by the same investor in the
same month across different platforms, we document that traders on smartphone buy
more risky assets, chase higher volatility and higher skewness investments, and lottery-
type assets. Moreover, investors are more likely to buy past winners.
   We conduct several additional analyses to better understand the mechanism behind
these results. Although investors are not more likely to use this new technology at specific
hours of the day, smartphone effects are stronger during after-hours. The selection of
specific times of the day or specific asset classes when using smartphones contribute--but
do not fully explain--our results. After using smartphones, investors start buying higher
volatility, higher skewness, more lottery-type assets also in their non-smartphone trades.
This evidence helps to rule out substitution effects across different platforms.
   Collectively, our evidence suggests that investors make more intuitive (system 1-
type) decisions while using smartphones. This tendency leads to increased risk-taking,
gambling-like activity, and more trend chasing. Previous studies have linked these trad-
ing behaviors to lower portfolio efficiency and performance. Therefore, the convenience
of smartphone trading might come at a cost for many retail investors.




    Sources:https://www.statista.com/topics/2711/us-smartphone-market/;
https://www.cnbc.com/2018/11/29/td-ameritrade-sees-more-people-trading-on-their-phones.html


                                              28
References
 [1] Bali, T., D. A. Hirshleifer, L. Peng and Y. Tang. 2019. Attention, Social Interaction, and
     Investor Attraction to Lottery Stocks Working Paper.

 [2] Barber, B. M., and T. Odean. 2002. Online Investors: Do the slow die first? Review of
     Financial Studies 15:455­87.

 [3] Barber, B. M., X. Huang, T. Odean, and C. Schwarz. 2020. Attention Induced Trading
     and Returns: Evidence from Robinhood Users Working Paper.

 [4] Baumeister, R., Bratslavsky,E., Muraven, M., and D. M. Tice. 1988. Ego depletion: Is
     the active self a limited resource? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 74(5):1252­
     1265.

 [5] Benartzi, S. and J. Lehrer. 2015. The Smarter Screen: Surprising Ways to Influence
     and Improve Online Behavior. Penguin Books, New York.

 [6] Benartzi, S. and R. H. Thaler. 1995. Myopic Loss Aversion and the Equity Premium
     Puzzle. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(1),73­92.

 [7] Buchak, G., G. Matvos, T. Piskorski, and A. Seru. 2018. Fintech, Regulatory Arbitrage,
     and the Rise of Shadow Banks. Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

 [8] Cen, X., 2019. Going Mobile, Investor Behavior, and Financial Fragility (December 15,
     2019). Working Paper, Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3312411

 [9] Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, and A. Metrick. 2002. How does the Internet affect trading?
     Evidence from investor behavior in 401(k) plans, Journal of Financial Economics 64:397­
     421.

[10] D'Acunto, F., N. Prabhala and A. Rossi. 2019. The Promises and Pitfalls of Robo-
     Advising The Review of Financial Studies, Forthcoming.

[11] D'Acunto, F., Rossi, A. G., and M. Weber. 2020. Crowdsourcing Peer Informa-
     tion to Change Spending Behavior. Chicago Booth Research Paper No. 19-09, Fama-
     Miller Working Paper, Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3339335 or
     http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3339335

[12] Di Maggio, M., and V. Yao. 2019. FinTech Borrowers: Lax-Screening or Cream-
     Skimming? Working Paper .

[13] Fos, V., N. Hamdi, A. Kalda, and J. Nickerson. 2019. Gig-Labor: Trading Safety Nets
     for Steering Wheels. Working Paper.

[14] Fuster, A., Plosser, M., Schnabl, P. and J. Vickery. 2018. The role of technology in
     mortgage lending. The Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

                                               29
[15] Gargano, A. and A. Rossi. 2018. Does It Pay to Pay Attention?, Review of Financial
     Studies 31,12:4595­4649.

[16] Haigh, M. S. and J. A. List. 2005. Do Professional Traders Exhibit Myopic Loss Aver-
     sion? An Experimental Analysis, Journal of Finance 60,1:523­534.

[17] Jackson, E., 2019. Availability of the gig economy and long run labor supply effects
     for the unemployed, Working Paper.

[18] Kahneman, D., 2003. A perspective on judgement and choice. American Psychologist
     58(9):697­720.

[19] Kahneman, D., 2011. Thinking, Fast and Slow. New York :Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

[20] Koustas, D., 2018, Consumption insurance and multiple jobs: Evidence from
     rideshare drivers. Working Paper.

[21] Kumar, A. 2009. Who Gambles in the Stock Market?, Journal of Finance 64,4:1889­1933.

[22] Levi, Y. and S. Benartzi, 2020. Mind the App: Mobile Access to Finan-
     cial Information and Consumer Behavior. Working Paper, Available at SSRN:
     https://ssrn.com/abstract=3557689 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3557689

[23] Liao, L., Wang, Z., Xiang, J., Yan, H., and J. Yang. 2020. User interface and firsthand
     experience in retail investing. The Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

[24] Loos, B., Previtero, A., Scheurle, S., and A. Hackethal, 2020. Robo-advisers and
     investor behavior. Working Paper.

[25] Linnainmaa, J., B. Melzer, and A. Previtero,. 2020. The Misguided Beliefs of Financial
     Advisors, Journal of Finance forthcoming.

[26] Stanovich, K. E. and R. F. West, 2000. Individual difference in reasoning: Implications
     for the rationality debate?. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 23(5):645­726.

[27] Thaler, R. H., and C. R. Sunstein. 2008. Nudge: Improving decisions about health,
     wealth, and happiness. Yale University Press.

[28] Welch. 2020. Retail Raw: Wisdom of the Robinhood Crowd and the Covid Crisis.
     Working Paper.




                                            30
Figure 1:
Smartphone Usage
This figure plots the fraction of trades that occur over smartphones through time. Panel
A plots this usage for the entire sample while Panel B plots this conditional for investors
who use the smartphone.

                             3
                Percent of SmartPhone Trades
                    1        0       2




                                               2010   2011   2012    2013     2014   2015   2016   2017



                                                                    Panel A
                             20
                Percent of SmartPhone Trades
                5           10
                             0         15




                                               2010   2011   2012    2013     2014   2015   2016   2017



                                                                    Panel B

                                                                      31
Figure 2:
Trading Hour Density
This figure plots density for hour of the day that trade occurs. Panel A plots this for the
sample while Panel B compares this density for phone users versus non-users. Panel C
plots this density for phone users and compares smartphone and non-phone trades.

                      .1
                      .08 .06
                   Density
                .04   .02
                      0




                                0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
                                                      Hours



                                                      Panel A
                      .1
                      .08
                        .06
                  Density
                .04   .02
                      0




                                0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
                                                      Hours

                                                  Non-Users            Phone Users



                                                      Panel B

                                                          32
     .1
     .08.06
  Density
.04  .02
     0




              0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
                                    Hours

                            Non-Phone Trades            Phone Trades



                                    Panel C




                                        33
Figure 3:
Spillover Effects: Dynamics
This figure plots the dynamics of the spillover effects on other trades estimated using
difference-in-differences regressions. The first difference comes from before and after
launch date of smartphone app while the second difference comes from the type of
smartphone an investor owns (e.g. iPhone vs android). Each coefficient represents the
effect of the use of smartphone on risk taking by the same individual on other platforms
for different quarters relative to the launch date of the trading app. The outcome variables
include Probability of purchasing risky assets (panel A), volatility (panel B), skewness
(panel C) of assets purchased, and probability of purchasing top 10 percentile performers
(panel D). The confidence intervals are plotted at 5% levels.
                                   .02
                Probability of Purchasing a Risky Asset
                    -.01            0
                                   -.02        .01




                                                          -8   -7   -6   -5   -4   -3     -2 -1 0 1 2 3              4   5   6   7   8+
                                                                                        Quarters relative to event



                                                                                           Panel A
                                   2
                                   1
                Volatility
                   0               -1
                                   -2




                                                          -8   -7   -6   -5   -4   -3     -2 -1 0 1 2 3              4   5   6   7   8+
                                                                                        Quarters relative to event



                                                                                           Panel B
                6
                4
Skewness
      2         0
                -2
                -4




                                    -8   -7   -6   -5   -4   -3     -2 -1 0 1 2 3              4   5   6   7   8+
                                                                  Quarters relative to event



                                                                     Panel C
                .04
Purchasing Top 10 pctl Performers
 -.02         0 -.04     .02




                                    -8   -7   -6   -5   -4   -3     -2 -1 0 1 2 3              4   5   6   7   8+
                                                                  Quarters relative to event



                                                                     Panel D




                                                                         35
Figure 4:
Dynamics of Smartphone Effects
This figure plots the dynamics of our effects relative to the first use of smartphone. Each
coefficient represents the effect of the use of smartphone on risk taking for different
quarters relative to the first use. The outcome variables include Probability of purchasing
risky assets (panel A), volatility (panel B), skewness (panel C) of assets purchased, and
probability of purchasing top 10 percentile performers (panel D). The confidence intervals
are plotted at 5% levels.
                                  .06
                Probability of Purchasing Risky Assets
                  .02        .03  .01  .04       .05




                                                         1   2     3        4         5        6       7     8   >=9
                                                                 Quarters following first smartphone trade



                                                                            Panel A
                                  12
                                  10
                Volatility
                                  8
                                  6




                                                         1   2     3        4         5        6       7     8   >=9
                                                                 Quarters following first smartphone trade



                                                                            Panel B
                20
                15
Skewness
                10
                5




                                    1   2     3        4         5        6       7     8   >=9
                                            Quarters following first smartphone trade



                                                       Panel C
                .16
Purchasing Top 10 pctl Performers
.08      .1      .12
                .06        .14




                                    1   2     3        4         5        6       7     8   >=9
                                            Quarters following first smartphone trade



                                                       Panel D




                                                           37
Table 1:
Summary Stats
This table reports the summary statistics of variables used in our analysis.



                                                 Mean    Std.Dev.    p25     Median   p75
 Smartphone                                       0.02    0.15       0.00     0.00    0.00
 Prob of Purchasing Risky Assets                  0.93    0.23       1.00     1.00    1.00
 Volatility of Assets Purchased                  17.27    13.14      8.71     13.70   21.32
 Skewness of Assets Purchased                    -7.92    55.56     -38.64    -7.46   24.16
 Prob of Purchasing Lottery type Assets           0.07    0.23       0.00     0.00    0.00
 Prob of Purchasing Top 50 pctl performers       0.68     0.40       0.38     1.00    1.00
 Prob of Purchasing Top 40 pctl performers       0.61     0.42       0.00     0.75    1.00
 Prob of Purchasing Top 30 pctl performers       0.46     0.42       0.00     0.50    1.00
 Prob of Purchasing Top 20 pctl performers       0.29     0.38       0.00     0.00    0.50
 Prob of Purchasing Top 10 pctl performers       0.11     0.27       0.00     0.00    0.00
 Risk Categories of Assets Purchased              3.99     0.72      3.50      4.00   4.50
 Prob of Purchasing a Warrant                     0.09    0.26       0.00     0.00    0.00
 Prob of Purchasing a Certificate                 0.03    0.16       0.00     0.00    0.00




                                            38
Table 2:
Who uses Smartphones?
This table compares investors who used smartphones to trade to those who never used
smartphones to trade.


                                       Panel A

                                                Phone Users           Non Users
                                               Mean   Median         Mean  Median
 Avg No of Trades per Month                     10.01       3.00       5.32       2.00
 Avg Value of Trades                          4,477.11   1,895.00   3,812.90   1,000.00
 Prob of Purchasing Risky Assets                 0.95       1.00       0.92       1.00
 Volatility of Assets Purchased                 22.01      17.78      16.52      13.13
 Skewness of Assets Purchased                   -5.61      -5.09      -9.02      -8.48
 Prob of Purchasing Lottery type Assets          0.12       0.00       0.07       0.00
 Prob of Purchasing Top 10 pctl performers       0.17       0.00       0.10       0.00
 Risk Categories of Assets Purchased             4.12       4.00       3.97       4.00
 Prob of Purchasing a Warrant                    0.19       0.00       0.07       0.00
 Prob of Purchasing a Certificate                0.04       0.00       0.03       0.00


                                       Panel B

                                       Phone Users         Non Users
                                      Mean Median         Mean Median
              Income Bin [20k,60k)    0.60        1.00     0.60      1.00
              Income Bin [60k,100k)   0.32        0.00     0.32      0.00
              Income Bin [>=100k]     0.09        0.00     0.08      0.00
              Wealth Bin [20k,60k)     0.75       1.00    0.80      1.00
              Wealth Bin [60k,100k)    0.09       0.00    0.08      0.00
              Wealth Bin [>=100k]      0.17       0.00    0.12      0.00
              Years since Member       8.71       9.32    9.82      9.32
              Age                     44.85      45.00    52.61     52.00
              Female                  0.05        0.00    0.18      0.00




                                         39
Table 3:
Probability of Purchasing Risky Assets
This table reports estimates of the regressions that examine the effect of the use of smart-
phones on risk taking as measured by the probability of purchasing risky assets. Each
observation corresponds to individual x month x trading device level where trading
device has been categorized into two groups - smartphone and all other devices. All
outcome variables are aggregated from the trade-level data to the observation-level as
average values and different columns include different fixed effects as indicated. Standard
errors are double-clustered at individual and month level, and t-statistics are reported in
parentheses. *, ** and *** represent significance at 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.


                                      Probability of Purchasing Risky Assets
                                        (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)
            Smartphone                 0.05       0.02      0.03      0.04
                                       (20.22)    (13.07)   (15.54)   (17.73)
            Individual FE               No          Yes       No        No
            Year FE                     No          Yes       No        No
            Individual x Year FE        No          No        Yes       No
            Individual x Month FE       No          No        No        Yes

            Observations              1595097     1575443   1524956   636922
             2                         0.001       0.684     0.670     0.499




                                             40
Table 4:
Volatility of Assets Purchased
This table reports estimates of the regressions that examine the effect of the use of smart-
phones on risk taking as measured by the volatility of purchased assets calculated using 12-
month rolling window as annualized standard deviation. Each observation corresponds
to individual x month x trading device level where trading device has been categorized
into two groups - smartphone and all other devices. All outcome variables are aggregated
from the trade-level data to the observation-level as average values and different columns
include different fixed effects as indicated. Standard errors are double-clustered at indi-
vidual and month level, and t-statistics are reported in parentheses. *, ** and *** represent
significance at 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.


                                           Volatility of Assets Purchased
                                         (1)        (2)        (3)      (4)
            Smartphone                 12.07       4.43      6.66      9.28
                                       (10.62)     (10.00)   (16.05)   (12.19)
            Individual FE                No          Yes       No        No
            Year FE                      No          Yes       No        No
            Individual x Year FE         No          No        Yes       No
            Individual x Month FE        No          No        No        Yes

            Observations              2326852      2309186   2270342   1320533
              2                        0.012        0.633     0.560     0.479




                                              41
Table 5:
Skewness of Assets Purchased
This table reports estimates of the regressions that examine the effect of the use of smart-
phones on risk taking as measured by the skewness of purchased assets calculated using
12-month rolling window. Each observation corresponds to individual x month x trading
device level where trading device has been categorized into two groups - smartphone and
all other devices. All outcome variables are aggregated from the trade-level data to the
observation-level as average values and different columns include different fixed effects
as indicated. Standard errors are double-clustered at individual and month level, and
t-statistics are reported in parentheses. *, ** and *** represent significance at 10%, 5% and
1% level, respectively.


                                           Skewness of Assets Purchased
                                         (1)      (2)        (3)      (4)
            Smartphone                 19.23        5.13     10.19     14.40
                                        (3.67)      (2.81)    (4.90)    (3.71)
            Individual FE                No          Yes       No        No
            Year FE                      No          Yes       No        No
            Individual x Year FE         No          No        Yes       No
            Individual x Month FE        No          No        No        Yes
            Observations              2326695      2309032   2270186   1320331
              2                        0.002        0.281     0.392     0.503




                                              42
Table 6:
Probability of Purchasing Lottery type Assets
This table reports estimates of the regressions that examine the effect of the use of smart-
phones on risk taking as measured by the probability of purchasing assets with below
median prices but above median volatility and skewness. Each observation corresponds
to individual x month x trading device level where trading device has been categorized
into two groups - smartphone and all other devices. All outcome variables are aggregated
from the trade-level data to the observation-level as average values and different columns
include different fixed effects as indicated. Standard errors are double-clustered at indi-
vidual and month level, and t-statistics are reported in parentheses. *, ** and *** represent
significance at 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.


                                      Prob of Purchasing Lottery Type Assets
                                        (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)
           Smartphone                  0.10       0.03      0.05       0.08
                                       (7.32)     (7.53)    (10.72)    (12.93)
           Individual FE                No          Yes       No         No
           Year FE                      No          Yes       No         No
           Individual x Year FE         No          No        Yes        No
           Individual x Month FE        No          No        No         Yes
           Observations               2361188     2343582   2305258   1362141
             2                         0.003       0.331     0.379     0.497




                                             43
Table 7:
Trend Chasing
This table reports estimates of the regressions that examine the effect of the use of smart-
phones on trend chasing. The outcome variable is the probability of purchasing an asset
that belongs to the top decile based on past 12-month performance. Each observation
corresponds to individual x month x trading device level where trading device has been
categorized into two groups - smartphone and all other devices. All outcome variables
are aggregated from the trade-level data to the observation-level as average values and
different columns include different fixed effects as indicated. Standard errors are double-
clustered at individual and month level, and t-statistics are reported in parentheses. *, **
and *** represent significance at 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.


                                    Prob of Purchasing Top 10 Pctl Performers
                                      (1)       (2)       (3)          (4)
          Smartphone                0.164          0.059     0.086     0.120
                                     (7.12)         (5.68)    (7.59)    (8.52)
          Individual FE                No           Yes        No        No
          Year FE                      No           Yes        No        No
          Individual x Year FE         No            No        Yes       No
          Individual x Month FE        No            No        No        Yes
          Observations              2313256    2295587       2256415   1304401
            2                        0.005      0.357         0.412     0.497




                                              44
Table 8:
Spillover Effects on Other Trades
This table reports estimates of difference-in-differences regressions that examine the as-
sociation between the use of smartphones and riskiness of assets traded by the same
individual on other platforms. The outcome variables include probability of purchasing a
risky assets, volatility of purchased assets, skewness of purchased assets and probability
of purchasing lottery type assets. Each observation corresponds to individual x month
level and captures average risk taking on devices other than smartphones. Panel A con-
siders the first time an individual uses smartphone app as the event date, while Panel B
considers the launch date of trading app for different smartphone operating systems as
the event date. Standard errors are double-clustered at individual and month level, and
t-statistics are reported in parentheses. *, ** and *** represent significance at 10%, 5% and
1% level, respectively.


                                          Panel A

                      Risky Asset    Volatility     Skewness     Lottery Type   Top 10 Pctl
                                                                    Asset       Performers
                           (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)
  Smartphone Use         0.002         0.529         4.787         0.005          0.005
                         (1.37)         (5.75)        (9.44)        (2.64)        (1.78)
  Individual FE           Yes           Yes            No            Yes           Yes
  Month FE                Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
  Observations           302278        427665        428285        287169         279971
       2                  0.507         0.540         0.093         0.306          0.331



                                           Panel B

                         Risky Asset    Volatility    Skewness     Lottery Type   Top 10 Pctl
                                                                      Asset       Performers
                             (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)
 Smartphone Launch         0.006          0.094        3.978          0.003          0.002
                           (2.07)         (0.47)        (5.01)        (1.93)         (1.32)
 Individual FE               Yes           Yes           No            Yes            Yes
 Month FE                    Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 Observations              186165        248031        248324         154865        149743
   2                        0.478         0.496         0.090          0.287         0.314


                                               45
Table 9:
Trading Hours
This table reports estimates of the regressions that examine the effect of the use of smart-
phones on risk taking and trend chasing within the same trading hour. The outcome
variables include probability of purchasing a risky assets, volatility of purchased assets,
skewness of purchased assets and probability of purchasing lottery type assets. Standard
errors are double-clustered at individual and month level, and t-statistics are reported in
parentheses. *, ** and *** represent significance at 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.


                            Risky Asset   Volatility   Skewness   Lottery Type    Top 10 Pctl
                                                                     Asset        Performers
                                (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)            (5)
 Smartphone                   0.014        3.475        7.573        0.032          0.046
                               (4.58)       (9.23)       (5.84)       (5.27)         (5.63)
 Individual x Month FE          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes
 Trading Hour x Year FE         Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes
 Observations                  33689        48879       48865         51441          47873
  2                            0.547        0.630       0.565         0.580          0.583




                                            46
Table 10:
Trading During Market Hours vs. After-hours
This table reports estimates of the regressions that examine how the effect of the use
of smartphones on risk taking varies with trading hours. The outcome variables in-
clude probability of purchasing a risky assets, volatility of purchased assets, skewness of
purchased assets and probability of purchasing lottery type assets. Standard errors are
double-clustered at individual and month level, and t-statistics are reported in parenthe-
ses. *, ** and *** represent significance at 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively. Different
panels represent different times of the day.


                                 Panel A: Market Hours

                          Risky Asset      Volatility   Skewness   Lottery Type Top 10 Pctl
                                                                      Asset     Performers
                               (1)            (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)
 Smartphone                  0.013          2.478        6.915       0.025         0.016
                              (2.87)         (5.75)       (4.79)      (3.67)       (1.99)
 Individual x Month FE         Yes            Yes           Yes        Yes          Yes
 Observations                 22385         29801        32550        31804        29037
  2                           0.546         0.584        0.543        0.556        0.557

                                     Panel B: After-hours

                          Risky Asset      Volatility   Skewness   Lottery Type Top 10 Pctl
                                                                      Asset     Performers
                               (1)            (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)
 Smartphone                  0.025          4.237        8.750       0.037         0.044
                              (3.16)         (6.00)       (4.10)     (2.51)        (2.30)
 Individual x Month FE         Yes            Yes           Yes        Yes          Yes
 Observations                 7401           9698        11662        10337        9414
  2                           0.528          0.612       0.546        0.575        0.561

                                 Panel C: Morning Hour

                          Risky Asset      Volatility   Skewness   Lottery Type Top 10 Pctl
                                                                      Asset     Performers
                               (1)            (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)
 Smartphone                   0.008         3.124        7.021        0.033       0.019
                              (1.37)         (6.29)       (3.80)      (1.62)       (3.61)
 Individual x Month FE         Yes            Yes           Yes        Yes          Yes
 Observations                 1370           2658         3240        2758         2602
  2                           0.510          0.622        0.582       0.557        0.580
Table 11:
Choice of Asset Classes
This table reports estimates of the regressions that examine the effect of the use of smart-
phones on risk taking and trend chasing within the same asset class. Assets can belong
to six different asset classes namely stocks, bonds, funds, warrants, certificates and option
bonds that could be converted to stocks. The outcome variables include probability of
purchasing a risky assets, volatility of purchased assets, skewness of purchased assets
and probability of purchasing lottery type assets. Each observation corresponds to indi-
vidual x month x trading device level where trading device has been categorized into two
groups - smartphone and all other devices. All outcome variables are aggregated from the
trade-level data to the observation-level as average values and different columns include
different fixed effects as indicated. Standard errors are double-clustered at individual and
month level, and t-statistics are reported in parentheses. *, ** and *** represent significance
at 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.


                            Risky Asset    Volatility   Skewness    Lottery Type Top 10 Pctl
                                                                       Asset     Performers
                                 (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)         (5)
 Smartphone                    0.004        2.536        3.146         0.024          0.027
                               (1.46)       (13.80)       (3.96)        (6.01)         (5.90)
 Individual x Month FE          Yes           Yes         Yes            Yes            Yes
 Asset Class x Year FE          Yes           Yes         Yes            Yes            Yes
 Observations                 636922       1304450      1304252       1344679         1289764
  2                            0.652        0.722        0.579         0.555           0.576




                                              48
Table 12:
Digital Nudges
This table reports estimates of the regressions that examine the effect of the use of smart-
phones on risk taking as measured by volatility, skewness and probability of purchasing
lottery-type stocks within different asset classes. Each observation corresponds to indi-
vidual x month x trading device level where trading device has been categorized into two
groups - smartphone and all other devices. All outcome variables are aggregated from the
trade-level data to the observation-level as average values and different columns include
different fixed effects as indicated. Standard errors are double-clustered at individual and
month level, and t-statistics are reported in parentheses. *, ** and *** represent significance
at 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.


                                 Panel A: Individual Stocks

                                 Volatility   Skewness    Lottery Type Top 10 Pctl
                                                             Asset     Performers
                                     (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)
      Smartphone                  1.531        3.085          0.009          0.017
                                   (5.67)       (3.32)        (1.66)         (2.38)
      Individual x Month FE         Yes            Yes         Yes             Yes
      Observations                 140755      140737         142296         138810
        2                           0.520       0.514          0.519          0.522


                                   Panel B: Mutual Funds

                                 Volatility   Skewness    Lottery Type Top 10 Pctl
                                                             Asset     Performers
                                     (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)
      Smartphone                  3.810        9.477          0.079          0.056
                                  (10.80)       (3.37)         (7.36)         (5.81)
      Individual x Month FE         Yes            Yes         Yes             Yes
      Observations                 456742      456720         457271         454062
        2                           0.499       0.494          0.503          0.501




                                              49
               Panel C: Certificates, Options & Warrants

                        Volatility   Skewness   Lottery Type Top 10 Pctl
                                                   Asset     Performers
                           (1)            (2)        (3)         (4)
smartphone               4.201        7.056        0.022        0.031
                          (2.68)      (1.56)       (0.98)       (0.91)
Individual x Month FE      Yes            Yes       Yes          Yes
Observations              2525        2521         4274         2475
 2                        0.562       0.551        0.556        0.566




                                     50
Table 13:
Device Screen Size
This table reports estimates of the regressions that examine the effect of the use of smart-
phones and iPad on risk taking. The outcome variables include probability of purchasing
a risky assets, volatility of purchased assets, skewness of purchased assets and probability
of purchasing lottery type assets. Each observation corresponds to individual x month x
trading device level where trading device has been categorized into two groups - smart-
phone and all other devices. All outcome variables are aggregated from the trade-level
data to the observation-level as average values and different columns include different
fixed effects as indicated. Standard errors are double-clustered at individual and month
level, and t-statistics are reported in parentheses. *, ** and *** represent significance at
10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.


                          Panel A: Within-Individual Variation

                     Risky Asset   Volatility   Skewness   Lottery Type Top 10 Pctl
                                                              Asset     Performers
                         (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)
    Smartphone         0.018        2.819        7.792        0.026          0.035
                        (4.66)       (6.86)       (4.86)       (3.34)         (3.15)
    iPad               0.015        2.999       15.502        0.055          0.048
                       (2.45)        (4.35)      (5.30)        (4.70)         (2.75)
    Individual FE        Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes
    Year FE              Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes
    Observations        18295        23241       23237         24193          23007
      2                 0.519        0.460       0.225         0.248          0.284



                     Panel B: Within- & Across- Individual Variation

                    Risky Asset    Volatility   Skewness   Lottery Type Top 10 Pctl
                                                              Asset     Performers
                         (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)         (5)
    Smartphone         0.031        4.842       11.435        0.039          0.071
                        (6.89)       (6.03)      (4.52)        (3.55)         (3.76)
    iPad               0.017        3.192       16.554        0.051          0.056
                       (2.17)        (2.91)      (4.91)        (3.36)         (2.90)
    Year FE              Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes
    Observations       18379         23311       23307         24255          23078
      2                0.005         0.088       0.031         0.011          0.009
 Smart(Phone) Investing?
Appendix for Online Publication




              52
Figure A1:
Trading Hour Density
This figure plots density for hour of the day that trade occurs by different asset classes.




                      .15
                      .1
                Density
                      .05
                      0




                            0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
                                                  Hours

                                               Stocks                Bonds
                                               Funds                 Warrants
                                               Certificates




                                                      53
Table A1:
Riskiness of Assets Purchased
This table reports estimates of the regressions that examine the effect of the use of smart-
phones on risk taking as measured by measured by the risk categories assigned by the
banks (which classify all assets into five risk categories). Each observation corresponds
to individual x month x trading device level where trading device has been categorized
into two groups - smartphone and all other devices. All outcome variables are aggregated
from the trade-level data to the observation-level as average values and different columns
include different fixed effects as indicated. Standard errors are double-clustered at indi-
vidual and month level, and t-statistics are reported in parentheses. *, ** and *** represent
significance at 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.


                                        Risk Categories of Assets Purchased
                                         (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)
            Smartphone                 0.248       0.049     0.098     0.163
                                       (16.02)      (7.59)   (11.89)   (14.32)
            Individual FE                No          Yes       No        No
            Year FE                      No          Yes       No        No
            Individual x Year FE         No          No        Yes       No
            Individual x Month FE        No          No        No        Yes
            Observations              2551671      2535135   2500436   1610230
              2                        0.002        0.567     0.548     0.501




                                              54
Table A2:
Probability of Purchasing Warrants/Certificates
This table reports estimates of the regressions that examine the effect of the use of smart-
phones on risk taking as measured by the probability of purchasing warrants/certificates.
The outcome variable for Panel A (B) includes the probability of purchasing warrants
(certificates). Each observation corresponds to individual x month x trading device level
where trading device has been categorized into two groups - smartphone and all other
devices. All outcome variables are aggregated from the trade-level data to the observation-
level as average values and different columns include different fixed effects as indicated.
Standard errors are double-clustered at individual and month level, and t-statistics are
reported in parentheses. *, ** and *** represent significance at 10%, 5% and 1% level,
respectively.

                                         Panel A
                                       Probability of Purchasing a Warrant
                                        (1)        (2)      (3)       (4)
            Smartphone                 0.16         0.03     0.07      0.12
                                       (5.01)       (3.98)   (9.35)    (8.13)
            Individual FE                No          Yes       No        No
            Year FE                      No          Yes       No        No
            Individual x Year FE         No          No        Yes       No
            Individual x Month FE        No          No        No        Yes
            Observations              2589595      2573148   2539461   1657381
              2                        0.007        0.689     0.597     0.493

                                          Panel B

                                      Probability of Purchasing a Certificate
                                        (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)
            Smartphone                  0.02        0.01      0.01      0.01
                                       (2.04)       (3.25)    (2.57)    (2.19)
            Individual FE                No          Yes       No        No
            Year FE                      No          Yes       No        No
            Individual x Year FE         No          No        Yes       No
            Individual x Month FE        No          No        No        Yes
            Observations              2589595      2573148   2539461   1657381
              2                        0.000        0.468     0.502     0.505

                                              55
Table A3:
Choice of Trading Hours & Asset Classes
This table reports estimates of the regressions that examine the effect of the use of smart-
phones on risk taking and trend chasing within the same trading hour and asset class.
Assets can belong to six different asset classes namely stocks, bonds, funds, warrants,
certificates and option bonds that could be converted to stocks. The outcome variables
include probability of purchasing a risky assets, volatility of purchased assets, skewness
of purchased assets and probability of purchasing lottery type assets. Each observation
corresponds to individual x month x trading device level where trading device has been
categorized into two groups - smartphone and all other devices. All outcome variables
are aggregated from the trade-level data to the observation-level as average values and
different columns include different fixed effects as indicated. Standard errors are double-
clustered at individual and month level, and t-statistics are reported in parentheses. *, **
and *** represent significance at 10%, 5% and 1% level, respectively.


                            Risky Asset   Volatility   Skewness   Lottery Type    Top 10 Pctl
                                                                     Asset        Performers
                                (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)            (5)
 Smartphone                    0.001       1.344        3.522        0.017           0.014
                               (0.23)       (4.80)       (2.98)       (2.98)         (1.85)
 Individual x Month FE          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes
 Asset Class x
 Trading Hour x Year FE         Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes
 Observations                  33642        48671       48657         51235          47665
  2                            0.805        0.708       0.609         0.600          0.614




                                            56
