                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                ROBUST FINANCIAL CONTRACTING AND INVESTMENT

                                           Aifan Ling
                                          Jianjun Miao
                                           Neng Wang

                                       Working Paper 28367
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28367


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2021




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Aifan Ling, Jianjun Miao, and Neng Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Robust Financial Contracting and Investment
Aifan Ling, Jianjun Miao, and Neng Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 28367
January 2021
JEL No. D81,E22,G12,G32,J33

                                          ABSTRACT

We study how investors' preferences for robustness influence corporate investment, financing,
and compensation decisions and valuation in a financial contracting model with agency. We
characterize the robust contract and show that early liquidation can be optimal when investors are
sufficiently ambiguity averse. We implement the robust contract by debt, equity, cash, and a
financial derivative asset. The derivative is used to hedge against the investors' concern that the
entrepreneur may be overly optimistic. Our calibrated model generates sizable equity premium
and credit spread, and implies that ambiguity aversion lowers Tobin's q; the average investment,
and investment volatility. The entrepreneur values the project at an internal rate of return of 3.5%
per annum higher than investors do.

Aifan Ling                                               Neng Wang
School of Finance                                        Columbia Business School
Jiangxi University of Finance & Economics                3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 812
Nanchang 330013                                          New York, NY 10027
China                                                    and NBER
aifanling@jxufe.edu.cn                                   nw2128@columbia.edu

Jianjun Miao
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
miaoj@bu.edu
1        Introduction

In standard corporate finance models, the entrepreneur and investors are endowed with the same
belief about the venture's productivity. In reality and entrepreneurial finance cases analyzed in
MBA classrooms, the entrepreneur and investors rarely agree on the venture's cash-flow projection,
as "unknown unknowns" are common for early-stage entrepreneurial firms. Early-stage ventures
may be in uncharted waters with very limited data that investors and the entrepreneur can use
to form their beliefs. Being concerned about the entrepreneur's productivity model, investors are
ambiguity averse and want their decision rules to be robust against potentially misspecified models.1
        In this paper, we study how investors's preferences for robustness influence corporate (invest-
ment, financing, payout, compensation, and liquidation) decisions and valuation by adopting the
approach of Hansen and Sargent (2001, 2008) in the dynamic contracting model of DeMarzo, Fish-
man, He, and Wang (2012), henceforth, DFHW (2012). Our formulation is highly tractable yet
rich enough for us to analyze how investors' ambiguity aversion influences corporate decisions and
valuation in a dynamic agency framework from both conceptual and quantitative perspectives.
        In our model, a risk-neutral entrepreneur has an exclusive access to a productive venture with
an initial capital stock but is financially constrained. The entrepreneur's talent (skill) is described
by a stochastic productivity model. Following Hayashi (1982) and the q -theory literature, we model
the firm's production technology via standard investment dynamics and capital adjustment costs.
        The entrepreneur needs to raise start-up funds from outside risk-neutral investors by writing a
long-term contract, which specifies state-contingent on-going financing, investment, compensation,
payout, and liquidation policies. After the venture is launched, the entrepreneur continuously
chooses his hidden effort level, which affects the venture's expected productivity. As in DeMarzo
and Sannikov (2006), Biais, Mariotti, Plantin, and Rochet (henceforth, BMPR) (2007), DeMarzo
and Fishman (2007a), DFHW (2012), and Miao and Rivera (2016), the entrepreneur must be
incentivized to exert the appropriate effort levels over time. Alternatively, we can interpret the
agency problem as one in which the agent can divert output for his private benefit.
        Unlike DFHW (2012), the investors in our model do not fully trust the entrepreneur's produc-
tivity model. We build on the multiplier preferences proposed by Hansen and Sargent (2001) to
model the investors' objective by scaling the entropy penalty cost by a size-dependent process. This
    1
    Knight (1921) is perhaps the first to point out the difference between risk (known unknowns) and uncertainty
(unknown unknowns). Model uncertainty or ambiguity is often referred to as Knightian uncertainty. The Ellsberg
paradox (Ellsberg (1961)) and the related experimental evidence demonstrate that people are typically averse to
ambiguity. Hansen and Sargent (2001, 2008) interpret decision under ambiguity as robust decision. We adopt both
interpretations interchangeably in this paper.



                                                       1
generalization allows us to focus on economically interesting cases where the investors' concerns
for the entrepreneur's productivity model are always economically relevant regardless of firm size.
The investors design a robust dynamic contract that maximizes their payoffs taking both their
ambiguity aversion and the agency problem into account.
   While the entrepreneur is confident about his model, investors view the entrepreneur's produc-
tivity model as an approximation to the unknown true model and form their own beliefs endoge-
nously based on the venture's performance and their own degree of ambiguity aversion (preferences
for robustness). The robust contract generates endogenous differences in beliefs: investors are pes-
simistic relative to the entrepreneur. Moreover, the risk-neutral investors behave as if they were
endogenously risk averse for both agency and robustness reasons.
   In our dynamic setting, the belief wedge between the entrepreneur and investors varies over time
in response to the venture's performance. This wedge is captured by the change in the drift of the
Brownian motion process, which can also be interpreted as the market price of model uncertainty
(Anderson, Hansen, and Sargent (2003)). It directly influences optimal pay-performance sensitivity
(PPS) and generates interesting asset-pricing implications for equity premium and credit spread.
   As in other dynamic contracting models, the entrepreneur's continuation value is forward looking
and also history keeping. As in DFHW (2012), the continuation value scaled by the firm's capital
stock is the effective state variable. We show that, following good performances, the entrepreneur's
scaled continuation value increases, the belief wedge decreases, and investors' endogenous risk
aversion also decreases.
   We find that the PPS in our model is a function of the entrepreneur's scaled continuation value
depending on both agency and investors' preferences for robustness­ this is in sharp contrast to the
standard rational-expectations agency models, where the PPS is solely determined by the binding
incentive constraint. Similar to Miao and Rivera (2016), we find that there are two endogenously
determined regions for the PPS depending on whether the entrepreneur has done sufficiently well
in the past, i.e., whether his scaled continuation value exceeds an endogenous cutoff value.
   When the entrepreneur's scaled continuation value exceeds the cutoff, investors sufficiently
trust the entrepreneur's model. Both the PPS and corporate investment increase with the scaled
continuation value. Additionally, the incentive constraint does not bind. The optimal PPS takes
a form resembling Merton's (1971) optimal portfolio rule. In particular, it increases with the
market price of model uncertainty and decreases with investors' endogenous risk aversion and
productivity volatility. As endogenous risk aversion decreases at a rate faster than the market
price of uncertainty, the optimal PPS increases with the scaled continuation value.


                                                 2
       When the scaled continuation value is below the endogenous cutoff, both investors' endogenous
risk aversion and the belief wedge are sufficiently large. Investors want to significantly reduce
their risk exposure but still have to induce the entrepreneur to exert effort. In this case, the
agency problem dominates investors' concerns for the entrepreneur's model, causing the incentive
constraint to bind as in the standard contracting models under rational expectations.
       A striking result of our paper is that early liquidation can be optimal and occurs when investors
lose confidence in the entrepreneur and the belief wedge is sufficiently large. In this case, investors
voluntarily terminate the long-term contract with the entrepreneur even doing so yields a higher
payoff to the entrepreneur than his outside option value. In reality, investors protect themselves
against the entrepreneur's persistent poor performances with various protective measures, e.g.,
liquidation preferences and anti-dilution protection in venture capital (VC) term sheets.2 Our
early liquidation result is in sharp contrast with rational-expectations contracting models, e.g.,
DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006) and DFHW (2012), where investors fully trust the entrepreneur's
model and liquidation is inefficient. In Miao and Rivera (2016), early liquidation does not take
place either.
       Our model's dynamic predictions are broadly consistent with VC contracting evidence docu-
mented by Kaplan and Str¨
                        omberg (2003), who find that entrepreneur has stronger control rights
when the firm performs well, while the investors have greater control over the project following a
sequence of weak performances. Our explanation based on model uncertainty complements that
advocated by the incomplete contracting literature (e.g., Aghion and Bolton (1992)).
       We then implement the optimal contract by using debt, equity, cash, and a financial derivative,
whose payoff is determined by the venture's productivity shocks. The key and novel component
of our optimal security design is the time-varying demand for the derivative asset. This seemingly
speculative demand arises from investors' concern for the entrepreneur's productivity model and
is optimal for the venture. As the venture's performance improves, the entrepreneur's stake in the
venture increases, its cash (financial slack) increases, investors becomes less pessimistic, the agency
problem weakens, and corporate investment increases. Since in equilibrium the entrepreneur is
more optimistic than investors about the venture's productivity, investors also optimally increase
the venture's exposure to its own risk by increasing its long position in the derivative asset and the
cumulative gains/losses contribute partly to finance future compensation to the entrepreneur.
       We calibrate our model and quantify the implications of investors' concern about the en-
   2
    Kaplan and Str¨  omberg (2003) and Metrick and Yasuda (2010) describe and analyze the economics of VC con-
tracting term sheets. Admati and Pfleiderer (1994) develop a model that shows the value of inside investors, such as
venture capitalists, in resolving agency conflicts that arise in a multistage financial contracting problem.


                                                         3
trepreneur's model for investment, compensation, and valuation (e.g., Tobin's average q , equity
premium, and credit spreads). We find that quantitative effects are significant based on plausible
parameter values in DFHW (2012). The only new parameter in our model is the entropy penalty
parameter  that measures ambiguity aversion or concerns for robustness. We calibrate  using the
detection error probability methodology advocated by Anderson, Hansen, and Sargent (2003), and
Hansen and Sargent (2008). We find that the mean of Tobin's q is 1.10 for our calibrated robustness
model, which is 12% lower than the value (1.25) in DFHW (2012), and that the payout boundary
is 1.12, which is more than 2.5 times the value (0.43) in DFHW (2012). The average investment
rate and investment volatility in our model are respectively 3.5 and 0.2 percentage points lower
than those in DFHW (2012). Moreover, the annual equity premium is 3.8%, even though investors
are risk neutral, compared to zero equity premium in DFHW (2012). In sum, although moments
matching is not our main goal in this paper, we show that our parsimonious model presents a
plausible economic mechanism that generates quantitative predictions in the right direction.
   Our model also predicts that the equity premium and credit spread decrease with the level of
investment and Tobin's average q. In this sense our model generates value premium, provides a
framework to generate empirically observed relation between the investment and asset returns in
asset markets (see, e.g., Zhang (2005) and Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015)).
   Finally, we use our model to shed light on a key valuation issue widely discussed in the VC
community and also in MBA Entrepreneurial Finance classes: Why the internal rates of returns
(IRRs) that VCs use to value projects are so high relative to the standard cost of capital calcula-
tions that we use to make capital-budgeting decisions? Our model offers one explanation. Rather
than discouraging and trying to convince the entrepreneur and expressing their concerns for the
entrepreneur's productivity model, investors can simply use the entrepreneur's belief model when
quoting the cost of capital for the project to the entrepreneur. Doing so, the VCs achieves the same
goal without making the entrepreneur feel that they do not trust the entrepreneur's productivity
model. For our baseline calibration, our model predicts that the entrepreneur values the project at
an annualized IRR that is 3.5% higher than investors do. These predictions are consistent with the
empirical evidence documented by Malmendier and Tate (2005), who find that overconfident man-
agers overestimate the returns to their investment projects and curtail investment when external
funds are used. But our interpretation is different from Malmendier and Tate (2005). In our model
the entrepreneur behaves as if he were more optimistic than investors because of investors' prefer-
ences for robustness. Landier and Thesmar (2008) study the effects of entrepreneurial optimism on
financial contracting.


                                                 4
Related literature.       Our paper builds on the dynamic moral hazard/contracting literature in
finance, e.g., DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006), DeMarzo and Fishman (2007a, 2007b), BMPR (2007),
Sannikov (2008), Biais, Mariotti, Rochet, and Villeneuve (2010), Williams (2009, 2011), DFHW
(2012), and Ai and Bhandari (2020), among others.3 Recently, there has been a growing interest
in introducing robustness and model uncertainty/ambiguity to this literature.
      Two approaches are widely used to model decision making under ambiguity in a continuous-
time setup. One approach advocated by Chen and Epstein (2002) builds on the static maxmin
expected utility model of Gilboa and Schmeidler (1989). Using this approach, Szydlowski and
Yoon (2020) study a continuous-time contracting problem where the principal is ambiguity averse
about the effort cost and Dumav (2017) studies a problem where both the principal and the agent
are ambiguity averse. Dicks and Fulghieri (2020b) study a continuous-time contracting model
within organizations, where the principal designs contracts with multiple agents who are exposed
to multiple sources of uncertainty.
      The other approach is based on the robust control or multiplier preference model of Hansen and
Sargent (2001, 2008). Adopting this approach, Miao and Rivera (2016) introduce the investors'
concern for the entrepreneur's model uncertainty into a financial contracting problem based on
DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006). Liu (2020) also adopts this approach in a contracting model with
investment, where the principal is ambiguity averse, but the agent is risk averse.
      Our paper differs from Miao and Rivera (2016) and other aforementioned papers in three ways.
First, we incorporate real investment decisions, calibrate our model, and generate quantitative
predictions on corporate investment and Tobin's average q . Second, we show that it can be optimal
for the firm to terminate the long-term contract early when the investors are sufficiently ambiguity
averse. Upon early liquidation the investors make a lump-sum transfer payment to the entrepreneur
larger than the entrepreneur's outside reservation value. Miao and Rivera (2016) focus on the case
where early liquidation does not take place.
      Third, we provide a new and intuitive financial implementation. Under model uncertainty,
optimal securities must be designed to align the conflicts of interests between the investors and
the entrepreneur with different endogenous beliefs. We introduce a financial asset whose payoffs
are contingent on the firm's productivity shock. Since outside investors are endogenously more
pessimistic than the entrepreneur, it is optimal for the firm to take a speculative position in this
derivative asset and use the proceeds to compensate the entrepreneur (in promise). The speculative
  3
    Broadly speaking, our model is also related to the limited-commitment-based contracting models, e.g., Albu-
querque and Hopenhayn (2004), Quadrini (2004), and Clementi and Hopenhayn (2006), and Ai and Li (2015).




                                                      5
profits are paid out to creditors. In contrast, Miao and Rivera (2016) introduce special dividends,
which can be received only by outside investors. These special dividends are used to hedge against
model uncertainty. One implication of this implementation is that inside and outside equities are
not pro-rata based.
    Our paper is also related to some other papers that apply ambiguity and robustness to corporate
finance. For example, Garlappi, Giammarino, and Lazrak (2017) develop a dynamic corporate
investment problem where decisions have to be made collectively by a group of agents holding
heterogeneous beliefs and recognize the ambiguity-like nature of corporate decisions. Dicks and
Fulghieri (2019) develop a theory of systemic risk based on ambiguity aversion. Lee and Rajan
(2020) study optimal security design when both the entrepreneur and investors are ambiguity
averse. Malenko and Tsoy (2020) study security design under asymmetric information when the
investor is ambiguity averse and show that the equilibrium security depends on the degree of
uncertainty and the nature of private information. Dicks and Fulghieri (2020a) develop a theory of
innovation waves, investor sentiment, and merger activity based on Knightian uncertainty.


2     Model

We formulate our robust financial contracting problem by introducing the principal's concern for
model misspecification developed by Hansen and Sargent (2001), and Anderson, Hansen, and Sar-
gent (2003) into the continuous-time dynamic-agency model with corporate investment proposed
by DFHW (2012).

2.1   Neoclassic q Theory of Investment and Managerial Agency

We first present the setup of DFHW (2012). A firm employs capital to produce output, whose price
is normalized to one. Let Kt and It denote the level of capital stock and gross investment rate at
time t  0, respectively. The firm capital stock (Kt ) evolves according to

                                      dKt = (It - Kt ) dt ,                                      (1)

where K0 is given and   0 is the rate of depreciation.
    The cost of investment includes both the cost of purchasing investment goods and capital
adjustment costs, as is standard in the q -theory literature. Let C (I, K ) denote the cost function.
We assume that C (I, K ) is smooth, increasing, and convex in I . To preserve the homogeneity
property, we assume that C (I, K ) is homogeneous of degree one in I and K . We use i to denote the



                                                 6
investment-capital ratio, it = It /Kt , and the homogeneity property allows us to express C (It , Kt ) =
c(it )Kt , where c(i) is the scaled investment cost function.
    Let dAt denote the firm's productivity over time interval [t, t + dt] and (At ) be the corresponding
cumulative productivity process. Assuming that the firm's output over [t, t + dt] is proportional to
the firm's capital stock, Kt dAt , we express the firm's incremental cash flow dYt as follows:

                                           dYt = Kt dAt - C (It , Kt )dt .                                          (2)

    We now introduce managerial agency. The firm is owned by investors who hire an entrepreneur
(agent) to operate the firm. In contrast to the neoclassical model in which the productivity process
(At ) is exogenously specified, the productivity process in our model is affected by the entrepreneur's
unobservable action, i.e., effort. The action at  [0, 1] determines the expected rate of output per
unit of capital, so that (At ) satisfies

                                                               a
                                              dAt = at µdt + dZt ,                                                  (3)

where µ,  > 0 and Z a is a standard Brownian motion defined on the filtered probability space
(, F , (Ft )t0 , Pa ). Here Pa is the probability measure induced by the entrepreneur's action a and
(Ft ) is the filtration generated by (At ).4
    The entrepreneur can enjoy private benefits at the rate of µ(1 - at )dt per unit of the capital
stock from the action at , where   [0, 1]. Due to linearity, our model is also equivalent to the
binary effort setup in which the entrepreneur can either shirk, at = 0, or work, at = 1. Alternatively,
we can interpret 1 - at as the fraction of cash flows that the entrepreneur diverts for his private
benefits, with  being the entrepreneur's net consumption per dollar diverted. In either case, a
larger value of  corresponds to a more severe agency problem. The choice of the entrepreneur's
action is unobservable to the firm's investors, thereby creating moral hazard issues. The firm's
investors only observe past and current cash flows and the investors' information set is represented
by the filtration (Ft )t0 generated by (Yt ) or equivalently (At ).
    Investors have unlimited wealth and are risk-neutral with discount rate r > 0. The entrepreneur
is also risk-neutral but more impatient than investors, i.e., the entrepreneur's discount rate  is
higher than r,  > r. As in DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006), DeMarzo and Fishman (2007a, 2007b),
and DFHW (2012), by assuming  > r, we avoid the scenario in which investors indefinitely
postpone payments to the entrepreneur. This impatience may arise because the entrepreneur may
   4
     All processes in the paper are assumed to be progressively measurable with respect to (Ft ). Inequalities in random
variables or stochastic processes are understood to hold almost surely. The triple (A, Z a , Pa ) is a weak solution to
the stochastic differential equation (3).


                                                           7
have other attractive outside investment opportunities. The entrepreneur has no initial wealth and
has limited liability, in that investors cannot pay negative wages at any time to the entrepreneur.
       Assume that the firm's capital stock Kt , investment It , and (cumulative) cash flow Yt are
observable and contractible. To maximize their value, investors offer a contract that specifies the
firm's investment process (It ), the cumulative compensation process (Ut ), and termination time
 , all of which depend on the history of (Yt ). The entrepreneur's limited liability requires the
compensation process (Ut ) to be nondecreasing and right continuous with left limits.
       Upon the contract's termination, investors recover Lt and the entrepreneur receives his outside
reservation value, which we normalize to zero as in DFHW (2012) and Miao and Rivera (2016).
We will relax this assumption in Section 3.3 and consider the possibility of early termination.
       To preserve the homogeneity property, we assume that Lt = Kt , where                       > 0 represents the
fixed fraction of the firm's capital stock that investors recover upon liquidation. We assume that is
sufficiently small so that the investors do not want to liquidate the firm immediately as liquidation
is inefficient.5
       Let  = (I, U,  ) denote a contract. For a given contract , the entrepreneur chooses an action
process {a
         ^t  [0, 1] : t  [0,  ]} to maximize the following objective function:
                                                         
                          Wt (, a) = sup EP
                                          t
                                            a
                                            ^
                                                            e- (s-t) (dUs + µ(1 - a
                                                                                  ^s )Ks ds) ,                   (4)
                                         a
                                         ^           t

where EP a
         ^
       t denotes the conditional expectation operator with respect to the measure Pa
                                                                                   ^ given the

information set Ft . The entrepreneur's objective function includes the present discounted value of
compensation (the first term in (4)) and the potential private benefits from taking action a
                                                                                           ^<1
(the second term in (4)). The contract  is incentive-compatible with respect to the entrepreneur's
chosen action process (at ) if (at ) is a solution to the problem stated in (4).
       At the time the contract is initiated, the firm has capital stock K0 and the entrepreneur ob-
tains the expected promised payoff W0 . The entrepreneur's W0 will be determined by the relative
bargaining power of the entrepreneur and investors when the contract is initiated. By varying W0 ,
we can obtain the entire feasible contract curve.

2.2       Robust Contracting Problem

In DFHW (2012), the investors and the entrepreneur share the same belief and both use the
probability measure Pa to evaluate their expected payoffs. In our model, decision makers may be
concerned about model misspecification. To capture the bias that the manager tends to be more
   5
       Since the firm could always liquidate by disinvesting, it is natural to assume    c (-).


                                                               8
confident or optimistic about his ability and talent, we assume that the entrepreneur's belief is
given by the probability measure Pa . However, the investors do not fully trust the entrepreneur's
probability model Pa . Instead investors treat Pa as an approximation to the true unknown model.
As a result, investors design the contract so that it is robust to their concerns that the entrepreneur's
model can be misspecified.
       Suppose that the investors consider alternative models as possible and all distorted beliefs are
described by mutually absolutely continuous measures with respect to Pa over any finite time
intervals. This assumption allows us to use Girsanov's Theorem for changing measures so that
model ambiguity is about the drift of the diffusion process.6 Define a density generator associated
with an action process (at ) as a real-valued process (ht ). Denote the set of density generators by
Ha . Given a process (ht ) in Ha , we define another process  h
                                                              t as

                                                       t                          t
                                                                          1
                                   h
                                   t = exp -
                                                                a
                                                           hs dZs -                   h2
                                                                                       s ds   .                (5)
                                                   0                      2   0

                                   t 2
Under the assumption that         0 hs ds   <  for all t > 0,  h
                                                               t defined in (5) is a (Pa , Ft )-martingale,

which plays an important role in our model.7
       By Girsanov's Theorem, there is a measure Qh corresponding to h defined on (, F ) such that  h
                                                                                                    t

is the Radon-Nikodym derivative of Qh with respect to Pa when restricted to Ft , dQh /dPa |Ft =  h
                                                                                                 t,
                 h , defined by
and the process Zt
                                                                     t
                                               h    a
                                              Zt = Zt +                  hs ds,                                (6)
                                                                 0
is a standard Brownian motion under measure Qh . We can identify any measure Qh by either its
density generator (ht ) or density process  h
                                            t . Denote the set of all such measures by Pa .

       Under measure Qh , the cumulative productivity (At ) defined in (3) can be written as:

                                                           h
                                        dAt = at µdt +  (dZt - ht dt).                                         (7)

Accordingly, the cash flow process (Yt ) under the measure Qh follows

                                                                             h
                             dYt = Kt (at µ - ht )dt - C (It , Kt )dt + Kt dZt .                               (8)

Importantly, the firm's incremental output dYt under measure Qh now depends on both the en-
trepreneur's effort at and investors' concerns for the entrepreneur's model misspecification, which
is described by ht .
   6
     See Epstein and Ji (2013) for a continuous-time model of ambiguity about both the drift and volatility without
the mutually absolute continuity assumption.
   7
     See Hansen et al (2006) for the technical details.


                                                             9
    To incorporate the investors' concerns for the model misspecification, building on the robust
control and variational utility models of Anderson, Hansen, and Sargent (2003), and Maccheroni,
Marinacci, and Rustichini (2006a, 2006b), we represent the investors's preferences at time t as
follows:
                                                                                      
           Ft (, a) = inf      EQ
                                t
                                  h
                                              e-r(s-t) dYs + e-r( -t) L -                e-r(s-t) dUs + Kt (Qh ),    (9)
                       Qh Pa           t                                          t

where Kt (Qh ) represents an ambiguity index.8 Intuitively speaking, investors want their decisions
to be robust to the "worst-case" model Qh , which is chosen from the set Pa to minimize the sum
of the expected present value of payoffs under Qh , which is the first term in (9), and the entropy
penalty term Kt (Qh ), which is determined by the degree of concerns for robustness.
    Generalizing the relative entropy cost of Anderson, Hansen, and Sargent (2003), Hansen et al.
(2006), and Hansen and Sargent (2008), we follow Maenhout, Vedolin, and Xing (2020) and specify
the penalty term as
                                                           
                                                                                 h
                                 Kt (Qh ) = EP
                                             t
                                               a
                                                              e-r(s-t) s d       s
                                                                                           ,                        (10)
                                                       t                         h
                                                                                 t

where  (x)  x ln x and t > 0 measures the size of the entropy cost. Maenhout, Vedolin, and
Xing (2020) show that this specification implies
                                                                  
                                             1 h
                                   Kt (Qh ) = EQ                     e-r(s-t) s h2
                                                                                 s ds ,                             (11)
                                             2 t              t

and the utility process in (9) is time consistent. When t is constant for all t, (10) is reduced to
the relative entropy penalty of Anderson, Hansen, and Sargent (2003).
    To capture the intuitive idea that a larger firm should have a larger entropy penalty (measured
in firm value or other dollar-based value), we assume that t increases with capital stock Kt . By
making this assumption, we obtain the economically desirable outcome that the firm will never
grow too large relative to the entropy cost or the ambiguity index. For tractability, we assume that
t is proportional to Kt :
                                                 t = (Kt ) = Kt ,                                                   (12)

where the parameter  > 0 measures the degree of investors' concerns for robustness. Following
Maccheroni, Marinacci, and Rustichini (2006a, 2006b), we may also interpret 1/ as the degree of
ambiguity aversion. We will use these two interpretations interchangeably in the paper.
   8
     In a discrete time setting, Maccheroni, Marinacci, and Rustichini (2006a, 2006b), show that, by appropriately
specifying K, this model includes the multiple-priors model of Gilboa and Schmeidler (1989) and the multiplier model
of Anderson, Hansen, and Sargent (2003), Hansen et al. (2006), and Hansen and Sargent (2008) as special cases.




                                                              10
        The homogeneity assumption about t given in (12) allows us to simplify our analysis by
reducing a two-dimensional robust contacting problem to a uni-dimensional one. Our modeling of
 implies that the entropy cost of model uncertainty grows with firm size so that the investors'
aversion to model uncertainty matters for the value of capital, e.g., when measured by Tobin's
average q . The larger the value of , the larger the penalty cost given in (10), and hence the more
the investors trust the entrepreneur's probability model. In the limit as   , the investors have
the same belief as the agent and our model becomes DFHW (2012).
        In summary, we study the following contracting problem when the investors are concerned about
the entrepreneur's model misspecification:

Problem 1 (robust contract)
                                             P (K0 , W0 ) = sup F0 (, a) ,                       (13)
                                                             (,a)

subject to (1), (2), (7), and the constraints that  is incentive-compatible with respect to the action
process a and W0 (, a) = W0  0, where Wt (, a) and Ft (, a) for t  0 are defined in (4) and
(9), respectively,


3        Solution

In this section, we first summarize the first-best (FB) solution under rational expectations without
agency frictions and then derive the solution for the robust contract with agency.
        Let q F B denote Tobin's average q under the first best. As in Hayashi (1982), the homogeneity
property implies that the marginal q is equal to the average q and

                                                                       µ - c (i)
                                          q F B = c iF B = max                   ,               (14)
                                                                 i     r+-i
where i = I/K and iF B is the solution to (14). We require that µ < c(r +  ) so that the firm's value
under the first-best is well defined and given by (14). Both iF B and q F B are then constant. Let
wt denote the entrepreneur's scaled value: wt = Wt /Kt . It is immediate to see that the investors'
scaled value function is given by pF B (w) = q F B - w.

3.1        Robust Contract with Agency

As for our FB case, we focus on the contract in which the high effort level at = 1 is always optimal

and hence should be implemented.9 We then derive the robust contract heuristically and leave
technical details including certain regulation conditions to Appendix A.
    9
        See the sufficient condition in Proposition 3 in Appendix A.


                                                            11
   By using the martingale representation theorem, we can express the entrepreneur's promised
utility process (Wt ), defined in (4), via the following controlled diffusion process under the high-level
effort at = 1:
                                                                               a
                       dWt + dUt = Wt dt +  t Kt (dAt - µdt) = Wt dt +  t Kt dZt ,                          (15)

where  t is endogenously determined. The left side of (15) is equal to the entrepreneur's incre-
mental compensation at t, which is equal to the sum of the cash payment dUt and the change
in the entrepreneur's promised utility, dWt . The right side of (15) states that the change of the
entrepreneur's total compensation over time increment dt is equal to the sum of Wt dt and a
mean-zero diffusion term under the entrepreneur's belief Pa .
   To understand the determinant of  t , we need to consider the possibility that the entrepreneur
deviates from the FB effort level, at = 1. Intuitively, shirking (by choosing at < 1) gives the

entrepreneur a private benefit µKt (1 - at ) but lowers his promised utility in expectation by
 t µKt (1 - at ) per unit of time due to the fall of the firm's expected output. To ensure that the
high effort level is incentive compatible, the cost of shirking must be larger than the benefit for all
t so that
                                                   t   .                                                    (16)

This result follows DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006), DeMarzo and Fishman (2007a), and DFHW
(2012). However, because of the investors' concern for the entrepreneur's model misspecification,
the solution for  is much different.
   As investors do not trust the entrepreneur's model Pa induced by a = 1, their belief is
represented by Qh as discussed in Section 2.2. Under the belief Qh and at = 1, we use Girsanov's

Theorem to rewrite (15) as

                                                                         h
                               dWt = (Wt -  t Kt ht ) dt - dUt +  t Kt dZt .                                (17)

Importantly, the drift (expected change) of the entrepreneur's value over dt, dWt + dUt , viewed from
the investors' perspective, (i.e., under Qh ), is equal to the difference between Wt dt and  t Kt ht dt.
The wedge between the drift in (15) with that in (17),  t Kt ht , captures the effect of the investors'
concerns for the entrepreneur's model misspecification.
   Using (8), (9), and (11), we can rewrite the objective function under measure Qh as
                                                                                     
                                                                             1
    EQh            e-rt (Kt (µ - ht )dt - C (It , Kt )dt - dUt ) + e-r L +              e-rt (Kt )h2
                                                                                                   t dt .   (18)
            0                                                                2   0




                                                      12
Then the value function P (Kt , Wt ) satisfies the following HJB equation in the interior region:

                                                                  1
rP (Kt , Wt ) =          sup inf     Kt (µ - ht ) - C (It , Kt ) + (Kt )h2
                                                                         t + PW (Kt , Wt ) (Wt -  t Kt ht )
                        It ,  t ht                                2
                                                                  1
                                     +PK (Kt , Wt ) (It - Kt ) + PW W (Kt , Wt ) ( t Kt  )2 ,          (19)
                                                                  2

subject to the incentive constraint given in (16).
       Compared with the HJB equation in DFHW (2012), there are four key differences due to model
uncertainty. First, as investors have preferences for the contract to be robust, we must have an inf
problem to determine h, which equivalently pins down the measure Qh . Second, there is a quadratic
entropy penalty term (Kt )h2
                           t /2, which generates a tradeoff for the choice of ht . Third, the drift

of productivity (At ) under Qh is lowered by ht from µ due to the belief distortion. Finally, the
drift of the entrepreneur's promised utility (Wt ) under Qh is lowered by  t Kt ht from Wt .
       To solve the dynamic programming problem in (19), we first consider how to determine ht.

On one hand, increasing ht (which means that investors' belief Qh is more distant from the
entrepreneur's model Pa ) makes investors better off as doing so protects them against the en-
trepreneur's model misspecification. On the other hand, increasing ht raises the entropy cost for
investors. The first-order condition (FOC) for ht equates the marginal entropy cost (Kt )ht with
the marginal benefit Kt  [1 +  t PW (Kt , Wt )] of guarding against model misspecification.10 Simpli-
fying this FOC, we obtain
                                                  Kt  [1 +  t PW (Kt , Wt )]
                                           ht =                              .                        (20)
                                                           (Kt )
       Second, consider the optimal PPS  t . Substituting (20) into the FOC for  t yields the following

expression for a candidate interior solution if  t > :

                                                     PW (Kt , Wt )
                                     t =                                         .                    (21)
                                           (Kt )PW W (Kt , Wt ) - PW (Kt , Wt )2

As the incentive constraint (16) has to hold, the following equation fully characterizes the optimal
sensitivity:
                                                      PW (Kt , Wt )
                              t = max                                             , .                 (22)
                                            (Kt )PW W (Kt , Wt ) - PW (Kt , Wt )2
       Third, the FOC for investment equates the marginal benefit of investing, PK (Kt , Wt ) with the
marginal cost of investing CI (It , Kt ). Because CII (I, K ) > 0, this FOC implies the following
                                              :
implicit function for the optimal investment It

                                                   
                                              CI (It , Kt ) = PK (Kt , Wt ) .                         (23)
  10
       Since (Kt ) > 0, this condition is also sufficient for ht to be the minimizer.




                                                             13
This equation shows that the marginal cost of investing is equal to marginal q, PK (Kt , Wt ). Al-
though robustness does not directly impact the investment FOC, it impacts investment indirectly
via its effect on the endogenously determined marginal q .
   Given the homogeneity property of our model, we use the lower-case letter to denote the cor-
responding upper-case letter scaled by the firm's contemporaneous capital stock. For example, we
write wt = Wt /Kt , p(wt ) = P (Kt , Wt )/Kt , it = It /Kt , and dut = dUt /Kt . We first focus on the
case where optimal liquidation occurs when wt reaches 0 for the first time. In Section 3.3, we show
that early liquidation is also possible. The following proposition characterizes the optimal robust
contract.

Proposition 1 Let at = 1 be implemented. Suppose that p (w ) satisfies the following ordinary

differential equation (ODE) on [0, w] :

                                                                  2           2                2
 rp (w) = max µ - c (i) + (i -  )p(w) + ( +  - i)wp (w) +           p (w) 2 -   1 + p (w)          (24)
             , i                                                  2           2

subject to the conditions: p (w) > -1 on [0, w), p(0) = , and

                                       p (w) = -1, p (w) = 0.                                      (25)

Suppose that   is sufficiently small and

                                                    2
                                 p (w) - p (w)          < 0 on [0, w].                             (26)

Then: (i) For w  [0, w], the investors' scaled value function is p (w) . The optimal sensitivity,
  (w), is given by
                                                   p (w)
                                 (w) = max                      ,                                  (27)
                                               p (w) - [p (w)]2
and the worst-case density generator is given by

                                              
                                    h (w) =    [1 +   (w) p (w)].                                  (28)
                                              

The optimal investment rate i (w) satisfies

                                    c (i (w)) = p(w) - wp (w).                                     (29)

The entrepreneur's scaled continuation value wt satisfies the following diffusion process:

                                                                                     
               dwt = [( +  - i (wt ))wt -   (wt ) h (wt )] dt - du             h
                                                                  t +  (wt ) dZt ,                 (30)



                                                   14
for wt  [0, w]. The firm is liquidated whenever wt = 0 for the first time. The optimal compensation
dUt = Kt dut keeps (wt ) reflecting at w and satisfies


                                            dut = max {wt - w, 0} .                                             (31)

(ii) For w > w, p(w) = p(w) - (w - w). The investors pay w - w immediately to the entrepreneur
and the contract continues with the entrepreneur's new initial value w.

       In Appendix C we present the solution for the robust contract without agency and show that
the corresponding scaled value function p (w) is concave. By contrast, for the robust contract with
agency, p (w) may not be concave as shown in Miao and Rivera (2016). Inequality (26) is a sufficient
condition for the optimality of   , which does not imply that p (w) is concave.11
       As in DFHW (2012), the key variable that determines the firm's performance and its financial
constraint is the entrepreneur's scaled continuation value w. Unlike in DFHW (2012), there is
an additional term -  (wt ) h (wt ) in the drift of equation (30) under the investors' endogenous
belief Qh . Under the entrepreneur's belief Pa , equation (30) becomes

                                                                                      
                            dwt = ( +  - i (wt )) wt dt - du             a
                                                            t +  (wt ) dZt .                                    (32)

By comparing the dynamics for w in (30) and (32), we see that the expected value of dwt from
investors' perspective is lower than the expected value of dwt , as the wedge between the drifts of
wt is equal to   (wt ) h (wt ), which we show is positive.

3.2      Properties of the Contract

We use Figure 1 to discuss the properties and intuition of the optimal robust contract.


Investors' scaled value function p(wt ) and optimal investment-capital ratio i (wt ).                          Pan-
els A and B of Figure 1 plot the investors' scaled value function p (w) and the investment-capital
ratio i (w), respectively. We find that p (w) is globally concave. We are unable to prove this result
generally, but show that it holds for the robust contract without agency for   0 (see Appendix
C). The intuition is as follows. In the absence of managerial agency, the first-best outcome is for
investors to sell the firm to the entrepreneur if the entrepreneur is wealthy enough to purchase
  11
    If p (w) is not globally concave, the Bellman-Isaacs condition does not hold so that we cannot exchange the order
of optimization (Hansen et al. (2006)). As a result we cannot offer an ex post Bayesian interpretation for the robust
contract. We refer to Miao and Rivera (2016) for more discussions on this issue. However, in all our numerical
examples below, we find that p (w) is globally concave.




                                                         15
                                       FB
                                       DFHW
                                       Robust
                                                        0




           0




           1
                                                                                    DFHW
                                                                                    Robust




                                                        0




Figure 1: Optimal robust contracting. The optimal payout boundary for the robust contract is
w1 , larger than for the rational-expectations DFHW (2012) contract w2 . For the robust contract,
w1 denotes the value of w above which   (w) > , i.e., the incentive constraint does not bind.


the firm. However, because the entrepreneur is financially constrained and also protected by lim-
ited liability, the entrepreneur cannot provide full insurance against investors' ambiguity about
his model Pa . Therefore, in equilibrium investors are endogenously averse to output fluctuation.
Similar intuition also applies to the robust contract with agency with one difference. For a low w,
the marginal benefit p (w) to the investors may increase with w when the firm is away from the
liquidation boundary as discussed in Miao and Rivera (2016).
   Panels A and B of Figure 1 show that the investors' concern for model misspecification lowers
their scaled value p(w) (see Proposition 2 in Appendix A) and reduce investment i(w). Technically
speaking, the only difference between the ODE for p(w) in our model and that in DFHW (2012) is
the last term on the right side of (24), which is negative and proportional to  2 /. Intuitively, the
greater the investors' concern for the entrepreneur's model misspecification (i.e., the lower the value
of ), the more pessimistic the investors are about their value (i.e., the lower their value p(w)).
This also causes them to be more pessimistic about the marginal benefit of investment, leading to
a lower investment rate i (w) .




                                                  16
PPS   (wt ) and endogenous belief wedge h (wt ).                    Panel C plots the firm's optimal   (w).
As in DFHW (2012), for incentive compatibility, the investors optimally expose the entrepreneur's
value to sufficiently large volatility, i.e.,  t  . Unlike in DFHW (2012) where the incentive
constraint always binds, i.e.,  t = , it can be optimal for the entrepreneur to be exposed more to
the cash-flow uncertainty when the investors are ambiguity averse. We show that with sufficiently
large values of w, we have  t > .
    Panel D plots the endogenous belief wedge h (w), which is always positive. The intuition is
that ambiguity aversion generates pessimistic beliefs so that the drift of productivity (At ) perceived
by the ambiguity averse investors is always lower than the drift under the entrepreneur's belief as
shown in (32) and (30). Moreover, this belief wedge h (w) decreases towards zero as w increases
towards the payout boundary w. The intuition is that as the entrepreneur's performance improves
and hence w increases, the investors increasingly trust the entrepreneur's model more.
    When w is sufficiently low, the firm's liquidation risk is high. The dominant consideration in
this low-w region is to preserve the firm's going concern value by setting  (w) =  to minimize the
risk of inefficient liquidation as in DFHW (2012).
    In contrast, when w is sufficiently high, liquidation risk is much less of a concern. The optimal
policy from the investors' perspective is to let the entrepreneur bear more cash-flow risk as the
entrepreneur is risk neutral, but the investors are ambiguity averse. It is optimal for the robust
contract to transfer uncertainty from the investors to the entrepreneur.
    Therefore, there exists an endogenous cutoff value w, such that the incentive constraint binds,
  (w) = , only when w  [0, w]. In the region where w  (w, w), the incentive constraint does not
bind,   (w) > , as the investors' concern for the entrepreneur's productivity model is the primary
driving determinant for   .
    In this region (w, w), by substituting h given by (28) into (27), we may write   (wt ) as follows:

                                      p (wt )           h (wt )
                       (wt ) =                      2 =  (w ) ,         for wt  (w, w) ,                      (33)
                                 p (wt ) - [p (wt )]        t

where  (w) can be interpreted as a measure of investors' endogenous (absolute) risk aversion:

                                                          p (w)
                                                 (w) =          .                                             (34)
                                                          p (w)
The investors' endogenous risk aversion  (w) depends on the agency problem (), liquidation risk
( ), and the investors' concern for the entrepreneur's model misspecification.12
  12
     Note that we do not have a minus sign in p (wt )/p (wt ) for the definition of absolute risk aversion. This is
because here the entrepreneur's w is the investors' liability rather than asset. In particular, both p (w) < 0 and
p (w) < 0 for w  (w, w).


                                                        17
   Equation (33) resembles the optimal asset allocation rule in the dynamic portfolio choice liter-
ature (e.g., Merton (1971)). The analogy is as follows: (i) the belief wedge h     
                                                                              t = h (wt ), which can

be interpreted as the market price of model uncertainty as will be shown in Section 4, is analogous
to the market price of risk in Merton (1971); (ii)  (wt ) = p (wt )/p (wt ) is analogous to the coeffi-
cient of absolute risk aversion in Merton (1971). The larger the wedge ht , the more optimistic the

entrepreneur is relative to the investors, the greater the investors benefit by letting the entrepreneur
bear the firm's risk, i.e., the higher the value of   . Unlike Merton (1971), h     
                                                                               t = h (wt ) and  (wt )

are both endogenous and indeed perfectly correlated in our model.
   As the entrepreneur's wt increases (e.g., following good performances), the wedge h between
the entrepreneur's model Pa and investors' belief Qh decreases but importantly the investors'
endogenous risk aversion  (wt ) = p (wt )/p (wt ) decreases even more. As a result,  t increases

with wt as one can see from Figure 1. That is, once the entrepreneur has earned sufficiently high
stake in the firm, i.e., wt  (w, w), it is optimal to increase the entrepreneur's PPS   (wt ) with
wt . In this way, the ambiguity-averse investors can transfer more uncertainty to the risk/ambiguity
neutral entrepreneur. This PPS has critical implications for the firm's payout policy and its choice
between hedging and speculation.


Payout boundary w.         Substituting the smooth-pasting condition, p (w) = -1, and the super-
contact condition, p (w) = 0, given in (25) into (24), we obtain the following condition at w :

                       rp (w) = max µ - c (i) + (i -  )p (w) - ( +  - i)w .
                                   i

DFHW (2012) show that this condition can be equivalently expressed as the "steady-state" valua-
tion condition:
                                                   µ - c (i) - ( - r) w
                               p (w) + w = max                          .                          (35)
                                               i         r+-i
Although the boundary conditions for w are the same as in DFHW (2012), the economics in our
model is quite different from that in DFHW (2012).
   In our model, at the payout boundary w, it follows from (25), (27), and (28) that

                                       h (w) = 0   and     (w) = 1 ,                               (36)

The intuition for (36) is as follows. At the payout boundary w, investors fully trust the en-
trepreneur's model and the belief wedge disappears: h (w) = 0. Otherwise, it is always optimal
for the investors to pay the entrepreneur in promise by increasing w rather than in cash. Since the
entropy penalty cost is quadratic in ht , the marginal entropy cost is linear in ht and hence equals

                                                   18
zero at w as h (w) = 0. The marginal benefit is proportional to 1 +  t PW = 1 -  t at w = 0.
Therefore, it is optimal to set  t = 1 at the payout boundary w as doing so equates the marginal
benefit with the zero marginal cost. The result   (w) = 1 is fundamentally different from the result
that the incentive constraint always binds,   (w) =  for all w  [0, w], in standard contracting
models under rational-expectations.
   As a result, our model allows us to separately identify volatility  and the agency parameter ,
which is infeasible in DFHW (2012), as  always appears multiplicatively in DFHW (2012). In
contrast, in our model, it is optimal for the entrepreneur to be the entire residual claimant when
the firm is at its payout boundary w, regardless of the severity of agency, measured by .
   Because   (w) = 1 > , in order to deliver the same level of promised w, the investors need
to further back-load compensation and delay cash compensation. That is, the endogenous payout
boundary under robustness, w1 , is larger than the boundary w2 in DFHW (2012), as we see in
Figure 1.
   So far, we have focused on the case where the investors always wait until the last moment to
liquidate the firm. Next, we consider the possibility that the investors may choose to liquidate the
firm before the entrepreneur's participation constraint Wt  0 binds.

3.3   The Case with Early Liquidation

In DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006) and DFHW (2012), it is never optimal for the investors to
liquidate the firm before the entrepreneur's participation constraint binds. The intuition is that
with rational expectations the investors fully trust the entrepreneur's talent and is only worried
about the agent's incentive problem. Therefore, the investors optimally delay using the stick (to
inefficiently terminate the project) as much as possible.
   However, in our model as the investors are ambiguity-averse, early liquidation can be optimal
when the investors are sufficiently concerned about the entrepreneur's productivity. We show that
it can be optimal for the investors to compensate the entrepreneur when the investors no longer
consider the entrepreneur to be sufficiently productive. In this case, it is optimal for the investors to
pay a lump-sum amount before the agent's participation constraint binds. This lump-sum payment
can be viewed as a severance compensation or a golden parachute.
   The intuition is that the investors are so worried about the entrepreneur's productivity (model)
that it is better off for the investors to "buy out" the entrepreneur so that the firm can be liquidated
sooner than later. This early liquidation is triggered in equilibrium by the investors' belief that the
entrepreneur's productivity is really low not because of the agency problem.


                                                   19
   Formally, the investors offer W > 0 to the entrepreneur at the termination time  . For a
given contract , the entrepreneur chooses an action process {a
                                                             ^t  [0, 1] : t  [0,  ]} to maximize
the following objective function:
                                              
            Wt (, a) = sup EP
                            t
                              a
                              ^
                                                 e- (s-t) (dUs + µ(1 - a
                                                                       ^s )Ks ds) + e- ( -t) W .      (37)
                          a
                          ^               t

The investors' payoff at time t is as follows:
                                          
         Ft (, a) = inf       EQ
                               t
                                 h
                                              e-r(s-t) (dYs - dUs ) + e-r( -t) (L - W ) + Kt (Qh ).   (38)
                     Qh Pa            t

Then the robust contract with early liquidation is defined in the same away as in Problem 1 where
Wt (, a) and Ft (, a) for t  0 are given in (37) and (38), respectively. As in Proposition 1, we
consider the case in which the high effort (a = 1) is implemented.
   Let w denote the entrepreneur's scaled promised utility w = W /K when the investors ter-
minate the contract at time  . Then w satisfies

                                     w = inf {w  0 : p (w) = - w} .

Intuitively, at the liquidation time  , the investors offer w  0 to the entrepreneur who is willing to
accept it as the payoff is higher than his reservation value of zero. The investors obtain p (w) = - w
upon liquidation. For w > w, Proposition 1 applies and will not be stated here again.
   Figure 2 shows that as we decrease  from 1.0 to 0.2, the investors become more concerned
about the entrepreneur's (productivity) model misspecification, liquidate the project sooner, and
pay out to the entrepreneur later (larger w).
   Importantly, rather than waiting to terminate the entrepreneur's employment when w reaches
his reservation value of zero for  = 1.0, the investors choose to terminate the contract earlier when
w reaches w = 0.07 for  = 0.2. This is because it takes fewer negative shocks for more ambiguity-
averse investors to lose confidence in the entrepreneur's productivity and hence it is optimal for
them to liquidate the project sooner despite paying a liquidating payoff w = 0.07, which is higher
than the entrepreneur's outside option value of zero.
   Additionally, the investors' value p(w) decreases, investment i(w) falls, and the equilibrium
belief wedge h (w) increases for all levels of w (see Panels A, B, and D) as investors become more
concerned about the entrepreneur's productivity.
   What is not obvious is that as  decreases from 1.0 to 0.2, the PPS   decreases for a given
level of w. Intuitively, liquidation occurs sooner at w2 = 0.07 for  = 0.2, and in order to reduce
liquidation risk, the optimal contract with  = 0.2 calls for a lower uncertainty exposure   (w)

                                                           20
                                                                 0


                 0




                     0                                               0


                 1




                                                                 0

                 0
                     0                                               0




Figure 2: Equilibrium early liquidation (w > 0). As we decrease  from 1.0 to 0.2, the
liquidation boundary increases from zero to w2 = 0.07.


for any w  [w2 , w1 ] than the contract with  = 1.0 does. Moreover, the investors with  = 0.2
delay payout to the entrepreneur as paying the entrepreneur in promise rather than in cash is more
efficient for the firm both because the entrepreneur is more optimistic about the firm's prospect and
also because it is optimal for the firm to keep more slack in the long-term contracting relationship
when the investors are more concerned about the entrepreneur's productivity.


4     Security Design and Financial Implementation

In this section we show that our robust contracting solution can be implemented by dynamically
managing the firm's financial slack (e.g., cash reserves), choosing a capital structure with a mix of
debt, inside equity, and outside equity, and dynamically trading a derivative contingent on the firm's
output.13 Our implementation builds on DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006), BMPR (2007), DeMarzo
and Fishman (2007a, 2007b), DFHW (2012), Miao and Rivera (2016), among others. What is new in
our implementation is the entrepreneur's speculative hedging demand that arises endogenously from
the equilibrium belief wedge between the entrepreneur and investors. For expositional simplicity,
  13
     It is well known in the security design literature that implementation is not unique. We provide an economically
intuitive implementation that uses simple and standard contracts.


                                                         21
we study financial implementation for the case without early liquidation, as the case where early
liquidation is optimal is similar.

4.1   Security Design and Pricing

Let Bt , St , and Mt denote the market value of the firm's debt, equity, and its cash balance at time
t. Our goal is to determine these values and design a firm's dynamic financing policies based on
the optimal contract.


Corporate Liquidity and Risk Management. We denote the scaled cash reserves by mt =
Mt /Kt in [0, m], where mt = wt / is the endogenous payout boundary. In the interior region where
the firm's cash balance Mt lies inside (0, mt Kt ], the firm dynamically engages in liquidity and risk
management. The firm earns interest on its cash balance Mt at the risk-free rate r.
   The firm also has access to a liquid financial asset that is perfectly correlated with its produc-
                 
               h . We refer to this asset as the derivative asset and define its payoff structure as
tivity shock dZt
follows: An investor who has a unit of long position in this derivative asset at time t receives a
                       
                    h at t + dt under Q  . As investors have no wealth constraints and their equi-
stochastic payoff dZt                  h

librium belief is given by the measure Qh , all contingent claims can thus be priced in a perfectly
competitive market under Qh . Therefore, it is costless for investors to take either a long or a short
position in this derivative asset as doing so is a mean-zero preserving spread for risk-neutral in-
vestors under Qh . However, because the entrepreneur is relatively more optimistic than investors,
the entrepreneur is willing to pay for this derivative asset as this asset provides a positive expected
payoff ht dt to him.

   Let xt Kt denote the firm's demand for this hedging asset at t. Over [t, t + dt], the firm's
                                                                                             
                                                                                         h , in that
cash-flow exposure to this hedging asset dHt is then given by the product of xt Kt and dZt

                                                        h      
                                          dHt = xt Kt dZt ,                                       (39)

where xt is to be determined.


Equity.    Because the ambiguity-averse investors are well diversified and financially unconstrained,
they are the marginal investors and therefore the firm's equity value is given by
                                                      
                                                         e-r(v-t) dUv
                                                                    S
                                           Q   
                                     St = Et h                        ,                           (40)
                                                  t
        S : t  v   } is the undiscounted cumulative dividend. Its increment is given by
where {Uv

                                            dUtS = dUt / ,                                        (41)

                                                      22
where dUt is the equilibrium payout to the entrepreneur characterized in Proposition 1. By defin-
ing dividends in this way, we naturally conclude that the entrepreneur receives  fraction of the
firm's total equity, as dUt = dUtS under all circumstances. This dividend payment interpretation
specified in (41) is widely used in the literature, e.g., DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006), BMPR (2007),
DeMarzo and Fishman (2007a, 2007b), and Miao and Rivera (2016).


Debt.     Similarly, we value the firm's debt as follows:
                                                    
                                                       e-r(s-t) Us
                                                                 B
                                                                   ds + e-r( -t) K ,
                                        Q   
                                Bt = Et h                                                                          (42)
                                                t

where  is the endogenous stochastic default time. The firm's debt service over [t, t + dt] is given
by UtB dt, where
                                UtB = (µ - c (i              
                                               t )) Kt + xt ht Kt - ( - r ) Mt .                                   (43)

The debt service UtB per unit of time is locally deterministic. The first term in (43) is the expected
operating cash flow. Because debt is senior to equity, it is intuitive that debt holders receive this
expected payoff.14
    The second term xt ht Kt is from the firm's speculative position via the derivative asset. Because

the entrepreneur beliefs that the derivative asset has a positive drift of ht dt while investors think

the drift of this asset is zero, it is efficient for the firm to take the speculative position xt ht Kt and

distribute this amount (in expectation) to debt holders. We will provide more discussions on this
point latter.
    The last term in (43) is the adjustment due to the firm's performance measured by its cash
balance Mt . Because the entrepreneur's required rate of return is  and the discount-rate wedge
between the entrepreneur and investors is  - r > 0, the firm keeps ( - r)Mt each period for future
dividend payments to shareholders.
    Whenever the firm misses its debt payment schedule, creditors have the right to liquidate
the firm. In equilibrium, the firm only defaults on its debt when it exhausts its cash balance,
meaning that the firm declares default at time  where  = inf {s  0 : Ms = 0}. Creditors
collect all liquidation proceeds K and equity investors are completely wiped out at the moment
of liquidation  , as implied by the absolute priority rule (APR).
    There are two key differences in debt value given in (42) and equity value given in (40). First,
debt is senior to equity as bond holders collect the firm's entire liquidation proceeds K and
  14
     Of course, we could also attribute this as part of payout to outside equity investors. Since we are treating inside
and outside equity investors symmetrically, we allocate the expected free cash flows to debt holders.



                                                            23
shareholders are completely wiped out upon liquidation (e.g., the APR holds in our model.) Second,
debt payment is locally deterministic with coupon payment UtB dt while cash-flow to equity is
stochastic in general.


Cash Balance.       The firm's cash balance is the nexus connecting the firm's various decisions.
Specifically, in the interior region (0, mt Kt ], the firm's cash holding Mt evolves as follows:

                dMt = Kt dAt + rMt dt - C (It , Kt )dt - UtB dt +        dHt        - dUtS .       (44)
                          sales   interest    Cap Ex costs   coupon   speculation    dividends

Equation (44) connects the firm's dynamically changing cash holding M , an item on the balance
sheet, to its three Cash-Flow Statements as follows:

  1. cash flows from operating activities, Kt dAt ;

  2. cash flows from investing activities, given by interest income rMt , minus investment costs
      C (It , Kt ), and minus debt coupon payment at the rate of UtB ;

  3. cash flows from financing activities, which include dividend payments dUtS to equity investors
      and speculation gains or losses dHt .

   The firm pays out dividends, meaning dUtS > 0, if and only if the firm's cash holding Mt
exceeds mKt , and the dividend policy is to distribute the firm's "excess" cash so that mt reflects
away from m into the interior region. As we discussed earlier, the dividend payment specification
dUtS allocates the entrepreneur a (non-tradable)  fraction of the firm's total payout to equity, so
that inside equity implements the optimal compensation contract for the entrepreneur.
   For the above capital structure to implement the robust contract characterized in Proposition
1, we use equations (30), (44), Wt = wt Kt , and Mt = Wt / to solve for the firm's hedge position:
                                                     t -
                                             xt =             .                                    (45)
                                                       
This equations shows that, when the incentive constraint binds ( t =  by Proposition 1), the firm

holds no hedging asset.
   When the incentive constraint does not bind (                 
                                                 t > ), we have xt > 0, which means that

the firm takes a long position in its own cash-flow risk via the hedging asset. This is in contrast
to the conventional wisdom that a financially constrained firm should hedge against its risk by
taking a short position in the hedging asset. The intuition for our results is as follows. Because in
equilibrium the entrepreneur is more optimistic than investors about the productivity, it is optimal

                                                      24
for the firm to expose itself more to its own risk, as the firm compensates the entrepreneur via 
fraction of equity, which is cost effective.
   From investors' point of view, the expected profit from speculation is zero because
                                                                     
                                                             x       h
                                   Q               Q    
                                  Et h [dHt ] = Et h          t Kt dZt   = 0.                        (46)

However, the speculation is profitable from the entrepreneur's point of view. Since investors do not
trust the entrepreneur's model, their beliefs Qh are different from the entrepreneur's Pa . As we
discussed earlier, the entrepreneur is endogenously more optimistic than the investors.
   Formally, we use (6) to compute
                                                                     
            Et a [dHt ] = Et a [x       h
                                                        x       a    
                                                                                = x      
             P             P                   P a   
                                 t Kt dZt ] = Et         t Kt dZt + ht dt          t Kt ht dt > 0,   (47)

where ht > 0 can be interpreted as the market price of uncertainty (Anderson, Hansen and Sargent

(2003)). The speculative profits represent free cash flows which are extracted by the firm via a
higher coupon rate UtB paid to creditors. Doing so alleviates agency issues. If the profits were kept
in the firm, the entrepreneur could divert them for his private benefits.
   Under rational expectations, BMPR (2007) show that their optimal contract can be imple-
mented by debt, equity, and cash reserves without speculative demand, i.e., xt = 0. DeMarzo

and Sannikov (2006), and DFHW (2012) offer different implementations. Under model uncer-
tainty, Miao and Rivera (2016) introduce special dividends to the implementation, which play a
different role of speculative demand in this paper. It is well known in the literature that financial
implementation is generally not unique.
   One robust feature of any financial implementation is that there exists a key state variable to
capture the firm's financial slack, which is tied to the entrepreneur's promised utility Wt . Here
we choose cash reserves Mt = Wt /. We could have chosen an alternative, e.g., credit line, as in
DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006), and DeMarzo and Fishman (2007a, 2007b).
   Next, we discuss the implications of our financial implementation. In doing so, we equivalently
express the contracting solution in Proposition 1 as various functions of the new state variable, the
scaled cash balance m = M/K = w/  (0, w/). For example, we write   (m) , h (m) , and
x (m) by (45). Let s (mt ) and b (mt ) denote the scaled equity and debt values: s (mt ) = St /Kt
and b (mt ) = Bt /Kt .


Graphic Illustration.       Panels A and B of Figure 3 plot the scaled speculative demand x (m)
and the scaled speculation profits x (m) h (m), respectively, for two values of . Panels C and
D present the corresponding sensitivity   (m) and belief wedge h (m) .

                                                        25
                                                      0
           0




           1




                                                      0




Figure 3: Speculative demand, speculative profits, sensitivity, and belief wedge for high
and low values of .

   Note that the entrepreneur speculates only when cash holding m is sufficiently high. When m
is low, investors are more concerned about agency problems and the risk of liquidation so that the
entrepreneur's incentive constraint binds, i.e.   (m) =  and hence x (m) = 0, as in rational
expectations models.
   However, when m  m = w/, the entrepreneur's incentive constraint no longer binds. Because
the firm has sufficient financial slack, it has more room to exploit the endogenous belief dispersion
between the entrepreneur and investors via speculation, as the firm can buffer losses better via its
savings. For this reason, the speculative demand x (m) increases with m. As one may expect,
the speculation profit first increases with m but then decreases with m after reaching a sufficiently
high level of m. This is due to the countervailing force that the investors increasingly trust the
entrepreneur's model. As a result, the market price of model uncertainty h (m) decreases with
the firm's financial slack m. In the limit, when m = m = w/, h (m) = 0, i.e., the two beliefs
coincide and hence there is no speculation profit. In sum, the speculation profit is hump shaped
and equal to zero when m is either sufficiently low or high.
   Figure 3 also shows that when the investors are more ambiguity averse (a smaller ), the



                                                 26
speculative profit is higher (Panel B). This is because the belief wedge is larger which implies that
the market price of uncertainty h (m) is also larger (Panel D.)
   The sensitivity   is not monotonic in . A firm with a higher value of  pays out sooner
to shareholders (a lower value of w), and optimally increases exposes the entrepreneur's exposure
to liquidation risk when its cash balance m is sufficiently high. This is because as w  w, the
investors' endogenous risk aversion approaches zero and   approaches unity. In contrast, when w
is sufficiently close to the liquidation boundary, the PPS   is always (weakly) lower when investors
are less concerned about the entrepreneur's model. This is because the going concern value for a
firm with a higher value of  is larger and as a result investors become more prudent by lowering
  (w) when w is not high. This explains why we have a crossing for   for the high and low 
cases.
   Next, we summarize our implementation by linking a firm's balance sheet to its cash flow
statements.

4.2      Enterprise Value, Tobin's Average q , and Balance Sheet

The firm's enterprise value is the present value of the firm's cash flows under the investor's en-
dogenously determined belief Qh . Note that here we are netting out the compensation to the
entrepreneur as it is a transfer from investors to the entrepreneur. That is,
                                               
                                                  e-r(s-t) dYs + e-r( -t) K .
                                    Q   
                             Vt = Et h                                                            (48)
                                           t

Thus the firm's enterprise value Vt is equal to the sum of the present value of the cash flows
generated by the firm's project and the liquidation value. In the first best case, liquidation is never
optimal and the firm's enterprise value is simply equal to q F B Kt where q F B is the firm's Tobin's
average q given in (14).
   We show that the firm's enterprise value is equal to the sum of its debt and equity values minus
cash. Creditors and (inside and outside) equity investors together own the firm including its going-
concern value and cash balances. Using outside investors endogenously determined belief Qh , we
may calculate the firm's enterprise value, Vt , as follows:

                                           V t = B t + S t - Mt .                                 (49)

Note that the firm's enterprise value Vt is the sum of the firm's net debt, Bt - Mt and the market
value of its equity held by both outside equity investors and the entrepreneur. We give the proof
of equation (49) in Appendix A.


                                                       27
                           Liquid Assets: 
                                                                          Debt: 



                                 Capital: 


                                                             Outside Equity:   Inside Equity:
                                                               (1 - )                
                           Goodwill:  - 




                                           Figure 4: Balance Sheet.


   Figure 4 illustrates the firm's balance sheet. On the liability side, the firm's market value of
debt is Bt and its equity value is St . The fraction  of its equity is held by the entrepreneur and
the remaining 1 -  fraction is held by outside equity investors. On the asset side, the firm's cash
holding is Mt , the firm's capital stock is Kt , and the goodwill is Vt - Kt , where Vt is the firm's
enterprise value defined in equation (49). At each time t, the two sides of the balance sheet are
equal, i.e., Mt + Vt = Bt + St as given in (49).
   We further link the investors' value function P (Kt , Wt ) from the contracting model to the firm's
enterprise value Vt in our financial implementation as follows:
                                       
                                          e-r(s-t) dUs
                                                     
                                                       - Kt (Q
                          Q   
     Vt = P (Kt , Wt ) + Et h                                 h ) = P (Kt , Wt ) + St - Kt (Qh ) .   (50)
                                   t

Therefore, we obtain
                                       Vt - St = P (Kt , Wt ) - Kt (Qh ) .                           (51)

The right side of (51) is equal to the investors' value P (Kt , Wt ) minus the penalty due to investors'
ambiguity aversion. The left side of (51) is equal to the firm's total enterprise value minus the market
value of the entrepreneur's inside equity. In equilibrium, as the contracting and implementation
formulations are equivalent and dual to each other, the two sides of (51), using the same belief and
the same discount rate r to value the investors' total value, have to be equal.
   We define average q as the ratio of firm value to the capital stock qa (t) = Vt /Kt . Equation (49)
implies that qa,t = s(mt ) + b(mt ) - mt . In Appendix B we provide an ODE characterization for


                                                        28
                                                    qa (6m)




                                   FB
                                   low 3
                                   high 3




                          1




                              0                         m2              m1




Figure 5: Tobin's average q . The agency problem and investors' concern for the entrepreneur's
model lower Tobin's average q from the first-best value q F B . Additionally, Tobin's average q
increases with cash balance m for a given level of . The more the investors are concerned about
the entrepreneur's productivity model the lower the firm's average q .


qa (w) = qa (m). Figure 5 presents average q for the robust contract with agency for two values
of  and compare with the first-best q F B . Tobin's average q increases with cash balances m and
ambiguity aversion lowers average q. For all cases average q starts at qa (0) = and increases to the
payout boundary such that qa (w) = 0.
    Finally, we conclude our financial implementation by discussing the initial capital structure.


Initial Capital Structure.        The firm with an initial capital stock K0 sets up its capital structure
at time 0 by raising debt with market value of B0 and issuing equity to outside investors with market
value of (1 - )S0 . Because the firm needs to motivate the financially constrained entrepreneur
to exert effort, it allocates  fraction of its equity as the long-term compensation package to the
entrepreneur. The firm's initial cash balance is M0 = B0 + S0 - V0 .


5    Quantitative Analysis

In this section, we analyze our model's quantitative implications for asset pricing and corporate
policies.




                                                    29
5.1       Equity Premium and Default Risk

The investors' concern about the entrepreneur's productivity model generates an endogenous mar-
ket price of model uncertainty h (mt ) > 0. By construction, equity premium is zero in DFHW
(2012). In contrast, the market price of uncertainty generates a positive equity premium in our
model. We define the conditional expected equity premium under measure Pa , e (mt ), as follows:
                                                             1 Pa         dUt
                                              e (mt )            E            + dSt           -r,
                                                            St dt t        
where mt is the scaled cash balance. Similar to Miao and Rivera (2016), we can show that
                                                                       s (mt )   (mt )
                                                 e (mt ) = h (mt )                     .                                          (52)
                                                                       s(mt )    
       We follow BMPR (2007) and use the credit spread on a consol bond to measure default risk.
The consol bond pays one dollar at each date until the firm defaults at  and nothing afterwards.
Let t denote the credit spread on this consol bond. Equilibrium pricing implies
                                                                                       
                                                 e-(r+t )(s-t) ds = Et h                  e-r(s-t) ds .
                                                                          Q   
                                                                                                                                  (53)
                                          t                                        t
It is helpful to introduce Dt , the market value of a default-contingent contract that pays the contract
holder one dollar at default time  . Using investors' endogenous belief Qh , we have

                                                               e-r( -t)
                                                        Q   
                                              Dt = Et h                        for t  [0,  ] .                                    (54)

Using (54) to solve t defined in equation (53),15 we obtain t = rDt / (1 - Dt ), which implies
that the credit spread t increases with the value of the default-contingent contact, Dt .
       Figure 6 presents the equity premium e (m) and the credit spread  (m) as functions of the
level of cash reserves m for three different values of . We find that both the equity premium
and credit spread increase with investors' concern for the entrepreneur's productivity (1/) and
decreases with cash balance (m). Intuitively, investors' concern for the entrepreneur's productivity
causes equity value under the endogenous belief Qh to be lower than under the reference belief
Pa as ambiguity-averse investors demands an expected return premium for holding risky equity.
       Unlike in Miao and Rivera (2016), the equity premium and credit risk are also related to in-
vestment and average q. Agency and investors' concern for the entrepreneur's productivity together
determine corporate investment, the equity premium, and credit spread. Our model predicts that
firms that invest more tend to have a lower equity premium, lower credit spread, and higher cash
balances (or more financial slack). These results are broadly in line with empirical studies by Zhang
(2005), Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2015), and Chordia et al. (2017).
                 Q             -r (s-t)             
                                                       e-r(s-t) ds 1 - Et h
                                                                          Q 
  15
       By using Et h         t
                                e        ds   =    t
                                                                                 e-r( -t)      = (1 - Dt )/r and the definition for the
                           -(r +t )(s-t)
credit spread,   t
                       e                ds = 1/(r + t ), we obtain t = rDt / (1 - Dt ) .


                                                                     30
                           A.      e(m)                                           B.    "(m)
        10                                                         10
                                              3 = 0:50
         9                                    3 = 1: 0             9
                                              3 = 5: 0
         8                                                         8

         7                                                         7

         6                                                         6

         5                                                         5

         4                                                         4

         3                                                         3

         2                                                         2

         1                                                         1

         0                                                         0
             0   0.2       0.4        0.6    0.8         1              0   0.2   0.4       0.6       0.8     1
                                  m                                                     m




Figure 6: Equity premium e(m) and credit spread (m). The equity premium and credit
spread are higher when investors are more concerned about the entrepreneur's productivity model
(i.e., when  is lower.) Also, both e(m) and (m) decrease with cash balance m.

5.2   Parameter Values

Next, we calibrate our model. We choose the widely used quadratic adjustment cost function:
                                                                    2
                                                   c (i) = i +       i ,                                             (55)
                                                                   2
where  is a positive parameter (Hayashi (1982)). The first-best optimal investment i and average
q are given by
                                                             2
                       iF B = r +  -        (r +  )2 -         [µ - (r +  )], q F B = 1 + iF B ,
                                                             
where we assume that (r +  )2 - 2 (µ - (r +  )) / > 0. Clearly, assuming                          < q F B is sufficient to
ensure that liquidation is never optimal in the first-best contract.
   Table 1 reports the parameter values used for our baseline calculation, which is based on the
baseline case in DFHW (2012). Specifically, we set the annual risk-free rate at r = 4.6%, the
annual mean and volatility of productivity to µ = 20% and  = 26%. For capital stock, we set the
liquidation recovery at          = 0.97 per unit of capital, the capital adjustment parameter at  = 2,
and the annual depreciation rate of capital stock at  = 12.5%. Finally, we set the entrepreneur's
annual discount rate at  = 5%, and the agency parameter at  = 0.2.
   The new parameter in our model is the key robustness parameter . Following Anderson,
Hansen, and Sargent (2003), and Hansen and Sargent (2008), we use the detection error probability
method to calibrate this parameter to 2.8.
   Specifically, recall that Pa is the entrepreneur's belief where the effort level at = 1 for all t,

which is an approximating model to an unknown true model, and Qh is the investors' equilibrium

                                                              31
Table 1: Baseline parameter values. All parameter values are continuously compounded and
annualized whenever applicable.


                        Parameters                              Symbol               Value
                        Risk-free rate                            r                  4.6%
                        Depreciation rate of capital stock                           12.5%
                        Mean of productivity shock                µ                   20%
                        Volatility of productivity shock                              26%
                        Entrepreneur's discount rate                                   5%
                        Adjustment cost parameter                                      2.0
                        Agency parameter                                               0.2
                        Liquidation recovery value                                    0.97
                        Robustness parameter                                           2.8



belief, also the worst-case measure for the robust contract with agency. The likelihood ratio between
these two measures is given by the following Radon-Nikodym derivative:
                                                t                             t
                  dQh                                              1
                             = h
                               t = exp -            h (ws )dZs
                                                             a
                                                               -                  (h (ws ))2 ds ,   (56)
                  dPa   Ft                  0                      2      0

where h is given in Proposition 1. The detection-error probability is defined as
                              1                1       h
                        T () = Pa ln( h
                                      T )  0} + Qh ln( T )  0                                       (57)
                              2                2
for some large T. This probability T () describes the likelihood of wrongly rejecting the true model,
which could be either the entrepreneur's approximating model Pa or the investors' endogenous
belief Qh , based on a finite sample of T years. We calculate T () using Monte Carlo simulations
as there is no analytical expression.
   We consider two cases with T = 10 and T = 20 years. Figure 7 plots the relation between
T () and the robustness parameter . First, consider the special case where investors fully trust
the entrepreneur's productivity level ( = ). In this case, there is only one model on the table
(Pa is true and the same as Qh ). If this model is rejected, it must be erroneous. That is, the
detection error probability is one, which is the value we obtain from (57).
   In contrast, when investors are concerned about the entrepreneurs' model (a finite value of ),
there is an economic and statistically meaningful difference between Pa and Qh . The lower the
value of , the more significant the difference between the two models is. This suggests that the
likelihood of erroneously rejecting the true model decreases as the investors become more concerned
about the entrepreneur's productivity model (i.e, as  decreases.) Indeed, Figure 7 confirms our
intuition as T () increases with  for a fixed T.

                                                     32
                                                        ,T (3)
                          0.7



                          0.6



                          0.5



                          0.4



                          0.3



                          0.2



                          0.1                                                   T = 10 years
                                                                                T = 20 years

                           0
                                0   10   20   30   40    50      60   70   80      90          100
                                                          3




Figure 7: Detection error probabilities T () as a function of the parameter . We plot
T () for two cases: T = 10 and T = 20 years. All other parameter values are reported in Table 1.


   Anderson, Hansen, and Sargent (2003) suggest that modelers choose  to target the implied
T () to at least 10%. By targeting T () at 10%, we obtain  = 2.8 for T = 10 years and  = 4.1
for T = 20 years. Note that with a longer sample (20 versus 10 years), the true model is less likely
to be rejected. Therefore, to attain the same level of detection error probability, e.g., 10%, we need
investors to be less concerned about the entrepreneur's model for a longer sample. This explains
why  = 4.1 for T = 20 and  = 2.8 for T = 10 as 20 (4.1) = 10 (2.8). For our baseline calculation,
we choose  = 2.8 and T = 10 (which seems sufficiently long for an entrepreneurial project.)

5.3   Quantitative Results

As in DFHW (2012), we simulate our model at the monthly frequency and generate sample paths
that lasts 20 years unless the firm is liquidated, i.e., ending at min{20,  }. Each simulation starts
with w0 = arg max p(w). That is, we assume that the investors have all the bargaining power. We
repeat the simulation 5,000 times and report various (sample) moments in Table 2.
   Column (1) of Table 2 replicates the results in DFHW (2012) which corresponds to  = 
in our model. Column (6) presents the results for our baseline calibration with  = 2.8. The
differences between columns (1) and (6) are entirely caused by the investors' concern for the en-
trepreneur's productivity model. Investors' concern for the entrepreneur's model delays payout to
the entrepreneur, reduces the average level and volatility of the investment-capital ratio, lowers
Tobin's average q , raises the average credit spread, and induces a large equity premium of 3.79%
per annum, even though investors are risk neutral.


                                                        33
Table 2: Quantitative comparative static results with respect to  and . All other
parameter values are reported in Table 1. Under the first best, q F B = 1.31 and iF B = 0.16.

                                                  (1)    (2)    (3)    (4)     (5)    (6)     (7)
     Robustness parameter                                4.1    4.1    4.1     2.8    2.8     2.8
     Agency parameter                             0.2    0.1    0.2    0.4     0.1    0.2     0.4

     Payout boundary w                           0.43   0.99   1.02   1.10    1.10   1.12    1.18
     Investment reduction (%), iF B - i (w)      6.14   8.31   8.70   9.48    9.46   9.63    9.89
     Investment volatility (%),   (w)i (w)       1.48   0.97   1.26   1.43    0.96   1.24    1.35
     Firm value reduction, q F B - qa (w)        0.06   0.19   0.18   0.17    0.23   0.21    0.19
     Equity premium (%), e(m)                    0.00   1.91   2.38   4.38    2.93   3.79    7.42
     credit spread (%), (m)                      1.75   0.77   2.42   13.04   0.86   2.84    17.34



   Table 2 also presents comparative static results with respect to  and . As the agency problem
becomes more severe when  increases, the firm becomes more financially constrained and hence
payout boundary w increases, underinvestment distortion iF B - i (w) becomes more severe, invest-
ment volatility   (w)i (w) increases, and both the equity premium and credit spread increase.
The effect on firm value reduction q F B - q (w) is subtle. For both  = 4.1 and  = 2.8 cases, the
firm value reduction decreases and hence firm's average q increases with .
   The last monotonicity result is the opposite of that in DFHW (2012). The difference is entirely
caused by investors' concern for the entrepreneur's model. The intuition is as follows. For incentive
compatibility considerations, a higher value of  causes the entrepreneur's w to be more exposed to
cash flow risk. While this higher risk exposure raises the risk of liquidation, it also allows investors
to let the more optimistic entrepreneur own a larger fraction of the firm at a cheaper valuation
under their belief Qh . The net effect is that a firm's average q is higher if investors' concern for
the entrepreneur's model is sufficiently large, for both  = 2.8 and  = 4.1 cases.
   Now consider the effect of changing the investors' concern for the entrepreneur's model by
comparing columns (1), (3), and (6). As investors become more concerned about the entrepreneur's
model (i.e., as  decreases), the firm delays its payout (w), under-investment (iF B - i (w)) and
firm value loss (q F B - qa (w)) become more significant, and both the equity premium and credit
spread increase. These results are intuitive. The effect of changing  on investment volatility is less
obvious. Investors who are more concerned about the entrepreneur's model (a lower ), are more
averse to inefficient liquidation and hence an optimal contract calls for a less volatile investment,
especially when the entrepreneur's w is sufficiently large (see Panel C of Figure 3).
   The quantitative effects of investors' concern for the entrepreneur's model are significant for


                                                  34
                          0.07




                          0.06




                          0.05




                          0.04




                          0.03




                          0.02




                          0.01




                            0
                                 0   5     10     15      20      25     30




Figure 8: Entrepreneur's equilibrium overconfidence and the IRR wedge due to the
entrepreneur's and investors' belief wedge: IRR(Pa ) - IRR(Qh ). Note that IRR(Qh ) = r.
We use parameter values for the baseline case reported in Table 1 and set w0 at arg maxw p(w).
For our baseline calibration with  = 2.8, the implied IRR wedge is 3.5% per annum.


both quantities and prices. For example, with our calibrated value of  = 2.8, the mean of Tobin's
average q is only 1.10, which is significantly lower than q F B = 1.31 by 0.21, compared with the
value of 1.25 for  = ; the average investment reduction is 9.63% and the investment volatility
is 1.24%, compared with 6.14% and 1.48% for  = ; and the equilibrium equity premium is
3.8% per annum rather than zero for  = . Our analysis shows that with plausible values for
the robustness parameter , the quantitative predictions are drastically different from those in the
standard model with  = .
   Our model also sheds light on different return expectations for the entrepreneur and investors in
equilibrium. In the next subsection, we show that different returns can be quite sizable, especially
for early stage projects and/or first-time (less experienced) entrepreneurs.

5.4   Internal Rate of Return (IRR)

A key valuation issue widely discussed in the VC industry and also in MBA Entrepreneurial Finance
classes is why the IRRs that VCs use to value projects are so high relative to the standard cost of
capital calculations (even with large  s) that we use to make investment decisions. There are various
explanations, e.g., VCs' skill/value-add, network, and market power. One common explanation is
that entrepreneurs tend to be overly optimistic and are often unrealistic about their projections.
Rather than discouraging and trying to convince the entrepreneur and expressing their concerns



                                                 35
for the entrepreneur's productivity model, investors can simply use the entrepreneur's belief model
when quoting the cost of capital for the project to the entrepreneur. Doing so, the VCs achieves
the same goal without making the entrepreneur feel that they do not trust the entrepreneur's
productivity model Pa .
    We now calculate the project's IRR based on the entrepreneur's belief Pa . That is, we compute
IRR(Pa ) by solving the following equation:
                                        
                       V0 = EPa            e-IRR(Pa )·s dYs + e-IRR(Pa )· K   ,
                                    0
where V0 is the firm's enterprise value given by (48). Since investors are break-even in our model,
the IRR for the risk-neutral deep pocketed investors is equal to the risk-free rate r under their
equilibrium belief Qh , i.e., IRR(Qh ) = r. In Appendix B, we verify the following result:
                                               h (w) [1 +   (w)v (w)]
                 IRR(Pa ) - IRR(Qh ) =                                , w  [0, w] .
                                                        v (w)
Using the ODE for v (w) given in Appendix B, we plot the IRR wedge IRR(Pa ) - IRR(Qh ) as a
function of  in Figure 8.
    This figure shows how the IRR wedge decreases as the investors become less concerned about
the entrepreneur's productivity model. For each level of , we set w0 = arg maxw p(w) by assigning
all the bargaining power to the investors in this calculation. At our calibrated value of  = 2.8,
this IRR wedge is 3.54% per annum, which is quite large. In the limit as    (as in the rational
expectations model), the belief wedge disappears, which in turn drives the IRR wedge to zero. As
investors become more concerned about the entrepreneur's model (as  decreases), the belief wedge
widens, which in turn causes the IRR wedge IRR(Pa ) - IRR(Qh ) to increase.


6    Conclusion

We have developed a continuous-time contracting model with investment in which investors are
concerned about the entrepreneur's productivity model. We characterize the robust contract and
show that early liquidation can be optimal when investors are sufficiently ambiguity averse. We pro-
vide a novel implementation of the robust contract by debt, equity, cash, and a financial derivative
asset. The derivable asset is used to hedge against the investors' concern that the entrepreneur's
productivity model may be misspecified. Our calibrated model generates sizable equity premium
and credit spread. We also find that (i) ambiguity aversion lowers Tobin's q , the average investment
rate, and investment volatility; (ii) the equity premium and the credit spread decrease with Tobin's
q, and (iii) the entrepreneur values the project at an internal rate of return 3.5% per annum higher
than investors do.

                                                    36
Appendices

A     Proofs

To ensure that the model is well posed, we impose the following conditions on Kt and the en-
trepreneur's compensation process Ut . Specifically, under the equivalent measure Qh induced by
h  Ha , where Ha is the set of density generators associated with effort a  [0, 1], we require
                             T
                 EQh             (e-rt Kt )2 dt < ,             T > 0,           and    lim EQh e-rT KT = 0,             (A.1)
                         0                                                              T 

and
                                                                                  2
                                                       EQh             e-s dUs         < .                               (A.2)
                                                                0


Proof of Proposition 1.                   Our proof of Proposition 1 essentially follows the proof of Proposition
1 in DFHW (2012) and the proof of Propositions 1 and 2 in Miao and Rivera (2016). We thus omit
the proof here.


Proof of Equation (49).                    Using the process (17) for the entrepreneur's continuous utility Wt ,
we obtain:

                                                                                                                      
    d(e-rt Wt ) = e-rt dWt - re-rt Wt dt = e-rt (( - r)Wt -                               h
                                                             t Kt ht ) dt - dUt +  t Kt dZt                                  .

Integrating over the interval [t, T   ] for any T > t, we obtain
            T 
                 d(e-rs Ws )           = e-r(T  ) WT  - e-rt Wt
        t
                                                T 
                                                                                                               
                                       =                e-rs (( - r)Ws -                               h
                                                                          s Ks hs ) ds - dUs +  s Ks dZs          .
                                            t

Rewriting the preceding equation yields
                                                       T 
                                                                                                                  
      e-r(T  ) WT  = e-rt Wt +                              e-rs (( - r)Ws -                               h
                                                                              s Ks hs ) ds - dUs +  s Ks dZs             .
                                                   t

By using  = inf {t  0 : Wt = 0}, which implies W = 0, letting T  , using Mt = Wt /, and
calculating the expectation under the measure Qh , we obtain:
                                                                  
                                                                dUs                  Ks h
                                                   e-r(s-t)         - ( - r)Ms ds + s    s
                                   Q   
                       Mt = Et h                                                           ds          .                 (A.3)
                                            t                                         




                                                                         37
   Summing up the firm's bond value Bt and equity value St , we obtain:
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                   s -
                                   e-r(s-t) [Ks (µ - c(i                                               e-r(s-t)           Ks h
               Q    
Bt + St = Et h                                          s )) - ( - r )Ms ] ds +                                               s ds
                           t                                                                    t                    
                                                                        
                                                                                   1 
                               e-r( -t) K + Et h                           e-r(s-t) dUs
                    Q                                  Q   
               +Et h                                                                                                          (A.4)
                                                                    t              
                               
                                   e-r(s-t) (Ks (µ - c(i           
                                                                                                       e-r( -t) K
               Q                                                                            Q   
         = Et h                                         s )) - Ks hs ) ds + Et
                                                                               h

                           t
                                                   
                                                 dUs                  Ks h
                                      e-r(s-t)       - ( - r)Ms ds + s    s
                    Q   
              +Et h                                                         ds                                                (A.5)
                               t                                       
                               
                                   e-r(s-t) dYs + e-r( -t) K + Mt
               Q    
         = Et h                                                                                                               (A.6)
                           t
         = Vt + M t ,                                                                                                         (A.7)

where (A.4) uses the present-value formulas for St and Bt given in equations (40) and (42), (A.5)
rearranges (A.4), and (A.6) uses the expression (A.3) for Mt and the expression (48) for the firm's
enterprise value, Vt . We now have proved the identity Vt = Bt + St - Mt stated in (49).

Proposition 2 Let assumptions in Proposition 1 hold. Then the scaled value function p (w) in-
creases with  for w  (0, w) .


Proof. Our proof builds on DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006), and Miao and Rivera (2016). Using
the envelope theorem and differentiating (24) with respect to , we obtain
             p(w)                            p (w)               p(w)  2 [  (w)]2 p (w)
         r              = ( +  - i (w))w           + (i (w) -  )     +
                                                                           2         
                                 2                               2               2
                                  [ (w)p (w) + 1]  (w) p (w)  [1 +  (w) p (w)]
                               -                              +                    .
                                                                       22
Using (28) for h (w), we rewrite the preceding equation as
                                          p(w)                                                                    p (w)
               (r +  - i (w))                     = [( +  - i (w))w -   (w) h (w)]
                                                                                                                   
                                                               [  (w) ]2 p (w) [h (w)]2
                                                           +                  +         .
                                                                   2              2
We write the dynamics of wt as
                                                                                                                      
               dwt = [( +  - i (wt ))wt -   (wt ) h (wt )] dt - du             h
                                                                  t +  (wt ) dZt ,
         
where Z h is the standard Brownian motion under the measure Qh . Using the Feynman-Kac
formula, we can show
                                                                                      2
                           p(w)                                 s
                                                                    g (wu )du [h (w )]
                                                          e-
                                   Q 
                                = Et h                         t                          ds wt = w > 0,
                                                   t                              2
where g (w) = r +  - i (w) . Thus, p(w) is an increasing function of  for any given w  (0, w).

                                                                           38
Proposition 3 The sufficient and necessary condition of implementing the highest effort a = 1 is
             (p(w) - wp (w) - 1)2                                                2
                                      ( + r)p(w) - p (w)[( +  )w - µ] +
                      2                                                          2
                                              2                  p (w)2       2p (w)
                                          -     max    p (w) -            2 -         .       (A.8)
                                              2                                  

Proof. Our proof builds on DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006), DFHW (2012), and Miao and Rivera
(2016). The high effort level is optimal if and only if

            rp(w)        sup    -µp (w) - c(i) + ( +  - i)wp (w)
                        i, 

                                          2  2 p (w)  2    1           1            2
                        +(i -  )p(w) +              -        + p (w) +   p (w)            .   (A.9)
                                              2            2           2
Substituting the adjustment cost c(i) = i+i2 /2 and the optimal rate i (w) = (p(w)-wp (w)-1)/
into the inequality given in (A.8), we obtain (A.9) stated in Proposition 3.


B     Asset Pricing Formulas

ODE for the scaled equity value s(mt ).         Under the measure Qh , the scaled cash reserves mt
evolves as follows:
                                                               h
                       dmt = ( +  - i             
                                     t )mt dt - dut / +
                                                          t
                                                             dZt - ht dt .                    (B.1)
                                                          
Using Ito's Lemma, we obtain the following ODE for s(mt ) = St /Kt in the region mt  [0, w/]:
                               (  (m)  )2                          (m)  
rs(m) = (i (m) -  )s(m) +            2    s (m) + ( +  - it )m -       h (m) s (m),
                                   2                                
subject to the boundary conditions s(0) = 0 and s (w/) = 1.


ODE for the scaled debt value b(mt ).          The ODE for b(mt ) = Bt /Kt for mt  [0, w/] is
                                               (m) -  
       rb(m) = µ - c(i (m)) - ( - r)m +               h (m)  + (i (m) -  )b(m)
                                                
                                         (m)               (  (m)  )2
                      + ( +  - it )m -       h (m) b (m) +            b (m),
                                                               22
subject to the boundary conditions subject to the boundary conditions b(0) =      and b (w/) = 0 .


Price of Dt = D (mt ) defined in (54). Using essentially the same argument as for s (mt ) and
b (mt ), we obtain the following ODE for Dt = D (mt ) for m  [0, w/]:
                                           (m)               [  (m)  ]2
          rD (m) = ( +  - it )m -              h (m) D (m) +            D (m) ,
                                                                 22
subject to the boundary conditions D (0) = 1 and D (w/) = 0.

                                                  39
ODE for the scaled market value of firm v (mt ).                         Let v (w) = Vt /Kt . Then v (w) solves the
following ODE:

                rv (w) = µ - c (i (w)) - h (w)  + [i (w) -  ] v (w)
                                                                                  [  (w)  ]2                      (B.2)
                              + [( +  - i              
                                         t )w -  (w ) h (w )] v (w ) +                       v (w) ,
                                                                                      2
subject to the boundary conditions v (0) =              and v (w) = 0. Since Tobin's average q is given by
qt = Vt /Kt , we may write qt as a function of wt , i.e., qa (wt ), where qa (w) = v (w).

                                                                                   t -IRR(Pa )·s
ODE for the entrepreneur's IRR(Pa ).                  By recognizing that         0 e            dYs + e-IRR(Pa )t Vt
is a martingale under Pa and using Vt = v (wt )Kt and the property that a martingale's drift is
zero, we obtain the following differential equation:

                                                                                          [  (w)  ]2
 IRR(Pa )v (w) = µ - c (i (w))+[i (w) -  ] v (w)+[( +  - it )w ] v (w )+                             v (w) . (B.3)
                                                                                              2

Since investors break even under their belief Qh , we have IRR(Qh ) = r. Subtracting (B.2) from
(B.3) on both sides and using IRR(Qh ) = r, we obtain the following IRR wedge:

                                                  h (w) [1 +   (w)v (w)]
                    IRR(Pa ) - IRR(Qh ) =                                , w  [0, w].
                                                           v (w)

C       Robust Contract without Agency

When   0, the incentive constraint (16) becomes irrelevant and the solution characterized in
Proposition 1 reduces to the robust contract without agency. For this case, we show that the scaled
value function p (w) is globally concave, h (w) > 0, and   (w) > 0.
    Under the belief Qh , we use (6) to rewrite (15) as

                                                                                  h
                      dWt = (Wt -  t Kt ht ) dt - dUt - µ(1 - at )Kt dt +  t Kt dZt .                             (C.1)

Using (2) and the Girsanov theorem, we can rewrite the objective function in (13) under Qh as
                                                                                                  
                                                                                          1
  EQh           e-rt (Kt (at µ - ht ) - C (It , Kt )) dt -           e-rt dUt + e-r K +              e-rt (Kt )h2
                                                                                                                t dt .
         0                                                    0                           2   0

Investors' value function P (K, W ) satisfies the HJB equation

                                                                                           1
    rP (Kt , Wt ) dt =           sup         inf Kt (at µ - ht )dt - C (It , Kt )dt - dUt + h2 (Kt )dt
                              It ,dUt ,at , t ht                                           2 t
                                           +PW (Kt , Wt ) [(Wt -  t Kt ht ) dt - dUt - µ(1 - at )Kt dt]
                                                                        1
                                           +PK (Kt , Wt ) (It - Kt )dt + PW W (Kt , Wt ) ( t Kt  )2 dt . (C.2)
                                                                        2

                                                             40
Since dUt  0, the FOC for dUt implies PW (Kt , Wt )  -1. Additionally, if PW (Kt , Wt ) > -1, we
have dUt = 0.
   Further simplifying the HJB equation (C.2), we obtain
                                                                      1
        rP (Kt , Wt ) =       sup inf Kt (at µ - ht ) - C (It , Kt ) + h2 (Kt )
                                      h
                            It ,at , t t                              2 t
                                                +PW (Kt , Wt ) [(Wt -  t Kt ht ) - µ(1 - at )Kt ]
                                                                           1
                                                +PK (Kt , Wt ) (It - Kt ) + PW W (Kt , Wt ) ( t Kt  )2 .   (C.3)
                                                                           2
The FOC for ht is
                                                    Kt  [1 +  t PW (Kt , Wt )]
                                           ht =                                .                           (C.4)
                                                             (Kt )
Since (Kt ) > 0, this condition is also sufficient for ht to be the minimizer. Substituting this

expression into the HJB equation (C.3) yields
                                                                                22
                                                                               Kt
   rP (Kt , Wt ) =      sup       Kt [at µ - µ(1 - a)PW (Kt , Wt )] -                - C (It , Kt )
                     It ,at , t                                               2(Kt )
                                                                                        2  2 P (K , W )
                                                                                       Kt     W  t   t t
                                   +(It - Kt )PK (Kt , Wt ) + Wt PW (Kt , Wt ) -
                                                                                              (Kt )
                                        22
                                       Kt        (Kt )PW W (Kt , Wt ) - PW (Kt , Wt )2  2
                                                                                        t
                                   +                                                      .            (C.5)
                                                            2(Kt )
If (Kt )PW W (Kt , Wt ) - PW (Kt , Wt )2 < 0, then using the HJB equation (C.5), we obtain the
following FOC for   :
                                                     PW (Kt , Wt )
                                  t =                                            .
                                           (Kt )PW W (Kt , Wt ) - PW (Kt , Wt )2
   Note that at = 1 is optimal for all t. Since C (I, K ) is convex in I, the first-order condition
                                                                     = C -1 (P (K , W ) , K ) .
PK (Kt , Wt ) = CI (It , Kt ) implies the optimal investment rule: It   I     K  t   t     t

   Substituting the solutions              
                               t , It and at into (C.5), we obtain a partial differential equation

for P (K, W ). Let w = W/K and p(w) = P (K, W )/K . Using the homogeneity property, we
characterize the robust contract without agency in the following proposition.

Proposition 4 (robust contract without agency) Suppose that p (w) satisfies the ODE on [0, w] :

                  rp (w) = max µ - c (i) + (i -  )p(w) + ( +  - i)wp (w)                                   (C.6)
                                     , i

                                                2               p (w)2              2 p (w)  2
                                            +         p (w) -             2 -               - ,
                                                2                                            2

subject to the conditions p (w) > -1 on [0, w) and
                                  µ - c (i (0)) -  2 / (2)
                     p(0) =                                , p (w) = -1, p (w) = 0,                        (C.7)
                                       r +  - i (0)

                                                             41
where i (w) satisfies (29). Suppose that        < p (0) and p (w) - [p (w)]2 < 0 hold. Then (i) for
w  [0, w], the optimal sensitivity is given by
                                                    p (w)
                                       (w) =                     ,                            (C.8)
                                                p (w) - [p (w)]2
and the worst-case density generator is given by
                                     [1 +   (w) p (w)]      p (w)
                         h (w) =                       =                  .                   (C.9)
                                                         p (w) - [p (w)]2
The firm is never liquidated and the principal's scaled value function is p (w) . The optimal in-
vestment rate is i (w). The entrepreneur always exerts high effort level at = 1 and his scaled

continuation value wt satisfies
                                                                                     
              dwt = [( +  - i (wt ))wt -   (wt ) h (wt )] dt - du             h
                                                                 t +  (wt ) dZt ,            (C.10)

for wt  [0, w]. The optimal compensation dUt = Kt dut keeps (wt ) reflecting at w and satisfies


                                       dut = max {wt - w, 0} .                               (C.11)

(ii) For w > w, p(w) = p(w) - (w - w). The principal pays w - w immediately to the entrepreneur
and the contract continues with the entrepreneur's new initial value w.

   The following result shows that p (w) is concave for the robust contact without agency.

Proposition 5 Let assumptions in Proposition 4 hold. The scaled value function p (w) is concave,
h (w) > 0, and   (w)  [0, 1] in the region where (0, w).


Proof: Substituting the optimal i (w) and the optimal sensitivity   (w) into (C.6), we obtain:

                                  (p - wp - 1)2               2  (p )2     2
                (r +  ) p = µ +                 + ( +  ) wp -           2 - .                (C.12)
                                        2                     2 p - (p )   2

Differentiating (C.12), we obtain
                                    - (p - wp - 1) wp
                   (r +  ) p   =                      + ( +  ) p + wp                        (C.13)
                                            

                                       2 2p p    p - (p )2 - (p )2 (p - 2p p )
                                    -                                   2        .
                                      2                             2
                                                         p - (p )

Evaluating (C.13) at the payout boundary w, and using p (w) = -1 and p (w) = 0, we obtain

                                        2
                                          p (w) =  - r > 0.
                                        2

                                                    42
Therefore, p (w - ) > 0 for small       > 0. Let q (w) = p (w) - wp (w) . We may rewrite (C.12) as

                                     (q - 1)2               2  (p )2      2
                   (r +  ) q = µ +            + ( - r) wp -             -   .
                                        2                   2 p - (p )2   2

Suppose that there exists w < w such that p (w) = 0. Choose the largest w such that p (w + ) < 0
for a small   > 0. Evaluating the above equation at w, we obtain

                                                  (q (w) - 1)2
                         (r +  ) q (w) = µ +                   + ( - r) wp (w) .
                                                       2
Since p (w) > -1, q (w) < p (w) + w < q F B . Recall that
                                                                     2
                                                 FB       qF B - 1
                                     (r +  ) q        =µ+                .
                                                             2
Therefore, ( - r) wp (w) < 0, which implies p (w) < 0. Evaluating (C.13) at w, we obtain
                                                                  2 p (w )
                            (r +  ) p (w) = ( +  ) p (w) +                  .
                                                                 2 [p (w)]2

As  > r, the preceding equation implies p (w) > 0. This leads to a contradiction as by assumption
p (w) = 0 and p (w + ) < 0. Therefore, p(w) is concave in w  (0, w).
   Since p (w) < 0, it follows from (C.9) that h (w) > 0. Since p (w) takes the largest value at
w = 0 and since p (w) < 0, we deduce that p (w) < 0 for w > 0. It follows from (C.8) that
  (w)  [0, 1] .
   Panels A and B of Figure 9 present the principal's scaled value function p (w) and investment
rule i (w) for two different values of  in the robust contract without agency. Panels C and D of
Figure 9 present the optimal sensitivity   (w) and the corresponding worst-case density generator
h (w). The straight lines in Figure 9 represent the solutions in the first-best case. We find that the
robust scaled value function is concave. Moreover, when the principal is more ambiguity averse,
i.e., when  is smaller, his scaled value function is smaller, the payout boundary is larger, and the
investment-capital ratio is lower. This means that ambiguity aversion is costly to the principal
(investors), delays payout to the entrepreneur, and causes underinvestment. The i(w) increases
with the entrepreneur's scaled continuation value w for w  [0, w] .
   Panels C and D of Figure 9 show that, when the principal is more ambiguity averse, his belief
is distorted more in the sense that the worst-case density generator h (w) is shifted upward more.
The density generator is positive so that the principal puts more weight on worse outcomes. This
is because the local mean of the Brownian motion is shifted downward under the principal's worst-
case belief by (6). The density generator decreases to zero at the payout boundary. At w = w, the
boundary conditions p (w) = -1 and p (w) = 0 imply that h (w) = 0 and   (w) = 1.

                                                       43
                                                     0




         0

             0                                           0


         1




                                                     0

             0




Figure 9: Optimal robust contract without agency. Investors' concerns for the entrepreneur's
model lower p(w) and i (w) from the first-best levels. For a given level of , the sensitivity   (w)
and i (w) increase with w, while the belief wedge h (w) decreases with w.


   The optimal sensitivity   (w) starts at zero when w = 0 and increases to one at the payout
boundary. This means that, in the robust contract without agency, the entrepreneur is partially
exposed to the productivity uncertainty and cannot fully insure the ambiguity averse principal for
low values of w. When w is larger, the entrepreneur can absorb more uncertainty. At the payout
boundary, the entrepreneur fully absorbs model uncertainty.




                                                44
References
Admati, Anat R., and Paul Pfleiderer, 1994, Robust financial contracting and the role of venture
   capitalists, The Journal of Finance 49, 371-402.

Aghion, Philippe, and Patrick Bolton, 1992, An Incomplete Contracts Approach to Financial
    Contracting, Review of Economic Studies 77, 338-401.

Ai, Hengjie, and Anmol Bhandari, 2020, Asset pricing with endogenously uninsurable tail risk,
    Econometrica, forthcoming.

Ai, Hengjie, and Rui Li, 2015, Investment and CEO Compensation under Limited Commitment,
    Journal of Financial Economics 116, 452-472.

Albuquerque, Rui, and Hugo A. Hopenhayn, 2004, Optimal lending contracts and firm dynamics,
    Review of Economic Studies 71, 285-315.

Anderson, Evan W., Lars Peter Hansen, and Thomas J. Sargent, 2003, A quartet of semigroups for
   model specification, robustness, prices of risk, and model detection, Journal of the European
   Economic Association 1, 68-123.

Biais, Bruno, Thomas Mariotti, Guillaume Plantin, and Jean-Charles Rochet, 2007, Dynamic
     security design: Convergence to continuous time and asset pricing implications, Review of
     Economic Studies 74, 345-390.

Biais, Bruno, Thomas Mariotti, Jean-Charles Rochet, and St´ephane Villeneuve, 2010, Large risks,
     limited liability, and dynamic moral hazard, Econometrica 78, 73-118.

Chen, Zengjing, and Larry Epstein, 2002, Ambiguity, risk, and asset returns in continuous time,
    Econometrica 70, 1403-1443.

Chordia, Tarun, Amit Goyal, Yoshio Nozawa, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, and Qing Tong, 2017,
    Are capital market anomalies common to equity and corporate bond markets? an empirical
    investigation, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 52, 1301-1342.

Clementi, Gian Luca, and Hugo A. Hopenhayn, 2006, A theory of financing constraints and firm
    dynamics, Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, 229-265.

DeMarzo, Peter M., and Michael J. Fishman, 2007a, Agency and optimal investment dynamics,
   Review of Financial Studies 20, 151-188.

DeMarzo, Peter M., and Michael J. Fishman, 2007b, Optimal long-term financial contracting,
   Review of Financial Studies 20, 2079-2128.

DeMarzo, Peter M., Michael J. Fishman, Zhiguo He, and Neng Wang, 2012, Dynamic agency and
   the q theory of investment, Journal of Finance 67, 2295-2340.

                                              45
DeMarzo, Peter M., and Yuliy Sannikov, 2006, Optimal security design and dynamic capital
   structure in a continuous-time agency model, Journal of Finance 61, 2681-2724.

Dicks, David L., and Paolo Fulghieri, 2019, Uncertainty aversion and systemic risk, Journal of
    Political Economy 127, 1118-1155.

Dicks, David L., and Paolo Fulghieri, 2020a, Uncertainty, Investor Sentiment, and Innovation,
    Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Dicks, David L., and Paolo Fulghieri, 2020b, Uncertainty and Contracting in Organizations, Work-
    ing paper, Baylor University and University of North Carolina.

Dumav, Martin, 2017, Continuous-Time Contracting with Ambiguous Perceptions, Working pa-
   per, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid.

Ellsberg, Daniel, 1961, Risk, ambiguity and the savage axiom, Quarterly Journal of Economics
     75, 643-669.

Epstein, Larry G., and Shaolin Ji, 2013, Ambiguous volatility and asset pricing in continuous
    time, Review of Financial Studies 26, 1740-1786.

Garlappi, Lorenzo, Ron Giammarino, and Ali Lazrak, 2017, Ambiguity and the corporation:
    Group disagreement and underinvestment, Journal of Financial Economics, 125, 417-433.

Gilboa, Itzhak, and David Schmeidler, 1989, Maxmin expected utility with non-unique prior,
    Journal of Mathematical Economics 18, 141-153.

Hansen, Lars Peter, and Thomas J. Sargent, 2001, Robust control and model uncertainty, Amer-
   ican Economic Review 91, 60-66.

Hansen, Lars Peter, and Thomas J. Sargent, 2008, Robustness. Princeton University Press.

Hansen, Lars Peter, Thomas J. Sargent, Gauhar Turmuhambetova, and Noah Williams, 2006,
   Robust control and model misspecification, Journal of Economic Theory 128, 45-90.

Hayashi, Fumio, 1982, Tobin's marginal q and average q : A neoclassical interpretation, Econo-
    metrica 50, 213-224.

Hou, Kewei, Chen Xue, Lu Zhang, 2015, Digesting anomalies: An investment approach, Review
    of Financial Studies 28, 650-705.

Kaplan, Steven N., and Per Str¨omberg, 2003, Financial contracting theory meets the real world:
    An empirical analysis of venture capital contracts, Review of Economic Studies 70, 281-315.

Knight, Frank H., 1921, Risk, uncertainty and profit. Vol. 1, Houghton Mifflin, New York.



                                              46
Landier, Augustin, and David Thesmar, 2008, Financial contracting with optimistic entrepreneurs,
    The Review of Financial Studies, 22, 117-150.

Lee, Seokwoo, and Uday Rajan, 2020, Robust Security Design, Working paper, University of
    Michigan

Liu, Yufeng, 2020, Optimal contracts with ambiguity and risk taking, Working paper, Kellogg
     School of Management

Maccheroni, Fabio, Massimo Marinacci, and Aldo Rustichini, 2006a, Ambiguity aversion, robust-
   ness and the variational representation of preferences, Econometrica 74, 1447-1498.

Maccheroni, Fabio, Massimo Marinacci, and Aldo Rustichini, 2006b, Dynamic variational prefer-
   ences, Journal of Economic Theory 128, 4-44.

Maenhout, Pascal J., Andrea Vedolin, and Hao Xing, 2020, Generalized robustness and dynamic
   pessimism, NBER Working Paper No. 26970.

Malenko, Andrey, and Anton Tsoy, 2020, Asymmetric Information and Security Design under
    Knightian Uncertainty, Working paper, University of Michigan.

Malmendier, Ulrike, and Geoffrey Tate, 2005, CEO overconfidence and corporate investment,
   Journal of Finance 60, 2661-2700.

Merton, Robert C., 1971, Optimal consumption and portfolio rules in a continuous-time model,
    Journal of Economic Theory 3, 373-413.

Metrick, Andrew, and Ayako Yasuda, 2010, The economics of private equity funds, The Review
    of Financial Studies 23, 2303-2341.

Miao, Jianjun, and Alejandro Rivera, 2016, Robust contracts in continuous time, Econometrica
    84, 1405-1440.

Quadrini, Vincenzo, 2004, Investment and liquidation in renegotiation-proof contracts with moral
   hazard, Journal of Monetary Economics 51, 713-751.

Sannikov, Yuliy, 2008, A continuous-time version of the principal-agent problem, Review of Eco-
    nomic Studies 75, 957-984.

Szydlowski, Martin, and Ji Hee Yoon, 2020, Ambiguity in Dynamic Contracts, Working paper,
    University of Minnesota.

Williams, Noah, 2009, On dynamic principal-agent problems in continuous time, Working paper,
    University of Wisconsin at Madison.

Williams, Noah, 2011, Persistent private information, Econometrica 79, 1233-1274.

Zhang, Lu, 2005, The value premium, Journal of Finance 60, 67-103.


                                              47
