                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             PRICE LIMITS IN A TRADABLE PERFORMANCE STANDARD

                                      Banban Wang
                                     William A. Pizer
                                    Clayton Munnings

                                    Working Paper 28368
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w28368


                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  January 2021




The authors wish to thank Xiaochen Sun for excellent research assistance. We also received
valuable comments from seminar participants at the Duke University Energy Initiative, HUST,
and Tsinghua University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Banban Wang, William A. Pizer, and Clayton Munnings. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Price Limits in a Tradable Performance Standard
Banban Wang, William A. Pizer, and Clayton Munnings
NBER Working Paper No. 28368
January 2021
JEL No. D82,Q54,Q58

                                           ABSTRACT

Tradable performance standards are widely used sectoral regulatory policies. Examples include
the US lead phasedown, fuel economy standards for automobiles, renewable portfolio standards,
low carbon fuel standards, and--most recently--China's new national carbon market. At the
same time, theory and experience with traditional cap-and-trade programs suggests an important
role for price limits in the form of floors, ceilings, and reserves. In this paper we develop a simple
analytical model to derive the welfare comparison between tradable performance standards and a
price-based alternative. This works out to be is a simple variant of the traditional Weitzman
prices-versus-quantities result. We use this result to show that substantial gains could arise from
shifting two programs, China's new national carbon market (~60% gain) and the California Low
Carbon Fuel Standard (~20% gain), to a price mechanism. This will generally be true when the
coefficient of variation in the price under a TPS is larger than 50%. We end with a discussion of
implementation issues, including full and partial consignment auctions based on actual and
expected output.


Banban Wang                                       Clayton Munnings
School of Economics                               Energy and Resources Group
Huazhong University of Science                    University of California Berkeley
and Technology                                    310 Barrows Hall
1037 Luoyu Road                                   Berkeley, California, 94720
Hongshan District                                 cminfocus@gmail.com
Wuhan, Hubei 430074
China
wangbanban@hust.edu.cn

William A. Pizer
Sanford School of Public Policy
Duke University
Box 90312
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
billy.pizer@duke.edu
1. Introduction

         Tradable performance standards (TPS) are a popular form of sectoral market-based
regulation that require regulated polluters to meet an emission-per-unit-of-output
performance standard on average across the sector. Regulated polluters earn emission
permits, denoted in tons of emissions, based on their level of output multiplied by the
performance standard, while acquiring obligations based on their actual emissions. When
their emissions rate is below the standard they end up with a surplus and when their
emissions rate exceeds the standard they end up with a deficit. Those with a surplus can
sell to those with a deficit (trading) or hold them for use in the future (banking). TPSs can
be conceptualized as a rate-based version of a "mass"-based emissions trading systems
(ETS). That is, under an ETS the aggregate mass of emissions is fixed; under a TPS the
aggregate emission rate (emissions per output) is fixed. There are many examples of TPSs
including the US lead phasedown, fuel economy standards for automobiles, renewable
portfolio standards, low carbon fuel standards, and China's new national carbon market
(Newell and Rogers 2003; Farrell and Sperling 2007; Pizer and Zhang 2018; Goulder et al.
2019; Yeh et al. 2020). Most recently, legislative proposals in the US Congress and
President Biden's climate plan feature a TPS for the power sector.
         Despite the prevalence of TPSs, most of the economic literature focuses on the
design of ETSs. An important conclusion in that literature is that managing permit prices
(either by enforcing minimum or maximum prices) increases welfare and other benefits by
reducing expected compliance costs for regulated polluters (Pizer 2002; Murray, Newell,
and Pizer 2009; Burtraw, Palmer, and Kahn 2010; Newell, Pizer, and Zhang 2005; Wood
and Jotzo 2011; Roberts and Spence 1976). However, this idea has been rarely discussed
in the context of a TPS.
         We address this gap in the literature by considering price limits in the context of a
TPS, resulting in a hybrid TPS. We first develop a simple analytical model to compare the
welfare between a TPS and a comparable price-based alternative, the feebate. A feebate can
be viewed as a tax on emissions coupled with a revenue neutral rebate on output--
essentially fixing the emission price rather than the emissions rate.1 Focusing on sectoral
level policy, we modify the traditional Weitzman (1974) prices-versus-quantities
framework by adopting an alternative unit cost function.. We find that with unit cost shocks,
the Weitzman's comparative advantage expression continues to hold with a minor
adjustment to the marginal benefit slope. In particular, the slope of the marginal benefit
schedule increases based on the coefficient of variation in output.
         We apply our simple comparative expression to two current TPSs, the new Chinese
national carbon market and California's Low Carbon Fuel Standard (LCFS). Using recent
cost estimates for both programs along with other data to calibrate the parameters, we
estimate large welfare advantages from using a feebate rather than using a TPS. These

1   We discuss and compare a TPS and feebate in Appendix A.
                                                         2
relative gains are on the order of 60 percent for the Chinese program and 20 percent in the
California program based on central cases. The more general result is that this relative gain
will be large when the coefficient of variation in under the TPS is large (for example,
greater than one-half).
         Finally, we discuss practical issues regarding the implementation of a price floor in
the context of our hybrid TPS. We the first introduce the idea of a consignment auction
with a minimum reserve price that mimics a feebate when the market price reaches the
reserve price. We then consider additional issues including full or partial consignment,
treatment of unsold permits, and advanced allocation of permits.
         The widespread and growing use of sectoral TPSs coupled with the demonstrated
advantages of price limits in ETSs motivate this paper. The first large-scale TPS, the US
lead phasedown, required refineries to decrease the average lead content of all gasoline to
10 percent of its original level (lead/gallon). A trading program related to the standard was
launched in 1982 to allow inter-refinery trading. In 1987, by the time the system terminated,
the phasedown successfully met the target and was considered highly cost-effective
(Newell and Rogers 2003; Schmalensee and Stavins 2017).
         In another example, the early US Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE)
standards were updated to allow permit trading in 2012. This program can be thought of as
regulating the lifetime greenhouse gas emissions per car sold, assuming every car is driven
the same number of miles over its lifetime. The accounting is complicated, but effectively
allows for trading and banking of permits. The program also includes a maximum price in
the form of a per unit compliance penalty when a manufacturer knowingly or unknowingly
exceeds the standard (Klier and Linn 2011; Leard and McConnell 2017).
         In the power sector, renewable portfolio standards are a widely used example of
TPSs. They set obligations on electricity sellers to acquire a certain proportion of their
electricity from renewable energy (denoted as renewable kilowatt-hours as a share of total
kilowatt-hours sold). Tradable permits (referred to as Renewable Energy Certificates in the
United States or Green Certificates in the European Union) are then generated from eligible
renewable energy sources and used for compliance. Such trading programs have been
implemented widely in around half of the United States as well as in the United Kingdom
and several other European countries (Barbose 2019). Some of these programs include an
alternative compliance payment that functions as a maximum price.
         The California low carbon fuel standard and China's new national carbon market
are two recent TPS examples that we discuss at length later in the paper as numerical
applications of our theoretical results. On the horizon, several policy proposals in the
United States have featured a clean energy standard, which require a certain percentage of
retail electricity sales comes from zero or low emitting sources. For example, H.R. 7516
would transition the United States electric sector to one hundred percent clean energy by
2050 (DeGette 2020). Even more ambitiously, President Biden's climate plan features a
clean energy standard that achieves carbon-pollution free energy in electricity generation
by 2035 (Biden 2020).
                                              3
        It is worth noting that with the exception of fuel economy standards, we are unaware
of any work comparing sectoral TPSs to feebates. Nor has there been any discussion of
how a price floor might be implemented in conjunction with a TPS, despite the importance
of price floors in ETSs. This paper aims to contribute in both regards.
        The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the existing
literature comparing price and quantity market-based policies in the context of rate-based
instruments (e.g., feebates and TPSs). Section 3 develops our model and derives the
comparative advantage expression for feebates versus TPSs. Section 4 estimates welfare
gains earned by switching from a TPS to a feebate in the context of California's low carbon
fuel standard and China's new carbon trading program. Section 5 presents consignment
auctions as a way to integrate price floors into a TPS and discusses associated design
choices. Section 6 concludes.


2. Literature Review

        There is a considerable volume of theoretical work comparing price-based taxes
and quantity-based policies such as ETSs. This begins with Weitzman's (1974) seminal
result that price-based instruments have higher expected net benefits than quantity-based
instruments when marginal benefits are flatter than marginal costs and marginal costs are
uncertain. This basic finding has been extended widely by considering alternative versions
of uncertainty, different cost and benefit functions, and with applications to stock pollutants
and dynamic settings (Fishelson 1976; Stavins 1996; Yohe 1978; Hoel and Karp 2002;
Newell and Pizer 2003; Weitzman 2018; Pizer and Prest 2020).
        As most pollution externalities have relatively flat benefits, price instruments tend
to outperform quantity instruments (Pizer 2002). Therefore, ETSs can enhance their
welfare by imposing price controls. Such a policy represents a hybrid price-quantity system
first proposed by Roberts and Spence (1976). They model an ETS with minimum and
maximum prices, showing that by nesting strict price and quantity controls as special cases,
the hybrid policy offers an improvement. Pizer (2002) elaborates on the implementation of
price controls, articulating the idea of a "safety valve" whereby a regulator sells an
unlimited number of additional permits at a specified trigger price.
        Burtraw et al. (2010) combine the safety valve, fixing a maximum price, with a
reserve-price permit auction to enforce a minimum price. This symmetric price corridor
protects against potential price spikes as well as potential price lulls. Murray et al. (2009)
elaborate further upon the implementation of a maximum price, proposing an allowance
reserve mechanism. Rather than selling an unlimited number of additional allowances at a
single trigger price, multiple fixed-volume tranches of permits can be introduced via
auction at multiple trigger prices. In addition to the expected welfare benefits from hybrid
mechanisms, Grüll and Taschini (2011) discuss additional economic advantages for
regulated polluters.

                                               4
         Beyond economic considerations, price controls in an ETS can lead to stronger
stakeholder support. Typically, environmental advocates support the addition of a
minimum price to an ETS to achieve higher levels of ambition. Meanwhile, business
interests favor the introduction of a maximum price to an ETS to protect against excessive
compliance costs (Aldy 2017). In recent years, as most ETSs have experienced relatively
low prices, calls for price minimums have increased (Wood and Jotzo 2011). For example,
the European Union Emissions Trading Scheme (EU ETS) has suffered from low
allowances prices since the 2009 economic crisis. They recently completed structural
reforms that have significantly increased allowance prices. Partly based on the early
experiences in the EU ETS, many ETSs--including the Regional Greenhouse Gas
Initiative and the California cap and trade program in the United States--chose to set price
minimums via reserve prices at allowance auctions (Hepburn et al. 2016; Schmalensee and
Stavins 2017). In practice, price controls for ETSs have been important for policy
performance and political durability.
         Price controls applied to a TPS have received less attention in the literature
compared to price controls applied to an ETS. Moreover, TPSs generally have received less
attention than ETSs. One line of work has focused on the choice between a TPS and ETS
(Fischer 2003; Fischer and Springborn 2011; Zhang, Chen, and Tanaka 2018; Ellerman and
Wing 2003; Kolstad 2005; Jotzo and Pezzey 2007a; Marschinski and Edenhofer 2010a;
Webster, Sue Wing, and Jakobovits 2010; Lemoine 2017). Davis and Knittel (2018)
compare a TPS to a non-tradable performance standard with special attention to
distributional effects. Other papers consider the effect of market power, productivity,
dynamic contexts, and other sector-based features on TPS outcomes (Rubin, Leiby, and
Greene 2009; Tombe and Winter 2015; Becker 2020).
         The price-based alternative to a TPS, a feebate, has been largely discussed as an
alternative to fuel economy standards for motor vehicles (D. L. Greene 1990; D. L. Greene
et al. 2005; Johnson 2006; Dumas, Greene, and Bourbeau 2007; Bunch et al. 2011; Adamou,
Clerides, and Zachariadis 2014; Durrmeyer 2018). Bernard et al (2007) focus on whether
a rebate is really necessary in the feebate. Other studies provide an empirical evaluation of
feebates in different countries (D'Haultfoeuille, Givord, and Boutin 2014; Konishi and
Zhao 2017; Yan and Eskeland 2018).
         A few papers do compare taxes or feebates to a TPS. For example, Gillingham
(2013) use a numerical simulation to find that welfare is similar for a TPS or feebate when
applied to US fuel economy standards, and argues that the final welfare effect is dependent
on implementation. Durrmeyer and Samano (2018) simulate non-tradable fuel economy
standards and the feebate policies in France and the US, finding that feebates have smaller
negative welfare effects. Caparros et al (2016) compare pollution taxes to equipment
standards, both varying over time and set to achieve a fixed emission outcome. Holland
(2012) compares TPS and taxes when there is leakage. None of these four papers model
focus on welfare outcomes when there is cost and output uncertainty, as we do in this paper.
         Kellogg (2018) is the one paper in this literature that develops and applies a
                                             5
comparative advantage expression for a TPS versus feebate like ours. Moreover, he
concludes that more price volatility under a TPS reduces its welfare improvement. This is
analogous to our conclusion that the welfare gain from a feebate is largest when the
coefficient of variation in prices under a TPS is large. Our paper seeks to generalize his
work in a number of ways, including abstracting from the fuel-economy application and
allowing both quadratic (rather than linear) benefits as well as correlation between output
and cost uncertainty. We note that Kellogg (2020) uses a similar model but focused on the
TPS versus ETS question (or another type of indexed emission limit).
        Quirion (2005), Newell and Pizer (2008), Branger and Quirion (2014) and Zhao
(2018) are similar in spirit to our paper. They focus on deriving general policy comparisons,
including TPSs and feebates, though they focus on a national rather than sectoral level.
They also all focus on ranking policies rather than estimating the welfare gain from
switching policies as we do in Section 4. Quirion (2005) takes this ranking idea as far as
possible based on theory. Zhao (2018), Branger and Quirion (2014) and Newell and Pizer
(2008) provide welfare expressions but again focus on numerical applications that rank
policies, rather than estimating the actual welfare difference.
        The welfare expressions in these last three papers comparing a TPS versus a feebate
are complicated (Equation (27) in Zhao, Equations (E.3) in Branger and Quirion, and (23)
in Newell and Pizer). As we describe below, their cost model is not well-suited to compare
TPS and feebate policies, resulting in more complex and less interpretable results. More
importantly, the model may be less appropriate for capturing sectoral (versus economy-
wide) cost uncertainty. We turn to these modeling choices in the section that follows as well
as how our results compare to all of these more closely related papers.

3. Welfare analysis of TPS versus Feebate

       In this section we build a model of mitigation costs and benefits to derive the
welfare advantage of feebates compared to TPSs. We build this model in unit-cost space
where the cost per unit of output depends on the reductions per unit of output. This
contrasts with most of the preceding literature (except the Kellogg papers and the early
Quirion paper) which focus on total costs and total emissions. This matters when we
consider uncertainty about output as well as costs.
       We consider the unit-cost, rather than the total-cost, formulation to be a more natural
formulation for modeling TPSs and feebates. As we show, this approach leads to a simple
adjustment to Weitzman's results. We also believe unit costs and unit-cost shocks may be
a more sensible model, which we now discuss.

3.1. Unit cost function and cost shocks

       We begin with our cost function, given by


                                              6
                 ()                            2
                    = () = 0 + (1 +  )( -   ) + ( -   )2 .                             (1)
                                               2

where q is emissions, x is output,  =  / is the emissions rate per unit of output x, the
parameters  are a quadratic approximation around an arbitrary emissions rate   , and
 introduces uncertainty. We assume convex costs so 2  0.  is mean-zero with
            2
variance      . A positive value of  raises the marginal (unit) cost schedule for
                                                               2
"producing"  . We assume output has mean  and variance           and, for the moment,
ignore possible correlation between x and c.
       Meanwhile, the Weitzman (1974) cost function is given by

                                                           
                                                           2
                         W
                    () = 0     W
                           + (c1 + 
                                    )( -   ) +               ( -   )2 .                (2)
                                                           2

where all variables are as before but the approximation is now around an arbitrary emission
level   and we use superscripts W to denote the Weitzman formulation.
       An important distinction arises when we consider marginal costs and the emissions
response functions. In particular, marginal costs under models (2) and (1) are given by


                           ()     
                              = -(1 +  )    (
                                         - 2  -   ).                                   (3)
                         (-)


             ()     ()       ()
                 =-      = -    = -(1 +  ) - 2 ( -   ).                                (4)
             (-)             

Here, we have taken derivatives with respect to reducing emissions, - , to highlight our
focus on pollution mitigation. That is, marginal costs rise as we move to increasingly lower
levels of pollution. Therefore, when we construct figures, marginal costs will be downward
sloping in emissions as 2  0. Consider now the emissions response functions, where
prices are fixed at p and firms respond by setting marginal cost equal to the price. The
respective response functions are given by

                                                     
                                                 1 + 
                                    =   -                                              (5)
                                                   2


                                                 1 + 
                                   =  (  -            )                                (6)
                                                   2

       Herein lies an important difference. Using our unit cost function with unit-cost
                                             7
shocks, emissions for a given price and value of c will scale with output. Put another way,
the emissions rate will remain fixed as x varies. Under a Weitzman-style cost function with
total costs shocks, however, the emission level for a given price and value of c remain
fixed as output fluctuates--and, in turn, the emissions rate will vary as x varies. Even with
correlation between x and c in Equation (5), it is impossible for the emissions rate to
remain fixed as x varies because of the fixed   term.
        This finding has implications for the comparative advantage of feebates versus TPS.
Using our cost function and absent correlation with c, variation in x will not affect the
emissions rate under either a TPS or a feebate that fixes the price. Intuitively, uncertainty
about c will then create the only difference between the feebate and a TPS. Using
Weitzman's cost function, even if c is fixed at zero, a TPS and feebate will deliver different
outcomes as x varies.
        There are a variety of reasons why cost shocks at the unit-cost level may be a more
sensible assumption in the real world. In most sectors, mitigation choices depend--at least
over the longer-term--on unit technology costs. For motor vehicles, there are choices of
adding technology to increase the fuel economy per car. For motor fuels, there are
blending and other choices that operate per gallon. For electricity, costs often rise with
higher shares of a particular technology (e.g., as an increased renewable share requires
more battery storage). In all of these cases, unexpected technological progress (or lack
thereof) will take the form of changes in unit mitigation cost. We therefore view shocks in
the marginal cost versus emissions-per-unit-output space, at least at the sectoral level, to
be equally if not more plausible than shocks in the marginal cost versus emissions space.

3.2. Unit benefit function and representation in unit-cost space

        We follow Weitzman's benefit function of emissions q, which is a local quadratic
approximation using parameters bn about an arbitrary quantity   :
                                                      2
                          () = 0 + 1 ( -   ) - ( -   )2 .                          (7)
                                                      2
We abstract from the notion of benefit shocks because we know, from Weitzman's work,
that they do not play a role in the comparative advantage expression. We assume concave
benefits such that 2  0. This allows us to represent marginal benefits as
                         ()
                                 = -1 + 2 ( -   )
                         (-)
                                                                                   (8)
                                                      -          
                                 = -1 + 2  ((1 +           )  - )
                                                                 
where we have again taken the derivative with respect to reducing emissions. As a negative
externality, mitigation benefits rise at higher q (and r). Therefore, marginal benefits will be
upward sloping in our figures. Also, note that unlike marginal costs in Equation (4),
marginal benefits expressed in terms of the emissions rate r depends on output x.

                                               8
        We graph expected marginal costs against expected marginal benefits (based on the
expectation of Equation (8)) in Figure 1. Without loss of generality, we have assumed
  =    and 1 = 1 . Note 1 = 1 are negative, based on the idea that we are spending
resources to reduce emissions, and emission reductions are what create benefits. This
serves to identify the intersection of the expected schedules given by Equations (4) and (8)
as [  , - 1 ] , but as we shall see, the only parameters that matter for the comparative
                         2
advantage are b2, c2,      ,  and  .
        We note that graphing prices versus emissions rate (the "unit cost space") is useful
for representing policies. A TPS fixes the emissions rate and emissions rate is represented
by a vertical line, while a feebate fixes marginal cost and is represented by a horizontal line.
As the marginal cost schedule (4) is realized based on values of  , the outcomes can be
read off the actual (versus expected) marginal cost schedule in the figure.
        We also note that equating these expected marginal costs and benefits does not
define the optimal TPS. That is because the vertical axis is the expected derivative of costs
and benefits with respect to emissions, plotted against the emissions rate. To determine the
optimal TPS, we want to consider the expected derivative of both costs and benefits with
respect to the emissions rate and then identify the emissions rate where those two
derivatives are equal, which we now do.

3.3. Optimal TPS Rate

       We now find the social optimal TPS rate  by matching the marginal benefit of
decreasing r with the marginal cost. That is, we equate
                                                    
                                  [        ] =  [       ]
                                    (-)            (-)
The expectation of the cost derivative is easily computed (recalling our assumption that x
and c are uncorrelated),
                                                   2
            [       ] =  [ [- (0 + (1 +  )( -   ) + ( -   )2 )]]
                (-)                                2
                                                                                           (9)
                                                               ))]
                             = [-((1 +  ) + 2 ( - 
                             =  (-1 - 2 ( -   ))

The expectation of the benefit derivative is more complex,
                                        
                      [        ] =  [            ]
                        (-)             (-)
                                  = [-(1 - 2 ( -    ))]                                   (10)

                                                    2)
                                  =  (-1 + 2  ((1 +    -   )).
      2   2
where   =   / 2 . We can divide both expressions by  and view them in Figure 1.

                                               9
In particular, the marginal cost schedule is the same, but the marginal benefit schedule
appropriate for determining the optimal TPS has a steep slope. Uncertainty about 
translates into variation in emissions uncertainty under a rate control that makes the
relevant marginal benefit schedule steeper. When r = 0, this effect vanishes; thus, the
vertical intercept of the two schedules is the same. Otherwise, expected marginal benefits
are higher at every level of mitigation, because raising  raises this variation.
        Equating Equations (9) and (10) and recalling 1 = 1 , we can solve for the optimal
TPS rate:

                                       (2  + 2 )
                                 =       2 + 1) + 
                                                      .                                (11)
                                     2  (         2


Note that  <   so long as x is uncertain.


             price
                                                             E[MB] based on (dB/dr) ÷ x
                                                                                      .
                                                                             2
                                                             slope= 2  (1 +    )



      Optimal
                                                                E[MB] based on dB/dq
      feebate rate
                                                                slope = 2 
     = -1 = -1




                                                                  E[MC]



                     0                                               r


                 Figure 1. Optimal Rate for Tradable Performance Standard


3.4. Feebates versus TPS

       We now consider the response function for a feebate, in order to first understand
the optimum feebate and then to derive the comparative advantage relative to a TPS. A
feebate is based on a fee or rebate levied on emissions above or below a "pivot" point.
Letting rf be the pivot point and P be the emission fee, the feebate equals ( -  ). We
assume an aggregate firm facing this feebate alongside the unit cost function Equation (1).

                                            10
Minimizing costs, the firm will choose r to minimize ( -  ) + (), choosing
                                =   - ( + 1 +  )/2 .                                   (12)

        To find the optimal feebate, we need to take the expectation of the derivative of net
benefits with respect to p and solve for that expected derivative being equal to zero. From
the intermediate steps in Equations (9) and (10), we know that

              
                 = (1 - 2 ( -    )) - ((1 +  ) + 2 ( -   ))
                                                                                       (13)
              = -2 ( -    ) -  - 2 ( -   )

(using 1 = 1 ). We can then substitute (12) into this expression for r, multiply by dr/dp
= ­1/c2, and take expectations, yielding
         
      [         ]
          
           -2 ((  - ( + 1 +  )/2 ) -    ) -  - 2 (- - 1 -  )/2
    =  [                                                       ]
                                     -2

                        + 1                      + 1
         [2  ((  -          ) (1 + 2)
                                      -   ) - 2
                        2                        2 ]
    =
                                 2
Setting this equal to zero solving for pF, we have
                                              2 
                                        2      
                 = -1 + 2 ×                        2)
                                                      = -1 + 2 (  -  )
                                    2 + 2  (1 + 

This shows that the optimal feebate is simply the price that corresponds to rT along the
marginal cost schedule in Figure 1.

       At this point, it should become more apparent that our model mimics Weitzman's
model but in unit cost space, with a marginal cost slope c2 and marginal benefit slope given
by
                                                   2
                                       2  (1 +       )
With that in mind, we posit our final result, that the comparative advantage (expected
welfare difference) between feebates and TPS is given by
                                     2 [       2
                                       2 - 2  (  + 1)]
                             - =             2         .                               (14)
                                           22
This mimics Weitzman's results with (a) our modified benefit slope, where more output
variations favors TPS, and (b) multiplying Weitzman's expression by x
                                                                     to obtain the total
                                             11
welfare difference (rather than the per-unit welfare difference). A detailed derivation is
given in Appendix B.
         Our results in the rate-based context are straightforward and can be viewed as
analogous to Weitzman's finding: if the marginal costs curve is steeper than the expected
marginal benefit curve, then feebates outperform TPS, and vice versa (Figure 2).

                price
                                                             TPS



                                                                           Expected MB
                                                                                       2
                                                                           slope = 2  (  + 1)


               Feebate                                                               Feebate


                                                                                   Expected MC
                                                                                   slope = 2

                                                                               Actual MC with c > 0

                        0                       F          T                           

                                       Figure 2. Feebates versus TPS

        Our results appear most similar to Quirion's (2005) Equation (14).2 That equation
suggests TPS ("relative cap" in his terminology) is preferred to a price policy when
marginal benefits are steeper than marginal costs, multiplied by an adjustment related to
output variation ("baseline emissions" in his formulation). In turn, we both find that
increased output variation tilts the expression towards TPS so long as b2 > 0. However, he
does not provide expressions for the actual comparative advantage, like our Equation (14),
making it more difficult to compute dollar gains for different applications as we do in
Section 4. We are also interested in how the results change when cost and output shocks
are correlated, which we now discuss.
        As hinted earlier, if we allow for correlation between  and x,  , positive
correlation will always tilt the expression (14) towards a TPS and negative correlation will
generally tilt it towards a feebate. In particular, we derive the following expanded result in
Appendix B




2 When b2 = 0, focusing on the unit case (x
                                           = 1) , our Equation (14) also matches Kellogg's (2018) Equation (35). His
Bee equals our c2 and his BeGc equals our c.
                                                          12
                            2 [       2
                              2 - 2  (  + 1)] 2 (1 + 2
                                                      )     2 2
                                                              
                  -       =         2        -            -     .                                                 (15)
                                  22             2          2 2
                                                              2



To understand this result, consider that a feebate introduces variance in the emissions rate
based on Equation (6), versus a TPS that fixes the rate. Based on the convexity of costs and
concavity of benefits, the direct effect is to raise costs and lower benefits. Positive
correlation between x and c exacerbates this effect, worsening expected welfare under the
feebate. Meanwhile, negative correlation ameliorates the effect raising expected welfare
under a feebate. When cost variation is large enough, particularly when the standard
deviation of shocks in rate space (c/c2) is larger than twice the TPS rate rT , even negative
correlation can eventually hurt feebates relative to TPS (a condition discussed in more
detail in the appendix).
        Finally, we note that expression (14) and (15) appear quite different compared to
Zhao's Equation (27), Newell and Pizer's Equation (23) and Branger and Quirion's
Equation (E.3). All three are more complicated expression for the comparative advantage
of prices versus indexed, intensity, or relative quantities (their equivalent of feebate versus
TPS).3 The main reason is the difference in the response function under price policies,
noted above. Our expression for emissions under a given price is given by Equation (6) and
theirs by Equation (5) (or a close variation). In particular, our cost model and response
function implies behavior under a price policy that is much closer to a TPS. The only
difference between TPS and feebate policy outcomes in our model is the cost shock c
shifting either the emissions rate or the price holding the other constant. Meanwhile, under
the other three cost models and response functions, TPS and price policy outcomes differ
based on both cost shocks c and x variation. For this reason, our comparative advantage
simplifies and theirs does not.4 As we argue in Section 3.1, not only does our approach
make the algebra simpler, it also corresponds to a natural way to think about technology
uncertainty in a sectoral context.


4. Applying the model: the case of ETS of China's Power Sector and

California LCFS

       We now apply our analytical model to calculate the welfare advantage of a feebate
over a TPS in two cases: China's national carbon market and California's low carbon fuel
standard.

3 Zhao (2018) does not present a comparative advantage expression
4 Indeed, the papers draw different conclusions regarding the effect of higher output variability. For example, n Newell
and Pizer, such variability is ultimately bad for a TPS because it introduces variability in emissions, lowering welfare;
there is no comparable effect for a price policy. In our expression (14), this unambiguously will favor a TPS. The
adverse effect in Newell and Pizer similarly affects both a TPS and the price policy.
                                                             13
4.1. China's national carbon market

        China announced its launch of a national carbon market on December 19, 2017.
The market will start with the power sector. Generators whose annual emissions are greater
than 26 thousand tons of CO2e (or whose annual energy consumption is greater than 10
thousand tce) are required to comply with the regulation. Over 2000 coal-fired generators,
which collectively emit about one-third of the country's CO2 emissions, will be regulated.
        The new carbon market in China is a tradable performance standard (Goulder et al.
2017; Pizer and Zhang 2018; Goulder and Morgenstern 2018; Goulder et al. 2019). It
allocates allowances according to a rate (benchmark) and the actual output (power
generation) in that year (Ministry of Ecology and Environment, P. R. China 2020).
Therefore, the realized emissions vary with the realized output level. While the benchmark
standard will be achieved in the aggregate, individual plants and firms may emit above or
below the standard. The national market is considering managing allowance prices in the
form of a hybrid system.
        Here we estimate the welfare gain if China used a feebate rather than a TPS,
providing a bounding estimate of the potential gains from limiting allowance price
variability. Assuming 2 is essentially zero (Newell and Pizer 2003), the parameters
needed in Equation (14) are the slope of marginal cost (c2), the standard error of unit cost
shocks (c), and the average output (x    ).
        We use two cost models of China's power sector to calibrate our model: (1) the
GCAM model from the Pacific Northwest National Lab's Joint Global Change Research
Institute (Yu et al. 2019), and (2) the Earth DNE-21+ model from the Research Institute of
Innovative Technologies. We use two scenarios for each model giving emissions, electricity
output and the corresponding CO2 price in the year 2030, and compute emissions rate. We
do a simple regression of carbon price against emissions rate for the four data points and
find 2 = 130 $MWh/tons2 and  = 22 $/ton. Figure 3 plots the marginal cost
curves for these two models alongside the fitted line and +/­ two standard deviations.
Finally, the average output level given by the two models is  = 8,282 TWh. Therefore,
the welfare gain if a feebate were applied instead of a TPS for China's power sector carbon
market would be:

                                  2
                                     222  8,282
                        - =         =           = $15 billion
                                 22    2  130




                                             14
                                   60
                                                               51
                                   50
                                                                               46
           Carbon price ($/tons)
                                   40
                                                                                                    E[MC]
                                   30
                                                                                                    +/- 2

                                   20                                                               DNE 21+
                                                                                                    GCAM
                                   10

                                    0                                           0         0
                                        0.0         0.2         0.4         0.6     0.8       1.0
                                                          Emissions rate (tons/MWh)

                                              Figure 3. Marginal Cost Curves of China's Power Sector

      This is the annual dollar gain for any feebate and TPS designed to achieve the same
target on average in the Chinese power market. To put this into context, we compare this
dollar value to estimates of the baseline, expected total abatement cost under different TPS
scenarios. Note that there is no change in benefits moving from a TPS to feebate, given our
assumption that b2 = 0. Both have the same expected emissions and expected benefits
depend only on expected emissions, not variation in emissions, when b2 = 0. Thus, expected
TPS costs are a reasonable way to normalize the feebate savings.
      The total abatement cost for a TPS in a linear marginal cost model is given by
                  1              1           1              1
               [ ] = E [           2 ] =          [2 ] =        ([]2 +      2
                                                                              )        (16)
                  2            2c2          2c2            2c2

          
where                    =  =  is the amount of reduction in emissions as we move from a
          2

(unregulated) price of zero to a TPS price p in order to achieve  =  . The cost function
            2
variance      equals the difference [2 ] - []2 . We show this in more detail in
Appendix C.1.
      To obtain price estimates, we turn to both China's pilot carbon trading experiences in
the past few years as well as recent studies of price expectations for the future national
market. China has operated seven regional trading experiments in five cities (Beijing,
Shanghai, Shenzhen, Tianjin, Chongqing) and two provinces (Guangdong, Hubei) since
2013. The average price of these pilots is about 5 $/ton (35 CNY/ton, assuming 1
CNY=0.15 USD). According to one recent study5,6, the average expectation of China's

5 http://www.chinacarbon.info.
6 The respondents of the survey include professionals from industry, consultancies, academia, carbon finance, NGO,
carbon exchanges and industry associations.
                                                          15
    Table 1 Percentage Welfare Gains of Feebate of China's National Carbon Market
        Expected price under TPS [] ($/ton)                        5            14       25
  (1)   Total cost ([])2  /22 (billion $)                          0.8          6.2      20
  (2)   Maximum positive shock,                                    0.227c       0.636c   1.14c
  (3)   [(    )2
                 ] with truncated normal ($/ton)2                  124          286      400
  (4)   Total expected cost [2 ] /22 (billion $)                   4.8          15.3     32.6
  (5)   - (billion $) (no truncation)                              15           15       15
  (6)   - (billion $) (truncated)                                  4.0          9.1      13
  (7)   Savings                                                    83%          59%      39%



carbon price in 2025, 2030 and 2050 are 11, 14 and 25 $/ton respectively (71, 93 and 167
CNY/ton) (Slater et al. 2020). Therefore, we calculate the percentage saving from
switching to a feebate under three price scenarios: 5$/ton (current average price in pilots),
14$/ton (2030 expected price), and 25$/ton (2050 expected price) (Table 1).
       An immediate complication arises as we think about price variation under a TPS in
this example. Namely, the indicated variation coupled with the expected price level would
suggest negative prices. That is, with expected prices of 5, 14, and 25 $/ton under a TPS
and cost shocks whose standard deviation is 22 $/ton, a shock that lowers costs by one
standard deviation would drive prices below zero in two of the three scenarios unless we
impose a non-negativity constraint in the model.
       In order to work around this, we replace the error,  ~(0,  ), with an alternative
                                      
error     . In particular, we assume   = -1 - 2  =  (where  = 0 based on (4))
                                                      
with probability  and, with probability (1 - ),         is distributed as a (0,  ) upper-
                                                          ]
tail-truncated at    . We choose  such that [                = 0. This allows us to continue
to use all of our earlier results, which assume [ ] = 0 but otherwise did not require
                                                                                        2
distributional assumptions. However, this switch to           changes the variance          in
                            )2                   2                                        2
Equation (14) to [( ] . Meanwhile, [ ] in Equation (16) becomes                   ([])      +
       )2                                                                   )2
[( ] . In Appendix C.2, we derive an expression for [( ] in terms of
[]/ =  / , the maximum error (before prices are negative under the TPS)
expressed as a multiple of c.
                                                                       1
        Turning to the results in Table 1, row (1) uses the simpler,          ([])2 formula to
                                                                       2c2

compute the cost at the expected price. Row (2) indicates the number of standard deviations
where the positive shock is truncated; e.g.,  = -1 - 2  from above. Row (3)
                                     
indicates the variance of the new       error. Row (4) then includes this in the expected
cost cacluation. Row (6) adjusts the comparative advantage in row (5) based on this new
variance. Finaly Row (7) shows the savings from using feebates over TPS (line 6) as
percentage of expected TPS costs (row (6) ÷ row (4)).
        At these low prices, given the considerable uncertainty about costs and TPS price,
a price-based approach that targets the same expected emissions rate offers a very
                                              16
significant improvement in expeted welfare.

4.2. California low carbon fuel standard

        California's Low Carbon Fuel Standard (LCFS) is a program that aims to reduce
California's greenhouse gas emissions in the transportation sector. The program is
implemented under California Assembly Bill AB 32 and is under the administration of
California Air Resources Board (CARB). The program started on January 1, 2011. The
LCFS sets decreasing standards on fuel suppliers denoted in terms of carbon intensity
(gCO2e/MJ) of transportation fuels. Regulated polluters include oil refineries and fuel
distributors that typically incur debits, while alternative fuel suppliers typically create
credits. The carbon intensity of all fuels are based on lifecycle analyses of their carbon
content. Regulated polluters accumulate LCFS credits if their own intensities are lower
than the standards and accumulate deficits otherwise. LCFS credits can be traded or banked,
thereby constituting a TPS.
        We estimate the potential gain for the LCFS program if feebates were applied
instead of a TPS. First, we obtain estimates of marginal cost and the average output from
Holland et al. (2015), who estimate the marginal cost of an LCFS for a broad range of
targets (Holland et al. 2015). Using that range of estimates we fit a marginal cost schedule
in terms of carbon emissions intensity. This yields 2 = 238 ($ (thousand gallons/ton2)
and  = 140 billion gallons of gasoline equivalent (gge). Next, we calculate the variance
of cost shock from the market price of California's LCFS trading market (Figure 4), which
gives  = 33 ($/ton). Therefore, for the California LCFS:

                                                     2
                                                        332  140
                                              - =      =         = $320 million
                                                    22   2  238


                                    160
                                    140
                                    120
            average price ($/ton)




                                    100
                                    80
                                    60
                                    40
                                    20
                                     0
                                     Dec-13     Dec-14     Dec-15     Dec-16      Dec-17

                       Figure 4. Market Price of California Low Carbon Fuel Standard

                                                             17
        We again compare this welfare gain to the total abatement cost using the above
parameters and a number of baseline carbon prices. In particular, we consider 20, 70 and
140 $/ton, approximately the lower, average and higher level of the CA LCFS market prices
in the above figure. As before, we compute costs under the marginal abatement cost curve
           1
as  [            2 ], where we also include uncertainty about p in the calculation (and use a
           22

truncated normal to deal with the possibility of uncertainty driving the price to zero).
Table 2 presents these calculations, analogous to Table 1. At the central value of $70/ton, a
feebate would offer a nearly 20% improvement in expected net benefits.
       We can look across these two examples, as well as comparing the comparative
                                                 1     2                                           1
advantage formula when b2  0,                            , and the total cost formula,  [                2 ] =
                                                 22                                                22

1
      ([]2 + 2)
                , to derive additional intuition. This ratio, row (7) in both tables, is given
22

by
                      -                 1             1                          2
                                                                                            2
                                                                                            
                                    =        2
                                              /           ([] +
                                                               2
                                                                   2
                                                                       )=             =                  (17)
                E[CT ] - E[Cp=0 ]       22        22                        []2 + 2
                                                                                           1 + 2
                                                                                               



        When the cost uncertainty, expressed as a coefficient of variation of prices under a
TPS, vp, is large, the comparative advantage of a feebate ("savings" in the above tables)
will be large compared to the expected TPS cost. For example, when  = 50% we have
 2
   = 0.25 and this savings ratio will be 20%.


5. Price limits in a tradable performance standard

       In context of climate change, feebates and taxes are preferred over TPSs and ETSs
in terms of welfare due to flat marginal benefits. Therefore, adding price elements to an

                      Table 2 Percentage Welfare Gains of Feebate of CA LCFS
            Expected price under TPS [] ($/ton)                             20        70           140
     (1)    Total cost ([])2  /22 (billion $)                               0.12      1.4          5.8
     (2)    Maximum positive shock,                                         0.61c     2.12 c       4.24 c
     (3)    [(    )2
                     ] with truncated normal ($/ton)2                       6219      1,067        1,08
     (4)    Total expected cost [2 ] /22 (billion $)                        0.26      1.8          6.1
     (5)    - (billion $) (no truncation)                                   0.32      0.32         0.32
     (6)    - (billion $) (truncated)                                       0.18      0.31         0.32
     (7)    Savings                                                         60%       18%          5.3%



                                                          18
ETS or TPS will improve welfare. In recent years, price elements have seen increasing
importance, particularly in ETSs. In practice, this is implemented through a minimum
auction price (to create a price floor) and adding an alternative, fixed $/ton compliance
mechanism (to create a price ceiling). The price ceiling has also seen considerable use in
TPSs. However, the mechanical implementation of a price floor within a TPS is not as
straightforward. In fact, price floors have not been implemented alongside a TPS to our
knowledge. In this section, we discuss the practical issues associated with implementing a
price floor in a TPS through with consignment auctions. This hybrid policy mimicks
feebates when market prices reach the floor price and therefore offers welfare
improvements.

5.1. Consignment auctions

        Here we discuss one method of implementing a price floor in a TPS: a reserve price
implemented via a consignment auction. Other options include government buybacks
(which have not been used widely to date) or imposing a regularly updated fee that makes
up the difference between a low permit price and the price floor. Such a fee is currently
used in the United Kingdom (Aldy 2017). Meanwhile, the consignment approach is used
in ETSs in both California's ETS and the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative.
        Under a consignment mechanism, recipients of allocated permits are required to
submit them to an auction and, in turn, receive a share of the auction revenue based on their
share of consigned permits. The consignment auction has many advantages compared to
alternatives. The approach is revenue neutral, and therefore would not create major
financial burdens to governments or firms. The idea of buying back allowances to raise
prices requires spending government revenue; the United Kingdom fee approach leads to
additional government revenue. The mechanism is automatic as well. Other than holding
the prescribed auctions intermittently, no other action is required. Finally, auctions
generally have the advantage of ensuring that part or potentially all allowances enter the
market, improving transparency, and motivating price discovery compared to a free
allocation of allowances (Burtraw and McCormack 2017). However, some authors
suggest that this method may not guarantee a clear price signal (Khezr and MacKenzie
2018).
        We now turn to some of the implementation choices that arise when using a
consignment auction in a TPS rather than an ETS.

5.2. Implementing the price floor in TPS with full consignment auctions

        To implement the price floor in a TPS with consignment auctions, we require firms
to consign their allocated permits to an auction with a price floor. We then distribute the
auction revenue based on each firms' share of the total consignment auction.
        Formally, we consider a representative firm i in the regulated sector. Firm i will be
allocated allowances equal to the product of the performance standard and its output, given
                                             19
by  =   . Subscript i now indicates individual firms versus the aggregate. As before,
the firm will also accumulate obligations equal to its emissions, which are a product of its
own emissions rate and output: , = ,  . Here, we add a second subscript s, to reflect
uncertain states that we will discuss below.
        Unlike a typical TPS, however, firms do not receive allocation directly. Instead, the
government auctions those allowances on behalf of firms, giving them the auction proceeds.
This is referred to as a consignment auction.
        We allow a reserve price,  , in the auction to maintain the floor price. There
will be two possible outcomes/states, indicated by MC1 and MC2 in Figure 5. The first is
that the auction is fully covered and clears at  >  . This is indicated by MC1. Firm i
receives revenue equaling its allocation times the market price   .
        We next imagine a function ,1 ( ) to be the unit cost function for firm i in case 1,
analogous to Equation (1) but for a single firm and with uncertain outcomes now indexed
by a subscript. Recall that we are working to reduce r, therefore firms take the cost function
derivative with respect to reducing r and set it equal to the market price in order to
determine their emissions rate. That is, firms solve ,1 ( )/(-) =  for r to
calculate their cost minimizing emissions rate; we label this inverse relation ,1 ().
        Firms buy permits in the same auction with the clearing price for compliance with
expenditure. We can therefore define the firm's gross auction expenditure to be ,1 () .
Recall that consignment auctions are revenue neutral. That is, the total revenue from
auction equals the total expenditure of firms that buy allowances in the auction,    =
    =  ,  =  ,1   . Therefore, (dividing both sides by  ) we have the
following result ex post:

                                          1 =  ,                                       (18)

where 1 = ,1  / , the average emissions rate of regulated polluters in case 1. The
TPS rate rT is exactly maintained when the clearing price is higher than the minimum. Note
that each regulated firm's net expenditures are (,1 -  )  and the outcome is the same
as a TPS.
        The second possibility is that the auction is not fully covered and clears at  =
 , indicated by MC2 in Figure 5. In particular, let ,2 () be firm i's response function
in case 2. Moreover, let 2 () =  ,2 () /   , the aggregate emissions rate at price
p averaged across all firms in case 2. From the figure, we know that a p such that 2 () =
 would require p < pmin (where the red schedule intersects the vertical line of the supply
schedule). Instead, we have p = pmin and 2 ( ) = 2 <  . Supply is reduced until
the aggregate demand supports the minimum price. In this case, firm i's gross
expenditures will be ,2   and its gross revenue    , where  is the
reduction in the auction volume for full consignment (here,  = 2 / ). Each regulated
firm's net expenditures at the minimum price is ( - 2 )  .
                                             20
                  price
                                                      Supply




                   1



                                                                      MC
                                                                          1

                                                         MC
                                                              2



                          0             Realization   Regulated               
                                         at           rate 

                   Figure 5. Floor price in a TPS with full consignment


5.3. Implementing price floor with partial consignment auction

        Policy makers can instead conduct partial consignment auctions to reduce the
capital burden on regulated polluters (e.g., that they must first buy allowances in the auction
before receiving their auction revenue). The downside is that whatever allocation is not
consigned sacrifices some of the policymakers' ability to maintain the floor price.
        In this case, a firm will be allocated some allowances directly according to its output
and a standard , lower than the established performance standard rT; e.g., , <
 . The firm is not required to consign these allowances. The remainder of the allocated
permits, equal to the difference between the two standards, multiplied by the firms' output,
( - , ) , are then consigned. The rest is almost as before--except there is a third
case as shown in Figure 6 and gross expenditures are smaller in all cases.
        In the first case, as before, the clearing price is higher than the floor. We can show
the firm has the same net permit expenditure ( -  )  and again  =  , so the
regulated rate is maintained. However, firm i's gross expenditure in the auction has
declined from    to ( - , )  thanks to a portion of allowances being
allocated directly.
        In the second case when the market hits the floor price, we again have net
expenditures (,2 - 2 )  and again 2 =  ( ) . But like the first case, the
auction itself is smaller and gross expenditures in (and revenues from) the auction are
reduced. Gross expenditures are reduced, from ,2   to (,2 - , )  .
Meanwhile, gross revenue declines from     to  ( - , )  .
Here,  = (2 - , )/( - , ) is the coverage rate in the partial consignment

                                              21
auction in case 2. It is straightforward to see that  <  .
         The advantage of the partial consignment auction comes from the ,  
reduction in gross expenditures. The disadvantage arises when  ( ) < , . Even
without selling any permits in the consignment auction, the price cannot be maintained at
pmin. This gives rise to case 3, where 3 = , and p < pmin. This is illustrated by the
intersection of MC3 and the vertical line at , in Figure 6. This finding is essentially
the rate-based variant of the permit reserve and price ceiling approach proposed by Murray
et al. (2009) for ETSs.


               price
                                                    Supply




                 1



                
                                                                       MC
                                       MC             MC
                                           3              2

                   0          Lower                                         
                                     Realization Regulation
                              rate , at          rate 

                 Figure 6. Floor price in a TPS with partial consignment

        It is worth noting that the problem with the partial consignment auction arises when
there is a reasonable likelihood that  ( ) < , for some uncertain state s. By
setting , < [ ( )] - 2( /2 ) , for example, one can be assured that the
minimum price will be maintained 97.5% of the time (assuming normally distributed cost
shocks).
        For example, in the $70 LCFS case, if we sought a $50 price floor, we would want
to set , < [ ($70/)] - 2(33$/ ÷ 238 ($  1000 /^2). We did not
provide this information above, but the baseline emissions rate we derive from Holland et
al (2015) is 11.16 (tons/1000 gge). So  ($70/) = 11.16 (/1000 ) ­ $70/
ton ÷ 238 ($  1000 /^2) or 10.87 (tons/1000 gge). Subtracting 2(33$/
 ÷ 238 ($  1000 /^2) = 0.28 , we have , < 10.59 (/1000) .
Thus, the consignment auction would not need to be that large, compared to the volume of
direct allocation, in the LCFS case.


                                               22
5.4. Options for unsold permits

        We discuss several options for dealing with unsold permits arising in a consignment
auction with a minimum price. We have in mind a multi-period setting where unsold
permits might or might not be considered as a part of a cumulative budget or target.
        First, unsold permits can simply be confiscated and retired by the government. At
the floor price, the market behaves as a price tool and the rate (as well as associated
emissions) is adjusted instead. Therefore, retiring the unsold allowances is a direct way to
adjust the quantity given a fixed price. However, this approach may be unappealing to
participating firms, who view the consigned allowances as their property based on the
allowed emissions rate and their indicated production level.
        Second, unsold permits could be carried over and added to the consignment auction
in the next period. If permit demand in the second period is high enough, all the consigned
allowances (including the unsold permits from period one) are auctioned. Firms with
unsold consigned allowances from the first period now receive additional revenue. If the
demand is not sufficiently high to exceed the minimum price in the second period, the
system still maintains the second period minimum price and now generates new unsold
permits in period two. Figure 7 shows this possibility of additional unsold allowances in
period two (parenthetical superscripts indicate time period).



                 Period 1                                   Period 2
  p                                         p
                               S                                        S




                                                             MC'
                                            
                                                                                 MC

                                   MC
      0             (1)                 r       0           (2)          (2) + ( -  (1) ) (1)
                                                                                 (2)


                  Figure 7. Unsold permits auctioned at minimum price

        There are two further options in the next-period-auction: the unsold permits from
period one can be prioritized for sale over the newer consigned allowances or vice-versa.
If newer consigned allowances are prioritized, the consigners in the second period will get
the auction revenue first, and then those in the first period. However, if the unsold permits
from period one are prioritized, the consigners from the first period acquire the revenue
first (and paid by those in the second period). One downside to this approach is that
                                                23
participants in the current period are not paying for their own consigned permits. Instead,
they are always paying consigners from previous periods.
        A third option is to put unsold permits into a pool for sale at a maximum price, if
there is a symmetric, maximum price or high-price permit reserve. In the case of a reserve,
this approach could expand the reserve and increase the ability to maintain the price ceiling.
If a price ceiling binds, then this approach would redirect what otherwise would be
government revenue to the consigners of unsold permits. Figure 8 shows the former
example, of an enlarged high-price reserve.


                      Period 1                         p             Period 2
         p
                                                                                      Supply
                                         Supply    



                                                                                        MC


                                                   
                                    MC

             0                                             0                              

             Figure 8. Unsold permits auctioned as part of a high-price reserve


5.5. Timing issues

        Generally, the allowances need to be auctioned after emissions occur, and more
particularly after output is measured, in order to precisely determine the volume of permits
to auction based on the established emissions rate. However, most ETS programs issue or
auction allowances before or during the period when obligations are entered. For example,
in 2020 RGGI held quarterly auctions for its 2020 allowances in March, June, September,
and December. In 2020 California held quarterly for both 2020 and a portion of 2023
allowances in February, May, August, and November. If ex-ante allocation is desirable,
then one could instead issue or auction allowances based on expected output.
        If periodic auctions are allowed during compliance periods, the allocation of
auction revenue needs adjustment as the government only knows the exact allocation once
the period ends. For example, imagine the above 2020 RGGI auctions where the
government only knows output levels for the first quarter in April, the second quarter in
                                                               (1)              (1)
July, etc. For the March auction, the government sell   , where                       is the expected
first quarter output level. For the June auction, the government then auctions based on

                                                  24
                                                                                         (2)
expected second quarter output and an adjustment for the first quarter,  ( +

         (1)
 (1) -  ). The same process then repeats.
        It is worth noting that this same issue arises even without auctions. The government
may want to provide permits under a TPS before output is exactly known. Indeed, the
Chinese government has taken exactly this approach. They make an initial distribution of
allowances based on expected production and then make adjustments in the next period
(Munnings et al. 2016).
        With consignment auctions, the government has the additional burden of managing
not just the volume of allowances but also the return of the allowance proceeds to firms.
This might be accomplished by waiting until the second quarter to return proceeds from
                                                                                         (1)
first quarter allowances. At that point, the actual average price received ((1)  +

               (1)                                                                 (1)
(2) ( (1) -  )) / (1) is known and can be paid out to each firm based on  .


6. Conclusion

        Tradable performance standards have earned increasing popularity as a regulatory
tool, especially at the sectoral level. However, the use of a price-based alternative (the
feebate), the introduction of price controls to a TPS, and features of the TPS policy itself
have been less frequently studied compared to their ETS counterparts. Moreover, the idea
of a price floor to establish a lower bound on prices has yet to be introduced in a real-world
TPS. This is true despite the recent trend of introducing minimum prices in carbon dioxide
ETSs. Here, theory suggests expected welfare improvements based on the relatively
constant marginal benefits associated with greenhouse gas pollution.
        In this paper, we develop a simple analytic model to compare the expected welfare
of a TPS and a feebate under cost uncertainty. We employ a unit cost function where the
schedule of marginal abatement cost is linear in the emissions rate (emissions per unit
output) with additive uncertain shocks. With this formulation, the Weitzman comparative
advantage expression continues to hold with a simple adjustment to the marginal benefit
slope based on output variation. Moreover, we show that the comparative advantage
expression varies almost monotonically with any correlation between output and the cost
shock (the exception occurring with negative correlation when the uncertainty in emission
rates under a feebate is large compared to the expected emission rate).
        We apply the model to two cases: the Chinese national carbon market and the
California Low Carbon Fuel Standard. In both cases we find relatively large gains
associated with switching from a TPS to a feebate, a savings of roughly 60 and 20 percent,
respectively, expressed as a share of total expected costs under the TPS. We argue this is a
general result when the coefficient of variation in emission price under at TPS is larger than

                                              25
roughly one-half.
        We also discuss implementation choices related to establishing a price floor for a
TPS. Price floors are typically implemented in emission trading programs through
establishing a reserve price in a permit auction. Because of the direct allocation of permits
under a TPS based on output, such an approach is not immediately available. We therefore
discuss the possibility of full or partial consignment auctions as well as advance auctions
based on expected output, which serve as a practical path forward for incorporating price
floors into TPSs.


References

Adamou, Adamos, Sofronis Clerides, and Theodoros Zachariadis. 2014. "Welfare
       Implications of Car Feebates: A Simulation Analysis." The Economic Journal 124
       (578): F420­43. https://doi.org/10.1111/ecoj.12094.
Aldy, Joseph E. 2017. "The Political Economy of Carbon Pricing Policy Design."
       Discussion Paper ES 17-7. Harvard Project on Climate Agreements.
       https://www.belfercenter.org/sites/default/files/files/publication/aldy-ets-tax-
       final.pdf.
Barbose, Galen. 2019. "U.S. Renewables Portfolio Standards: 2019 Annual Status Update."
       Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. https://emp.lbl.gov/publications/us-
       renewables-portfolio-standards-2.
Becker, Jonathon M. 2020. "Tradable Performance Standards in a Dynamic Context."
       2020­03. Working Papers. Working Papers. Colorado School of Mines, Division of
       Economics and Business. https://ideas.repec.org/p/mns/wpaper/wp202003.html.
Bernard, Alain L., Carolyn Fischer, and Alan K. Fox. 2007. "Is There a Rationale for
       Output-Based Rebating of Environmental Levies?" Resource and Energy
       Economics 29 (2): 83­101. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.reseneeco.2006.07.001.
Biden, Joe. 2020. "The Biden Plan to Build a Modern, Sustainable Infrastructure and an
       Equitable Clean Energy Future." Joe Biden for President: Official Campaign
       Website. 2020. https://joebiden.com/clean-energy/.
Branger, Frédéric, and Philippe Quirion. 2014. "Price Versus Quantities Versus Indexed
       Quantities." FEEM Working Paper No. 085.2014. Foundazione Eni Enrico Mattei.
       https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2511192.
Bunch, David S., David Lloyd Greene, Timothy Lipman, S. Shaheen, C. Knittel, Y. Fan, D.
       Brownstone, W. McManus, K. G. Duleep, and E. Marteen. 2011. "Potential Design,
       Implementation, and Benefits of a Feebate Program for New Passenger Vehicles in
       California." Institute of Transportation Research Report UCD-ITS-RR-11_01.
       Project Final Report Prepared for State of California Air Resources Board and the
       California Environmental Protection Agency. University of California, Davis.
Burtraw, Dallas, and Kristen McCormack. 2017. "Consignment Auctions of Free

                                             26
        Emissions      Allowances."       Energy    Policy     107    (August):    337­44.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2017.04.041.
Burtraw, Dallas, Karen Palmer, and Danny Kahn. 2010. "A Symmetric Safety Valve."
        Energy Policy 38 (9): 4921­32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2010.03.068.
Caparrós, Alejandro, Richard E. Just, and David Zilberman. 2016. "Dynamic Relative
        Standards versus Emission Taxes in a Putty-Clay Model." Journal of the
        Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, January.
        https://doi.org/10.1086/681599.
Davis, Lucas W., and Christopher R. Knittel. 2018. "Are Fuel Economy Standards
        Regressive?" Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource
        Economists 6 (S1): S37­63. https://doi.org/10.1086/701187.
DeGette, Diana. 2020. "Text - H.R.7516 - 116th Congress (2019-2020): Clean Energy
        Innovation and Deployment Act of 2020." Webpage. 2019/2020. July 10, 2020.
        https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/house-bill/7516/text.
D'Haultfoeuille, Xavier, Pauline Givord, and Xavier Boutin. 2014. "The Environmental
        Effect of Green Taxation: The Case of the French Bonus/Malus." The Economic
        Journal 124 (578): F444­80. https://doi.org/10.1111/ecoj.12089.
Dumas, Alexandre, David L. Greene, and André Bourbeau. 2007. "CHAPTER 7 - North
        American Feebate Analysis Model." In Driving Climate Change, edited by Daniel
        Sperling and James S. Cannon, 107­27. Burlington: Academic Press.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-012369495-9/50008-7.
Durrmeyer, Isis. 2018. "Winners and Losers: The Distributional Effects of the French
        Feebate on the Automobile Market." Monograph. TSE Working Paper. Toulouse:
        TSE Working Paper. September 2018. http://tse-fr.eu/pub/32928.
Durrmeyer, Isis, and Mario Samano. 2018. "To Rebate or Not to Rebate: Fuel Economy
        Standards Versus Feebates." The Economic Journal 128 (616): 3076­3116.
        https://doi.org/10.1111/ecoj.12555.
Ellerman, A. Denny, and Ian Sue Wing. 2003. "Absolute versus Intensity-Based Emission
        Caps."           Climate           Policy         3         (sup2):         S7­20.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clipol.2003.09.013.
Farrell, Alexander, and Daniel Sperling. 2007. "A Low-Carbon Fuel Standard for
        California, Part 2: Policy Analysis." Institute of Transportation Studies, Working
        Paper      Series.   Institute    of    Transportation    Studies,   UC     Davis.
        https://ideas.repec.org/p/cdl/itsdav/qt8xv635dc.html.
Fischer, Carolyn. 2003. "Combining Rate-Based and Cap-and-Trade Emissions Policies."
        Climate Policy 3 (sup2): S89­103. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clipol.2003.09.015.
Fischer, Carolyn, and Michael Springborn. 2011. "Emissions Targets and the Real Business
        Cycle: Intensity Targets versus Caps or Taxes." Journal of Environmental
        Economics           and          Management          62         (3):       352­66.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2011.04.005.
Fishelson, Gideon. 1976. "Emission Control Policies under Uncertainty." Journal of
                                            27
        Environmental       Economics      and     Management        3     (3):     189­97.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/0095-0696(76)90018-8.
Gillingham, Kenneth. 2013. "The Economics of Fuel Economy Standards versus Feebates."
        NEPI        Working       Paper.    National      Energy       Policy     Institute.
        http://www.ourenergypolicy.org/the-economics-of-fuel-economy-standards-
        versus-feebates/.
Goulder, Lawrence H., Xianling Long, Jieyi Lu, and Richard D. Morgenstern. 2019.
        "China's Unconventional Nationwide CO2 Emissions Trading System: The Wide-
        Ranging Impacts of an Implicit Output Subsidy." w26537. National Bureau of
        Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w26537.
Goulder, Lawrence H., and Richard D. Morgenstern. 2018. "China's Rate-Based Approach
        to Reducing CO2 Emissions: Attractions, Limitations, and Alternatives." AEA
        Papers          and         Proceedings         108         (May):          458­62.
        https://doi.org/10.1257/pandp.20181028.
Goulder, Lawrence H., Richard D. Morgenstern, Clayton Munnings, and Jeremy Schreifels.
        2017. "China's National Carbon Dioxide Emission Trading System: An
        Introduction." Economics of Energy & Environmental Policy 6 (2).
        https://doi.org/10.5547/2160-5890.6.2.lgou.
Greene, David L. 1990. "CAFE OR PRICE?: An Analysis of the Effects of Federal Fuel
        Economy Regulations and Gasoline Price on New Car MPG, 1978-89." The Energy
        Journal 11 (3): 37­57.
Greene, David L., Philip D. Patterson, Margaret Singh, and Jia Li. 2005. "Feebates, Rebates
        and Gas-Guzzler Taxes: A Study of Incentives for Increased Fuel Economy."
        Energy Policy 33 (6): 757­75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2003.10.003.
Greene, William. 2017. Econometric Analysis. 8th edition. New York, NY: Pearson.
Grüll, Georg, and Luca Taschini. 2011. "Cap-and-Trade Properties under Different Hybrid
        Scheme Designs." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 61 (1):
        107­18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2010.09.001.
Hepburn, Cameron, Karsten Neuhoff, William Acworth, Dallas Burtraw, and Frank Jotzo.
        2016. "The Economics of the EU ETS Market Stability Reserve." Journal of
        Environmental Economics and Management 80 (November): 1­5.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2016.09.010.
Hoel, Michael, and Larry Karp. 2002. "Taxes versus Quotas for a Stock Pollutant."
        Resource and Energy Economics 24 (4): 367­84. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0928-
        7655(02)00014-3.
Holland, Stephen P. 2012. "Emissions Taxes versus Intensity Standards: Second-Best
        Environmental Policies with Incomplete Regulation." Journal of Environmental
        Economics           and          Management         63         (3):         375­87.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2011.12.002.
Holland, Stephen P., Jonathan E. Hughes, Christopher R. Knittel, and Nathan C. Parker.
        2015. "Unintended Consequences of Carbon Policies: Transportation Fuels, Land-
                                            28
        Use, Emissions, and Innovation." The Energy Journal 36 (3).
        https://doi.org/10.5547/01956574.36.3.2.
Johnson, Kenneth C. 2006. "Feebates: An Effective Regulatory Instrument for Cost-
        Constrained Environmental Policy." Energy Policy 34 (18): 3965­76.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2005.10.005.
Jotzo, Frank, and John C. V. Pezzey. 2007a. "Optimal Intensity Targets for Greenhouse Gas
        Emissions Trading under Uncertainty." Environmental and Resource Economics 38
        (2): 259­84. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10640-006-9078-z.
------. 2007b. "Optimal Intensity Targets for Greenhouse Gas Emissions Trading under
        Uncertainty." Environmental and Resource Economics 38 (2): 259­84.
        https://doi.org/10.1007/s10640-006-9078-z.
Kellogg, Ryan. 2018. "Gasoline Price Uncertainty and the Design of Fuel Economy
        Standards." Journal of Public Economics 160 (April): 14­32.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2018.02.013.
------. 2020. "Output and Attribute-Based Carbon Regulation under Uncertainty."
        Journal       of      Public      Economics       190      (October):     104246.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2020.104246.
Khezr, Peyman, and Ian A. MacKenzie. 2018. "Consignment Auctions." Journal of
        Environmental Economics and Management 87 (January): 42­51.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2017.11.003.
Klier, Thomas, and Joshua Linn. 2011. "Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards and
        the Market for New Vehicles." Annual Review of Resource Economics 3 (1): 445­
        62. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-resource-083110-120023.
Kolstad, Charles D. 2005. "The Simple Analytics of Greenhouse Gas Emission Intensity
        Reduction        Targets."     Energy      Policy      33      (17):     2231­36.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2004.05.001.
Konishi, Yoshifumi, and Meng Zhao. 2017. "Can Green Car Taxes Restore Efficiency?
        Evidence from the Japanese New Car Market." Journal of the Association of
        Environmental        and      Resource      Economists       4     (1):    51­87.
        https://doi.org/10.1086/689701.
Leard, Benjamin, and Virginia McConnell. 2017. "New Markets for Credit Trading Under
        U.S. Automobile Greenhouse Gas and Fuel Economy Standards." Review of
        Environmental        Economics       and      Policy      11      (2):    207­26.
        https://doi.org/10.1093/reep/rex010.
Lemoine, Derek. 2017. "Escape from Third-Best: Rating Emissions for Intensity
        Standards." Environmental and Resource Economics 67 (4): 789­821.
        https://doi.org/10.1007/s10640-016-0006-6.
Marschinski, Robert, and Ottmar Edenhofer. 2010a. "Revisiting the Case for Intensity
        Targets: Better Incentives and Less Uncertainty for Developing Countries." Energy
        Policy, Special Section on Carbon Emissions and Carbon Management in Cities
        with Regular Papers, 38 (9): 5048­58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2010.04.033.
                                            29
------. 2010b. "Revisiting the Case for Intensity Targets: Better Incentives and Less
        Uncertainty for Developing Countries." Energy Policy, Special Section on Carbon
        Emissions and Carbon Management in Cities with Regular Papers, 38 (9): 5048­
        58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2010.04.033.
Ministry of Ecology and Environment, P. R. China. 2020. Notice on the Issuance of the
        "Implementation Plan of 2019-2020 National Carbon Emissions Trading Cap
        Setting and Allowances Allocation (Power Sector)", "The List of Key Entities
        Covered by the 2019-2020 National Carbon Emissions Trading Allowances
        Management" and the Launch of Pre-allocation for Power Sector.
        http://mee.gov.cn/xxgk2018/xxgk/xxgk03/202012/t20201230_815546.html.
Munnings, Clayton, Richard D. Morgenstern, Zhongmin Wang, and Xu Liu. 2016.
        "Assessing the Design of Three Carbon Trading Pilot Programs in China." Energy
        Policy 96 (September): 688­99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2016.06.015.
Murray, Brian C., Richard G. Newell, and William A. Pizer. 2009. "Balancing Cost and
        Emissions Certainty: An Allowance Reserve for Cap-and-Trade." Review of
        Environmental         Economics       and       Policy,     January,     ren016.
        https://doi.org/10.1093/reep/ren016.
Newell, Richard G., and William A. Pizer. 2003. "Regulating Stock Externalities under
        Uncertainty." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 45 (2,
        Supplement): 416­32. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0095-0696(02)00016-5.
------. 2008. "Indexed Regulation." Journal of Environmental Economics and
        Management 56 (3): 221­33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2008.07.001.
Newell, Richard G., William Pizer, and Jiangfeng Zhang. 2005. "Managing Permit Markets
        to Stabilize Prices." Environmental & Resource Economics 31 (2): 133­57.
        https://doi.org/10.1007/s10640-005-1761-y.
Newell, Richard G., and Kristian Rogers. 2003. "The Market-Based Lead Phasedown."
        http://www.rff.org/research/publications/market-based-lead-phasedown.
Pizer, William A. 2002. "Combining Price and Quantity Controls to Mitigate Global
        Climate Change." Journal of Public Economics 85 (3): 409­434.
Pizer, William A., and Brian C. Prest. 2020. "Prices versus Quantities with Policy
        Updating." Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists
        7 (3): 483­518. https://doi.org/10.1086/707142.
Pizer, William A., and Xiliang Zhang. 2018. "China's New National Carbon Market." AEA
        Papers and Proceedings 108: 463­67. https://doi.org/10.1257/pandp.20181029.
Quirion, Philippe. 2005. "Does Uncertainty Justify Intensity Emission Caps?" Resource
        and           Energy           Economics         27          (4):        343­53.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.reseneeco.2005.05.002.
Roberts, Marc J., and Michael Spence. 1976. "Effluent Charges and Licenses under
        Uncertainty."      Journal    of    Public    Economics    5      (3):  193­208.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/0047-2727(76)90014-1.
Rubin, Jonathan, Paul N. Leiby, and David L. Greene. 2009. "Tradable Fuel Economy
                                           30
        Credits: Competition and Oligopoly." Journal of Environmental Economics and
        Management 58 (3): 315­28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2009.05.002.
Schmalensee, Richard, and Robert N. Stavins. 2017. "The Design of Environmental
        Markets: What Have We Learned from Experience with Cap and Trade?" Oxford
        Review of Economic Policy 33 (4): 572­88. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxrep/grx040.
Slater, Huw, Dimitri De Boer, Guoqiang Qian, and Shu Wang. 2020. "2020 China Carbon
        Pricing         Survey."        Beijing:       China        Carbon       Forum.
        http://www.chinacarbon.info/sdm_downloads/2020-china-carbon-pricing-survey/.
Stavins, Robert N. 1996. "Correlated Uncertainty and Policy Instrument Choice." Journal
        of Environmental Economics and Management 30 (2): 218­32.
        https://doi.org/10.1006/jeem.1996.0015.
Sue Wing, Ian, A. Denny Ellerman, and Jaemin Song. 2006. "Absolute vs. Intensity Limits
        for CO2 Emission Control: Performance Under Uncertainty." Technical Report.
        MIT Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change.
        http://dspace.mit.edu/handle/1721.1/31204.
Tombe, Trevor, and Jennifer Winter. 2015. "Environmental Policy and Misallocation: The
        Productivity Effect of Intensity Standards." Journal of Environmental Economics
        and Management 72 (July): 137­63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2015.06.002.
Webster, Mort, Ian Sue Wing, and Lisa Jakobovits. 2010. "Second-Best Instruments for
        near-Term Climate Policy: Intensity Targets vs. the Safety Valve." Journal of
        Environmental       Economics      and     Management      59    (3):   250­59.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2010.01.002.
Weitzman, Martin L. 1974. "Prices vs. Quantities." The Review of Economic Studies 41 (4):
        477­491.
------. 2018. "Prices or Quantities Dominate Banking and Borrowing." Working Paper
        24218. National Bureau of Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w24218.
Wood, Peter John, and Frank Jotzo. 2011. "Price Floors for Emissions Trading." Energy
        Policy 39 (3): 1746­1753.
Yan, Shiyu, and Gunnar S. Eskeland. 2018. "Greening the Vehicle Fleet: Norway's CO2-
        Differentiated Registration Tax." Journal of Environmental Economics and
        Management 91 (September): 247­62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2018.08.018.
Yeh, Sonia, Dallas Burtraw, Thomas Sterner, and David Greene. 2020. "Tradable
        Performance Standards in the Transportation Sector." Working Paper 20-18.
        Resources for the Future.
Yohe, Gary W. 1978. "Towards a General Comparison of Price Controls and Quantity
        Controls under Uncertainty." The Review of Economic Studies 45 (2): 229­38.
        https://doi.org/10.2307/2297337.
Yu, Sha, Jill Horing, Qiang Liu, Robert Dahowski, Casie Davidson, James Edmonds, Bo
        Liu, et al. 2019. "CCUS in China's Mitigation Strategy: Insights from Integrated
        Assessment Modeling." International Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control 84
        (May): 204­18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijggc.2019.03.004.
                                           31
Zhang, Duan, Yihsu Chen, and Makoto Tanaka. 2018. "On the Effectiveness of Tradable
       Performance-Based Standards." Energy Economics 74 (August): 456­69.
       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2018.06.012.
Zhao, Jinhua. 2018. "Aggregate Emission Intensity Targets: Applications to the Paris
       Agreement."          ADBI         Working     Paper        813.       ADBI.
       https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3198679.




                                         32
Appendix

A. Comparison and Notions of TPS and Feebate

       We start by showing that feebate and TPS is analog to the prices versus quantities
problem in the context of a rate-based cap-and-trade system.

A.1. Tradable performance Standard

        First, considering the tradable performance standard policy. TPS is also known as
rate-based regulation, intensity targets, or indexed regulation. It has become an option when
emissions are highly related to output levels. Theoretical studies show that it may be
preferable to absolute standard if emissions and activities level are highly related (Fischer
and Springborn 2011; Jotzo and Pezzey 2007b; Marschinski and Edenhofer 2010b; Sue
Wing, Ellerman, and Song 2006).
        Under TPS, the policy maker sets an emission limit or target, but it is continuously
scaled to some output measure or index,  . Therefore, the emission limit or target equals
   , where  is the standard / rate / intensity. In practice for a set of firms   {1, ... , },
policy maker allocates allowances based on the firm's output  ; that is, a representative
firm's allocation is given by  =    . It is also required to surrender allowances equal
to its emissions,  . Therefore, firms will buy  -  allowances if  >  or sell  -
 allowances if  <  , forming a price . In aggregate,  =  =    , that is,
the average emissions rate is exactly the standard.

A.2. Feebate

        The corresponding price version of TPS is feebates. A typical feebate policy is a
system combining a fixed fee levying on emissions and a revenue neutral rebate on output.
The instrument has been applied in countries such as France, Denmark, Norway, Canada,
etc. for low carbon regulation in transportation sector (Bunch et al. 2011).
        For a representative firm, if its production has an emissions rate  above a
standard  , it pays a "fee" equal to ( -  ) , where  is a fixed price. When its
production has an emissions rate  below the standard  , it receives a re-"bate" equal to
( -  ). This is equivalent to a tax on emission    and a subsidy to output equal to
   . In aggregation, feebate is revenue neutral, that is  ( -  )  =     -
    = 0. It implies that a revenue neutral feebate can achieve emission standard on
average.

A.3. Equivalent outcomes under a TPS and feebate

        Under TPS, policy maker sets emissions standard  ; markets establish a price 
for allowances. Firms have unit production cost functions  ( ) in terms of their unit
                                             33
emissions  =  / . Moreover,  ( ) < 0 as we require firms to reduce emissions and
 ( ) > 0.
        With the TPS, firm's unit costs are  ( ) +    -    as they buy or sell
allowances. Allowances price  adjusts to balance permit supply and demand. Firms
choose  to minimize unit costs, so  = -.
        Given the standard is met on average, the aggregate unit costs are given by ( ),
where () is the unit production cost function averaged across firms, and average
emissions rate equals the standard.
        Under feebate, instead of setting target and allowing trade, policy maker tax
emissions at  and subsidize output at    . With feebate tax/subsidy, firm's unit costs
are also  ( ) +    -    . Firms choose  to minimize unit cots, so  = -.
        Given this corresponds to the TPS outcome at the firm level, feebate have the same
outcome in the aggregate: unit costs are given by ( ) under assumption that we know
what price  corresponds to rate  .
        Note that compared to an emission tax, the feebate generates the same marginal cost,
but higher emissions averagely. Compare an emission tax at level  to a feebate that taxes
emissions at level  but also subsidizes output at level  . At the firm level, both will
set marginal cost equal to the emission tax or fee. However, the (re)bate part of the feebate
lowers unit costs to  ( ) +  -  relative to ( ) +  under a tax. In the
aggregate averaging over all firms, this leads to lower product prices under a feebate
compared to a tax equal to the fee, that is, ( ) versus ( ) +  . With a non-zero
demand elasticity, output (and emissions) will be higher under a feebate compared to a tax
equal to the fee. Nevertheless, feebate and TPS would have the same output effect.


              price
                                                  TPS




                 p                                                     Feebate



                                                                    ()



                      0                           r*          Emissions rate r

                              Figure A1. Feebate versus TPS



                                             34
B. Calculating comparative advantage

       Write the net benefit function:

                                         2
                  = 0 + 1 ( -    ) -       ( -    )2
                                         2
                                                 2
                           -0  - (1 +  )( -   ) - ( -   )2 
                                                 2

Substitute  =  , take expectation, and set 1 = 1 yields the expected net benefit under
TPS at optimal standard:

                             2 2 2
  [ ] = 0 + 1 ( -   ) -        ( ( +  2)
                                         - 2    2 +   2  2 ) - 0  - (1 
                             2 
                              2
               +  )( -   ) - ( -   )2 
                              2
                                          2    2        2 2 2
           = 0 - 0  - ( -   ) - ( -   )2 (  2 +  ) -          
                                          2     2       2

                                                                      
Now redo for the feebate, subsitituting the response function  =  -       in the above net
                                                                      2

benefit expression and taking expectations:
                                                                          2
                                 2    
         = 0 + 1 (( - )  -    ) - (( - )  -    ) - 0 
                     2           2    2

                                                     2
                                       
                                            2      
                       - (1 +  ) ( - -  )  - ( - -  ) 
                                    2       2   2


                                 1 
[ ] = 0 + 1 ( -   ) -
                                  2
                      2                       2
               2  2
                           2  2       2   2 2    2 
              - ((  + 2 ) ( +  ) - 2   +   + 2 +      )
               2     2                        2   2

                                                     2                 2
                                              )
                                                       1  2     2
                                                                     2 
              - 0  - (1  +  )( -                   +  +  - ( -  )  -   2 
                                                    2  2  2          2 2
              + ( -   )




                                              35
                      ( -   )2 
    [ ] = 0 -                   (2  + 2 )
                         2
                                 2              2                  2
                        2 2 2                       2             
                    -     (  + ( 2 ) ( 2 + 2)
                                              + 2 +      ) - 0  +    
                        2       2              2     2            22


  Now we can compute the compariative advantage, subtracting [ ] from
[ ]:
 [ ] - [ ]
                               2            2            2   2
                           2         2   2)
                                                2           
                        = - (( 2 ) (   +  + 2 +      ) +  -    
                           2  2             2    2      2   22
                        + ( -   )
                  2                 2                2
             2                    2                2        
        =-     (( 2 ) ( 2 + 2)
                               )+   2  + ( -   )
                                                 -   2 - 2    
             2   2                2 2              2 2     2

      2                                                       2
                     2
                                     2  + 2         2       2 
    = 2 (2 - 2  (1 +  )) - ((1 -         2 ) + 
                                                 )+   )   -   2
     22                          2  (1 +       2    2       2 2

    2
                  2 ))
                                          2               2   2
             (         (     )
  = 2 (2 - 2  1 +  - ( 2  + 2 (1 -          2 ) + 
                                                    ))    -   2
   22                              2  (1 +        2     2   2 2

                    2                                 2)       2
                                       2 ))
                                              2  (1 +        2 
               =      2 (2 - 2
                                ( 1 +       -             
                                                           -   2
                   22                             2          2 2
           2  +2          
Where         2 )+    =       .
        2  (1+    2        



Or, when there is no correlation,
                                        2
                                                       2 ))
                                  -   = 2 (2 - 2  (1 + 
                                       22
And, when there is correlation,

                                             2)
                              -      2  (1 +         
                                = -(           )  - 2 2
                                         2           2
        We can rewrite this as

                                       2
                          -    2  (1 +   )        
                            =-             ( +      2 )
                                                         )
                                   2           (1 +    2
                                             36
                                                   -
Therefore, for some neighborhood | | <  ,                 < 0 and positive correlation will
                                                    

favor TPS while negative correlation will favor feebates.
                                                                             2
        Looking at the second term, it is easy to show 0   /(1 +               )  1/2 (given
 > 0 since output > 0). So we can write,
                                                      
                                              2 )
                                                    <
                                       (1 +       2    2
Therefore, a sufficient condition for this derivative to remain negative, regardless of cx,
is 2 >  /2 . That is, the same conclusion about correlation continues to hold so long
as the standard deviation of the cost shock, expressed in terms of the standard deviation of
the shift in the rate of emissions at a given price (e.g., the "horizontal shock") is less than
twice the TPS standard rT. When this is violated, specifically,
                                                       2
                                                 1 + 
                                           > 
                                        2           
a sufficiently large negative correlation can tilt the comparative advantage towards TPS.
Note that a positive correlation always tilts towards TPS.


C. Cost calculations

C.1. Calculating the baseline expected TPS cost.

        To compute the expected cost of a TPS relative to a no-policy baseline, we compare
the expected TPS cost from the calculation of [ ] in Appendix B and subtract the no
policy expected cost, which we define as the expected cost when the price (marginal cost)
is fixed at zero. We might imagine that the expected cost ought to be zero when the price
is zero, but we have not yet set the parameters to ensure that assumption. In particular, the
cost and benefit function have been defined as approximations around a point   =   / ,
later assumed to be the benefit maximizing value of q when x is certain.
        From Appendix B, we have
                                                                        2
                [ ] = [( )] = 0  + 1  ( -   ) + ( -   )2 
                                                                         2
where we have dropped the benefit terms and terms related to the covariance of x and c,
which we assume is zero for this exercise.
        To compute the expected cost when p = 0, we first solve the marginal cost equation
(4) when marginal cost = 0, yielding
                                                1 + 
                                       =   -
                                                   2
We substitute this into the expression for costs yielding:

                                              37
                  1 + 
  =0 =  (  -           ) 
                    2
                                                                   2
                                           1 +         2  1 + 
                 = 0  + (1 +  ) (  -              
                                                -  )  + ( -      
                                                               -  ) 
                                             2         2    2
Simplifying
                                           1 +      2   1 +  2
               =0 = 0  + (1 +  ) (-             )  + (-     ) 
                                             2      2     2
And taking expectations
                                        2   2      2    2
                                        1 +     2 1  + 
                     [=0 ] = 0  -              + (    2    )
                                          2     2    2

                                             2    2
                                             1  + 
                                   = 0  -           
                                               22
We now subtract this from the expected TPS cost yielding:
                                                                   2    2
                                           )
                                                          
                                                         2 2
                                                                   1  + 
    [ ] - [=0 ] = 0  + 1  ( -                  + ( -  )    - (0  -         )
                                                        2            22

                       2    2
                       1  +                           2
                     =         + 1  ( -   ) + ( -   )2 
                         22                           2
Without loss of generality, we have assumed -1 is the expected price  =   , call this
[ ]. And from (4), we know that -2 ( -   ) is the expected TPS price difference
between a TPW with  =  and a TPS with  =   . Call this [ ] - [ ] =
[ -  ]. Thus we can rewrite

                              2                               2
     [ ] - [=0 ] =           (  + [  ]2 + 2[  ][ -  ] + [ -  ] )
                          22
                            2      2
                    =      (  + [ ] )
                        22



C.2. Calculating the expected variance of our truncated normal distribution

coupled with a discrete value at the truncation point

        When prices are low relative to the variation in cost shocks, a TPS may not bind.
That is, a favorable cost shock will reduce compliance costs to the point that the marginal
                                            38
cost with our linear schedule appears less than zero at the TPS rate rT. This is illustrated
in Figure 9. In reality, the price will be zero.
        One way to address this without affecting our results is to change the assumed
distribution of c. In particular, if  = -1 - 2 ( -   ) = [] then we can define
a new error,

                      TN(0, c , -,  )             with probability         1 - 
           ~{
                                                  with probability         

where TN(,,b) is a upper-tail truncated normal distribution with mean , standard
                                                                       ]
deviation , and maximum b. In particular, we choose  such that [         = 0. In this way,
                                                             2
all of our previous results continue to hold, except that       needs to be replaced with
      )2 ]
[(         (in Equation (14), for example). Greene (2017) derives the mean and variance of
the one-sided truncated normal to be
                                              ()
                                         - 
                                              ()
And
                                                           2
                               2
                                     ()    ()
                               (1 -     -(    ) )
                                     ()    ()
Where  = ( - )/ =  / = []/ , e.g., the number of standard deviations 
between the expected price and zero, and () and () and the standard normal PDF
and CDF respectively. Once we know  in our applications, it is easy show that choosing

                                     ()             ()
                                     
                                     ()             ()
                            =                  =
                                         ()            ()
                                +                  +
                                         ()            ()
In other words, as  becomes large (>2),  will be negligible as   0.05 and   1. If
 were 0.5, however,   0.5 . Letting VTN be the variance of the truncated normal
distribution given above, with  =  and  = []/ , we have

                                                    2                           2
           )2 ]       2               2
                                             ()          ()    ()
        [(        =         + (1 -   )  ((      ) + 1 -     -(    ) )
                                             ()          ()    ()

                          2         2
                                                        ()
                        =   + (1 - )  (1 -                 )
                                                        ()
                                                  )2 ]
We use this expression to make calculations of [(      in Table 1 and Table 2.



                                             39
          price
                                            TPS




                                                               Expected MB
                                                                           2
                                                               slope = 2  (  + 1)
        Feebate                                              Feebate

                                        T

                  0                                             
                                                            Expected MC
                                                            slope = 2

                                                         Actual MC with c > 0

              Figure 9. Favorable cost shock when expected prices are low.


D. Calculating full and partial consignment auctions

D.1. Full consignment auctions

       With full consignment, a firm will be allocated allowances for consignment auction
according to the rate  . The firm's allocaiton is   and emissions (obligations) are   .
Introduce a floor price  in the acution. Therefore, the total revenue of consignment
auction would be:


                               ,                   if        > 
                      ={
                                 .                 if        = 


       Each firm's revenue would be:


                               ,                   if       > 
                       = {
                                 ,                 if       = 


      They are output shares of the total revenue no matter whether market hits the
minimum price.
      Firms can buy allowances in the same auction with the clearing price for
compliance. The total expenditure of all regulated firms would be:
                                            40
                                    ,                if         > 
                       ={
                                     ,               if         = 

        And because of the revenue neutral nature of consignment auctions, the total
auction revenue equals the total expenditure  = . It is easy to show that:
        (1) If the clearing price is greater than the floor, the ex post average intensity among
firms equals the target rate:
                                               =  .
        (2) If the market hits the floor, the minimum price maintained, while only 
fraction of allowances sold at auction, and
                                                     
                                            = ,
                                                    
        which is below 1 (and greater than 0) because in this case the ex post average
intensity is smaller than the original standard due to demand shocks.
        Therefore, each regulated firm's net expenditures with full consignment are:

                               ( -  ) ,                   if         > 
                     = {
                               ( -  )  ,                  if         = 

D.2. Partial consignment auctions

       With partial consignment, a firm will be immediately allocated some free
allowances according to its output and a standard lower than the performance standard
, . The rest part of free allowances which equals to the difference between the two
standard and the firms' output ( - , ) , are then allocated for consignment auction.
       Therefore, the total revenue of consignment auction with a minimum price would
be:


                         ( - , ) ,                             if        > 
             ={
                         ( - , )   .                           if        = 


       Each firm's revenue would be:


                         ( - , ) ,                             if       > 
               = {
                         ( - , )   ,                           if       = 


       which are also the output share of the total revenue no matter whether market hits
the minimum price.
                                              41
       The total expenditure of firms to fulfill their obligation is:


                           ( - , ) ,                        if       > 
                ={
                           ( - , )  ,                       if       = 


       Given the revenue neutral condition,  = , it is also easily shown that:
       (1) If the clearing price is higher than the price floor, the rate holds:

                                    =  , if  > 

       (2) If the market hits the price floor, the minimum price holds, and the fraction of
allowances that would be sold is:

                                      - ,
                            =             , if  = 
                                      - ,

        (3) It is obvious that  would only be greater than 0 if  > , . That is, if
the demand is too low, the mechanism maintains the lower rate , instead of the price
floor.
        Each regulated firm's net expenditures with partial consignment are the same with
that with full consignment:

                              ( -  ) ,                 if         > 
                    = {
                              ( -  )  ,                if         = 




                                              42
