                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            RETHINKING HOW WE SCORE CAPITAL GAINS TAX REFORM

                                       Natasha Sarin
                                    Lawrence H. Summers
                                       Owen M. Zidar
                                         Eric Zwick

                                     Working Paper 28362
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28362


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2021




We thank Coly Elhai for outstanding research assistance. We received helpful comments from
Tim Dowd, Robert McClelland, Rich Prisinzano, Jim Poterba, and others who wish to remain
anonymous. These acknowledgments should not be interpreted as implying that these individuals
are in agreement with this paper's conclusions. This work is supported by National Science
Foundation under Grant Number 1752431. We declare that we have no relevant or material
financial interests that relate to the research described in this paper other than owning some
assets which have unrealized accrued capital gains. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Natasha Sarin, Lawrence H. Summers, Owen M. Zidar, and Eric Zwick. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Rethinking How We Score Capital Gains Tax Reform
Natasha Sarin, Lawrence H. Summers, Owen M. Zidar, and Eric Zwick
NBER Working Paper No. 28362
January 2021
JEL No. H0,H2,H3

                                          ABSTRACT

We argue the revenue potential from increasing tax rates on capital gains may be substantially
greater than previously understood. First, many prior studies focus primarily on short-run
taxpayer responses, and so miss revenue from gains that are deferred when rates change. Second,
the composition of capital gains has shifted in recent years, such that the share of gains that are
highly elastic to the tax rate has likely declined. Third, focusing on capital gains tax collection
may understate fiscal spillovers from decreasing the preferential tax treatment for capital gains.
Fourth, additional base-broadening reforms, like eliminating stepped-up basis and making
charitable giving a realization event, will decrease the elasticity of the tax base to rate changes.
Overall, we do not think the prevailing assumption of many in the scorekeeping community--that
raising rates to top ordinary income levels would raise little revenue--is warranted. A crude
calculation illustrates that raising capital gains rates to ordinary income levels could raise $1
trillion more revenue over a decade than other estimates suggest. Given the magnitudes at stake,
scorekeeping procedures employed in evaluating capital gains should be made more transparent
and be the subject of external professional debate and review.

Natasha Sarin                                    Owen M. Zidar
University of Pennsylvania                       Department of Economics &
Carey Law                                        School of International and Public Affairs
Silverman 139                                    Princeton University
3501 Sansom Street                               237 Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Philadelphia, PA 19104                           Princeton, NJ 08544
nsarin@law.upenn.edu                             and NBER
                                                 ozidar@princeton.edu
Lawrence H. Summers
Harvard Kennedy School of Government             Eric Zwick
79 JFK Street                                    Booth School of Business
Cambridge, MA 02138                              University of Chicago
and NBER                                         5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
lhs@harvard.edu                                  Chicago, IL 60637
                                                 and NBER
                                                 ezwick@chicagobooth.edu
1     Introduction
Capital gains taxes are a perennial issue in tax reform debates. Some maintain that preferential rates on capital
gains encourage entrepreneurship and capital formation. Others question whether these benefits are sufficiently
large to outweigh the equity and fiscal costs of lower rates. While the direct equity costs of lower rates are
clear--the wealthiest one percent account for two-thirds of capital gains realizations in the 2019 Survey of
Consumer Finances--the fiscal costs are more uncertain.
    The Joint Committee on Taxation (JCT) estimates these costs. In the parlance of policymakers, the JCT
is the official "scorekeeper" who decides how tax legislation "scores" if implemented. The prevailing wisdom
among some in the scorekeeping community (e.g., Tax Policy Center, Tax Foundation, Penn Wharton Budget
Model) has been that the revenue-maximizing capital gains rate is around 30 percent, such that setting a rate
too far above this level could actually reduce the total amount of revenue collected.1 This "Laffer rate" is well
below both current top marginal tax rates on other income and top rates currently under debate. The rationale
for a low Laffer rate is that the static revenue gains expected from a high rate will fail to materialize because
the dynamic response of taxpayers dramatically shrinks the tax base.
    Accounting for the difference between static and dynamic scores is clearly important. For example, the
official score attached to changes in the top income tax rate is perhaps 12 percent lower than the static score,
because some taxpayers will choose to work less, or hire tax planners to help avoid taxes more.2 But in the
capital gains context, dynamic effects are often assumed to exceed 100 percent, because rate hikes lock-in
realizations that would have otherwise occurred. Deploying this assumption, increases in the capital gains tax
rate have previously been estimated to lose revenue, and decreases, to raise revenue.3
    It seems natural that the dynamic effects in the case of capital gains are more pronounced than for other
policies: Retiming a capital gain realization in an investor's stock portfolio is easier than changing investment
strategy for executives seeking to avoid a corporate tax increase, or reducing labor supply for workers when
income tax rates rise. But we suspect that these behavioral effects are overstated, resulting in a potentially
severe underestimate of the revenue at play from capital gains tax increases.
    The current "realization elasticity" used by JCT and others in the scorekeeping community is approximately
-0.7, based both on historical scores (Joint Committee on Taxation, 1990) and more recent academic research
(Dowd, McClelland and Muthitacharoen, 2015). If tax rates increased by 100%, crude application of this
elasticity implies that only 53% (= 1 - (0.7 × 0.67)) of gains will be realized.4 In concrete terms, roughly $1
trillion of annual realizations would shrink to around $500 billion. This assumed $500 billion response is large
enough that raising capital gains rates to ordinary income levels could be scored as raising no new revenue.
    1 For example, McClelland provides a short discussion of revenue-maximizing rates, noting that "the Tax Policy Center uses

estimates that imply that the revenue from taxing long-term capital gains is maximized when the top rate is set to be about 28
percent" and the Treasury Department, and JCT appear to use similar estimates. https://www.taxpolicycenter.org/taxvox/
new-study-suggests-congress-could-raise-money-increasing-capital-gains-tax-rates-47-percent
    2 See Saez, Slemrod and Giertz (2012), which uses an elasticity of taxable income of -0.2.
    3 Indeed, in the 1990s, a long line of academic and policy work was focused on whether decreasing the capital gains tax rate

was likely to pay for itself (Gravelle, 1991; Auten and Cordes, 1991).
    4 Note that 0.67 = .20/.30, which is the rate change from 20% to 40% divided by the mid-point. This stylized example ab-

stracts from the 3.8% net investment income tax and other tax considerations.




                                                                2
   This style of calculation neglects a material offsetting factor: medium-term retiming of realizations would
offset lost revenues in the short-term. Suppose that doubling capital gains rates from 20% to 40% causes
realizations to occur half as often: instead of realizing gains every year, individuals realize gains every two
years. If assets grow at 10% annually, then in the low-tax regime, $100 of assets yield realizations of $10 in year
1 and $10.80 in year 2 (after paying two dollars of tax in year 1). In the high-tax regime, $100 of assets yield
realizations of $0 in year 1 and $21 in year 2. Despite the appearance in year 1 of a large elasticity of realizations
in response to the tax increase, total revenues over both years increase from $4.16 in the low-tax regime to
$8.40 in the high-tax regime. In this simple example without other behavioral responses, the short-run revenue
score is zero and the medium-run revenue score is double the baseline. Clearly, the latter revenue score is more
relevant for policy purposes.
   It is not clear to what extent these dynamic factors are incorporated in current scorekeeping methods,
or if instead the current approach predicts that annual realizations would permanently fall. Given scarce
public information about official scorekeeping methods, we are not in a position to evaluate how these methods
account for such medium-run behavior. It is also unclear how much additional base-broadening reforms, like
stepped-up basis and making charitable giving a realization event, would affect estimates of lost tax collection
due to indefinite deferrals. This ambiguity also impairs the ability of new research to contribute to improving
our understanding of dynamic taxpayer responses.
   Beyond the issue of deferred gains, we highlight three additional considerations that suggest conventional
elasticities may be overstated. First, the composition of capital gains has shifted in recent years, such that
the share of capital gains that are highly elastic to the tax rate has fallen. Today, nearly half of capital gains
accrue through passthrough and mutual fund distributions outside of the direct control of taxpayers. If half
of capital gains are not sensitive to the tax environment, then for e = -0.7 to be the right average elasticity
across all gains, the elasticity for the other half of gains would be e = -1.4. And even in the extreme case that
the timeable realizations were to shrink to zero, a large stock of gains that will be taxed regularly at higher
rates would remain. Moreover, the appropriate elasticity for scoring big tax increases should put more weight
on the elasticity of the less timeable portion since it will account for more of the remaining tax base. It is
unclear whether scorekeeping models account for compositional changes and dynamic weights.
   Second, revenue estimates may understate the substitution between capital gains and other forms of income.
Third, the uncertainty about how scorekeepers incorporate dynamic effects into various capital gains reform
proposals complicates apples-to-apples evaluation of alternatives. These issues are all deserving of further study.
Overall, we do not think the prevailing assumption by many in the scorekeeping community--that raising rates
to top ordinary income levels would raise little revenue--is warranted by a reasonable reading of the evidence.
   We conclude with crude estimates of the wide range in revenue potential from raising capital gains rates
to the top ordinary income levels under different elasticity assumptions. Applying the conventional elasticity
e = -0.7 leads to the conclusion that this substantial rate increase would raise less than $150 billion in revenue.
In stark contrast, using an elasticity that incorporates medium-term dynamics suggests that raising rates to
the top ordinary income level could raise more than $1 trillion over a decade. Put differently, e = -0.7 implies



                                                          3
that once capital gains rates reach around 30 percent, the additional increase to top ordinary rates loses, rather
than raises, revenue. Our preferred estimates suggest the opposite. Pairing rate increases with the elimination
of loopholes that erode the capital gains tax base--like stepped-up basis and the tax preference for charitable
gifts of appreciated assets--produces larger revenue estimates. We provide a simple calculation that abstracts
from many important details. Our point is not to offer an official score, but instead to illustrate the magnitude
of potential revenue and how sensitive capital gains revenue estimates are to various assumptions. We suspect
that making scorekeeping procedures more transparent and the subject of external professional debate and
review will lead to an upward revision in the estimated revenue potential from substantially increasing capital
gains tax rates.



2     Short-Run Deferral Increases Medium-Run Realizations

2.1    Longer estimation window produces smaller elasticity estimates

A long estimation window is necessary to measure the dynamic response and revenue effects of capital gains tax
changes. The reason is that gains deferred when taxes rise may not, in fact, be deferred indefinitely. Auerbach
(1989) provides a helpful model that we describe in the Appendix. In the model, rate changes may induce less
frequent asset turnover, but at least some portion of gains deferred will face a tax burden eventually. And
when deferred realizations do occur, the gains will be larger, as they will accrue over many years, offsetting
transient losses from delays in realization. Working through the long-run dynamic equilibrium properties of
whatever elasticity is estimated is quite important. In general, increasing the frequency of realizations means
that the average realization will be smaller, and decreasing the frequency of realizations means that when they
do occur, they will be larger. The impact on the size of the taxable gain works against this baseline effect and
is missed by short-term elasticity estimates.
    There is a long line of empirical research on the responsiveness of capital gains realizations to rate changes,
relying on different methodologies for estimating taxpayer response, different sample periods, and different
rate changes from which to derive estimates (Dowd and Richards, 2021). Importantly, varying realization
elasticities across studies often reflect the horizon over which taxpayer responses are estimated. Due largely
to data limitations, much of the literature has estimated a short-run elasticity by studying responses within a
short window before and after tax changes. If researchers and professional scorekeepers adopt the short-run
elasticity as the relevant statistic for revenue estimation, they implicitly presume that realizations that are
deferred when rates rise will never take place.
    Consider two recent contributions. Dowd, McClelland and Muthitacharoen (2015) use micro panel data from
the 2000s to estimate a permanent elasticity of -.72, based on taxpayer responses from the two years surrounding
tax changes. A limitation of this approach is that it misses out on realizations that are deferred when rates
change, but occur eventually, just outside of the years immediately surrounding tax changes. Consistent with
this idea, Dowd, McClelland and Muthitacharoen (2015) find that their estimates are exclusively driven by
intensive margin effects (i.e., the size of a realized gain), indicating this approach may miss medium-run timing


                                                         4
responses that are more likely to appear as extensive margin effects (i.e., the presence of a realized gain).
    Agersnap and Zidar (2020), in contrast, capture realizations that occur at the state-level within ten years
of a tax change (Figure 1). Consistent with the deferred realization hypothesis, they arrive at an estimate of
the behavioral effect of capital gains tax hikes that is much lower than existing estimates (between -.3 and -.5),
and consequently an estimate of the revenue-maximizing rate that is much higher, around 38 to 47 percent.
There are issues with this ten-year horizon as well. On the one hand, estimates are less precise in later years
since other shocks occur during such a lengthy estimation window. On the other, even this more expansive
estimation window misses realizations deferred when rates change that occur eventually, just outside of the
ten-year horizon.

Figure 1: Evolution of realization responses: Elasticity estimates by horizon from Agersnap and Zidar (2020)
                                                      .5
                                  Elasticity of realizations w.r.t. tax rate
                                               -.5    -1         0




                                                                               -10   -5       0        5   10
                                                                                          Event Time



Notes: This figure plots tax rate elasticities within 3-year bins defined relative to the year of a tax change. For instance, the
rightmost point indicates that the realizations elasticity to a tax change 9 and 11 years previous is -0.28. This figure is con-
structed by converting the policy-relevant elasticity (CG - N ) series from Figure 3(c) of Agersnap and Zidar (2020) to a tax-
                                                -0.22
rate elasticity. We use a conversion factor of 1 -0.22
                                                       so that the result is an elasticity at a tax rate of 22 percent.



    A critique of both Dowd, McClelland and Muthitacharoen (2015) and Agersnap and Zidar (2020) is that
their identification relies on relatively small state-level tax changes. An alternative approach would be to use the
time series of large federal changes to examine dynamics around larger reforms. The only comparable historical
episodes in the U.S. are in the 1970s, when capital gains rates rose following the Tax Reform Act of 1969 to
49 percent, before being cut to 29 percent by the end of the decade. However, the lack of a comparison group
and the existence of confounding shocks makes clear how difficult it is to identify the permanent tax-induced
component of this change from the federal time series.
    Figure 2 plots aggregate realizations and capital gains tax rates and reveals clear issues with extrapolation
from the federal time series. First, the time series show clear anticipatory and transient taxpayer timing,
providing more evidence of why elasticities based on just a few years of data can be misleading. Second, the
base of capital gains is procylical, so it is hard to disentangle changes in realizations from unrelated market-
induced changes in tax collections. The 1970s featured capital gains tax hikes, decreases in capital gains
tax collection as a share of GDP, and poor market performance--all of which reversed in the 1980s. Figure


                                                                                           5
2(b) shows a sharp decline in C-corporation equity wealth as a share of GDP in the 1970s, which confounds
inferences about the tax elasticity based solely on time-series fluctuations in rates and realized gains. Looking
to state-level changes is thus valuable, as it is a broader sample that allows for separating tax-induced changes
from general macroeconomic trends.

                                  Figure 2: Evolution of Net Capital Gains and C-Corporation Equity Wealth

                                                                          (a) Capital gains




                                                                                                                                       40
                          8
                          6




                                                                                                                                       30
       Share of GDP (%)




                                                                                                                                           Tax rate (%)
                          4




                                                                                                                                       20
                          2




                                                                                                                                       10
                          0




                           1965            1975                    1985                     1995                             2005   2015

                                                    Net realized capital gains       Max long-term capital gains tax rate


                                                          (b) C-Corporation equity wealth




                                                                                                                                       40
                          80
                          60




                                                                                                                                       30
       Share of GDP (%)




                                                                                                                                           Tax rate (%)
                          40




                                                                                                                                       20
                          20




                                                                                                                                       10
                          0




                           1965            1975                    1985                     1995                             2005   2015

                                                   C-corporation equity wealth        Max long-term capital gains tax rate




Notes: These graphs plot net realized capital gains, C-corporation equity wealth, and the maximum long-term capital
gains tax rates between 1960 and 2014 as a share of GDP. Data on capital gains and C-corporation wealth from Smith, Zi-
dar and Zwick (2020). Data on tax rates from the U.S. Treasury (https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/tax-policy/
tax-analysis/Documents/Taxes-Paid-on-Capital-Gains-for-Returns-with-Positive-Net-Capital-Gains.pdf) and the Tax
Foundation (https://taxfoundation.org/federal-capital-gains-tax-collections-1954-2009/). GDP data from the World
Bank (https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD).



2.2       Some portion of deferred gains are eventually realized

Overall, many empirical estimates in the capital gains literature are lacking because without lengthening the
window beyond a year or two, one cannot measure relevant medium- and long-term responses. If taxpayers
respond to increases in capital gains rates by realizing gains less frequently--but not deferring indefinitely--
then these longer-run responses would suggest the impact of rate changes on capital gains tax collection is more
temporary than previously believed.
   If this were the case, one would expect to observe a few patterns in the data when rates increase. First,


                                                                                 6
the duration that taxpayers hold their gains before realizing would rise. Second, the ratio of sales price to
basis would be higher: In the Auerbach framework discussed in the Appendix,  represents the share of
realizations that occur annually. If a capital gains change affects  , the share of annual realizations falls, but
when realizations occur, gains relative to purchase basis are higher.
                  The IRS SOCA (Sales of Capital Assets) study provides some suggestive evidence on these patterns. The
SOCA panel data includes the sales price, basis, gain or loss, and the purchase and sales date for capital gains
transactions for a representative sample of taxpayers. This data is at the federal level and only for certain
years between 1997-2012.5 As such, there is just one federal tax change during the time covered by these data,
the 2003 reform, which reduced the top rate from 20% to 15%. This is one of many areas where more recent
and comprehensive IRS data would be invaluable: Regular SOCA panels would enable better inference about
the extent to which realization behavior has changed over time.
                  Figure 3 shows that, for all transactions and corporate stock transactions specifically, duration decreases in
lockstep with the rate change. In other words, the share of assets held for more than ten years drops when the
rate falls, and the ratio of sales price to basis falls (Figure 4). It is worth noting that this evidence is purely
suggestive--these two periods are distinct and differences in macroeconomic conditions may well be driving the
results.6 But the figures are consistent with the notion that at least some of the changes induced by capital
gains reforms have to do with the timing of gains, and not just the decision of whether or not to realize. Models
that assume only the latter channel is operating will miss out on the revenue potential of rate changes.

                                                                       Figure 3: Holding Length by Asset Class

                                                (a) Held less than 5 years                                                                                              (b) Held 10 years or more
                                                                                                                                                               .08
                                                                                     .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                            .3
                                        .8




                                                                                                                         Share of transactions held < 10 yrs
   Share of transactions held < 5 yrs




                                                                                     Max tax rate, long-term gains




                                                                                                                                                                                                            Max tax rate, long-term gains
                                                                                                                                                               .07
                                        .7




                                                                                                          .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .2
                                                                                                                                                               .06
                                        .6




                                                                                           .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .1
                                                                                                                                                               .05
                                        .5
                                        .4




                                                                                                                                                               .04
                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                         1995   2000        2005          2010    2015                                                                           1995   2000        2005          2010   2015
                                                            year                                                                                                                    year

                                                        All assets   Stocks                                                                                                     All assets   Stocks
                                                        Tax rate                                                                                                                Tax rate




Notes: These graphs plot the average share of capital gains realizations that are held for less than five years and for more
than 10 years. For reference, we also plot the maximum federal long-term capital gains tax rate. Data from the IRS SOCA.
            5 There
             is also a 1985 SOCA study but there are no study files for other years in the 1980s and early 1990s.
            6 Indeed,
               the share of assets held for long periods is mechanically tied to recent market movements: when the stock of capital
gains rises significantly in a year, the share of total gains that have been held for long periods drops.




                                                                                                                     7
                                                      Figure 4: Price-to-Basis Ratio by Asset Class




                                                                                                         .3
                                             3




                                                                                                         Max tax rate, long-term gains
                                             2.5
                      Price-to-basis ratio




                                                                                                                              .2
                                             2




                                                                                                               .1
                                             1.5
                                             1




                                                                                                         0
                                               1995         2000           2005          2010         2015
                                                                           Year

                                                                       All assets   Stocks
                                                                       Tax rate


Notes: This graph plots the ratio of sales price to basis for long-term gain realizations of all assets and for stocks only. For
reference, we also plot the maximum federal long-term capital gains tax rate. Data from the IRS SOCA.



2.3     Tax law changes make it unlikely that taxpayers can defer gains indefinitely

An early theoretical paper by Stiglitz (1983) suggests that the avoidance opportunities for capital gains taxes
are so rampant that the existence of a tax would have no impact on individual consumption, because the tax
can be avoided entirely through a range of techniques like the use of derivatives.
    Whether the assumptions that underlie this model were ever realistic is debatable. A long line of literature
documents that most trading activity is inconsistent with tax-motivated realizations, which pushes against
the idea that investors are so active in their tax avoidance strategies.7 Further, to the extent that these
opportunities did exist, they are more limited today than they were in the 1980s.
    For example, Section 1259 of the tax code was adopted in 1997 and required that a constructive sale of
property held by a taxpayer be treated for the purposes of recognizing gain and establishing a holding period
as if she had sold the property in question for its fair market value. Section 1259 leaves some room for forward
contracts designed for the holder to defer tax liability for a period (typically three to five years) while receiving
cash today. But recent legal precedent makes clear that there are limits to this strategy that make it infeasible
for gains periods to be rolled over indefinitely.8 Thus, this strategy offers only a temporary salve to inevitable
capital gains tax liability.
    For those at the top of the wealth distribution, diversification, rather than consumption, needs likely drive
    7 See, for example, Odean (1998, 1999) and Barber and Odean (2000). In more recent work looking at bunching behavior

around capital gains tax thresholds, Dowd and McClelland (2019) find that many taxpayers appear to pursue "distinctly inferior
tax minimization [strategies]" when selling assets (p.347).
    8 See, for example, Estate of Andrew J. McKelvey V. Commissioner, No. 17-2554 (2d Cir. 2018).




                                                                            8
some realization choices. But for taxpayers who are looking to consume out of their gains, it is plausible that
they could borrow against shares that have accumulated in value, thus deferring capital gains liability. However,
potential borrowers are likely to face sizable marginal calls because of the volatility of their underlying shares.
They thus need to have sufficient liquidity on hand, which makes consumption without realization challenging.
    Outside of the wealthiest who actively choose not to diversify (e.g., founders with large equity stakes), it
seems unlikely that rate changes could conceivably lock-in accrued gains until death. More quantitative work is
needed to try and measure the behavior of and share of gains held by taxpayers across the wealth distribution.



3     A Rising Share of Capital Gains Cannot Be Easily Retimed
Relative to the 1990s, the portion of assets where accumulated capital gains could conceivably be deferred--and
thus untaxed--has declined. The prototypical example of a capital gain is a share of corporate stock. An
individual who bought a share of Amazon when it IPO-ed at $18 could sell that share today, and pay taxes on
more than $3,100 of appreciation. Or, if she does not face consumption needs during her lifetime, she could
defer the gains indefinitely and bequest the share of stock to her heirs, at which point the basis will adjust and
wipe out any tax liabilities for appreciated gains during her lifetime.
    Stock transactions are among the most elastic form of capital gains, since the taxpayer can proactively decide
whether or not to realize. But, as Figure 5 shows, the share of capital gains that stock transactions represent
has fallen substantially over the course of the last several decades, while more inelastic gains are growing in
import: between 1997 and 2012, the share of long-term gains that involved corporate stock transactions fell
from 41.2% to 26.9%.
    The largest corresponding growth is in passthrough gains or losses, which rose from just 22.6% of long-term
gains to 37.7%. Pass-through gains refer to distributed gains from pass-through entities owned by taxpayers.
This category includes the growth of "carried interest" compensation to general partners of hedge funds, venture
capital, and private equity firms. Partnership agreements typically require funds to be returned within ten to
twelve years of the initial commitment. Investors in these structures cannot time realization decisions around
favorable tax environments, as their participation is limited, nor can they typically defer their gains indefinitely
like stockholders. Instead, they receive--and pay taxes on--gains when the general partners exit underlying
investments. Moreover, many of the limited partners in these funds are non-taxable, such that the decision to
exit an investment is likely to be less responsive to capital gains tax changes.
    Considering this shift in composition suggests that conventional elasticities are likely overstated. The most
recent data available from the IRS reveal that nearly half of capital gains accrue from passthrough and mutual
fund distributions. It is hard to know what share of non-personal capital gains are timeable around tax
changes (e.g., corporate stock held by partnerships) and what share are inelastic (e.g., carried interest, which
itself represents around 10% of annual capital gains in recent years (Smith, Zidar and Zwick, 2020)). It seems
plausible that between 30% to 50% of capital gains are not easily timeable in response to tax changes. If 50%
of gains are untimeable, then for e = -0.7 to be the right average elasticity across all gains, then the remaining



                                                         9
                                                               Figure 5: Stock Share of Gains




                                                     .5




                                                                                                          .5
                                                     .45




                                                                                                                                      .4
                                                                                                          Max tax rate, long-term gains
                        Stock share of total gains
                                                     .4




                                                                                                                             .3
                                                     .35




                                                                                                                   .2
                                                     .3




                                                                                                          .1
                                                     .25




                                                                                                          0
                                                       1995      2000             2005     2010        2015
                                                                                  Year

                                                              Stock share of total gains    Tax rate



Notes: Points represent the corporate stock share of total capital gains realized in a given year. These are
plotted alongside the maximum federal long-term capital gains rate. Data from the IRS SOCA.


50% of timeable capital gains that are elastic to the tax rate should have an elasticity of close to -1.4.
   Said another way, if 50% of capital gains are not sensitive to the tax environment, then no matter how large
the "timeable" elasticity is, doubling rates to top ordinary income levels will still raise substantial revenues.
Even if the timeable realizations shrink to zero, there remains a large stock of gains that will be taxed regularly
at new, higher rates. Moreover, the appropriate elasticity for bigger changes should put more weight on the
elasticity of the less timeable portion. The elasticities used by scorekeepers are averages across different asset
types. But the weights are not static: when there is a substantial change in the tax environment, the weights
of the different asset classes that comprise the capital gains tax base shift, and so too does the elasticity of the
overall tax base. It is no accident that when capital gains tax rates are low (or, when taxpayers predict that
rates may rise in the near future), a large share of realizations are in easily-timeable equities. This dynamism
appears missing from existing revenue estimates.
   Work by Dowd, McClelland and Muthitacharoen (2015) confirms that different types of assets exhibit
different realization elasticities, finding for example that pass-through distributions exhibit a higher sensitivity
to rate changes than other types of assets, while mutual fund distributions exhibit a much lower sensitivity.
However, their data runs from 1999 through 2008, so may not reflect the current composition of gains. In
addition, they find the elasticity of directly-owned capital gains varies over different time periods and is lower
in recent years. Further research incorporating the growth of carried interest and the quantitative importance
of different types of gains and their varied elasticities would be useful for improving assessments of the revenue
potential of capital gains tax reform.




                                                                                   10
4     Realization Responses Generate Fiscal Spillovers

4.1     Capital gains tax changes affect tax collections beyond realization responses

Elasticity estimates from the literature tend to focus on the narrow question of how the capital gains tax
base evolves in response to rate changes, but this approach offers an incomplete answer to the question of total
revenue effects. Perhaps scorekeepers are already modeling such spillovers, but we are unaware of the approach,
the assumed magnitudes, and the empirical basis for these assumptions.
    Consider a few examples of how changes in the capital gains tax might affect other tax bases. First,
incentives to mischaracterize labor income and profits as capital gains to take advantage of lower tax rates
can also affect revenues (Smith, Yagan, Zidar and Zwick, 2019). The existence of preferential tax treatment
encourages avoidance in the form of misclassification of wage income for fund managers through the carried
interest loophole, discussed above. Similarly, the tax code favors employee stock options, which, when held for
long enough, qualify for capital gains treatment. Second, different treatment of capital gains and dividends
affects the relative attractiveness of distributing corporate profits via share buybacks versus dividends. Third,
capital gains tax preferences can affect the allocation of capital across industries and locations, due to sheltering
opportunities such as like-kind exchanges in real estate and oil and gas, investments in Opportunity Zones,
and incomplete recapture of depreciation deductions following asset sales. Reforming capital gains taxation
will thus also reduce wasteful effort by taxpayers and their planners to devote resources to circumventing tax
liabilities by exploiting preferential capital gains rates and sheltering opportunities.


4.2     Capital gains tax changes and investment behavior

One reason to be skeptical of the revenue potential of capital gains tax increases is that tax increases might
impact economic growth. Many critics of capital income taxes argue that low rates induce business creation
by allowing investors to reap a larger share of the gains they create (Feldstein, 2006).
    Indeed in the Bush Administration, one rationale for cutting capital gains rates was incentivizing en-
trepreneurship.     According to the 1990 Economic Report of the President, "[m]uch of the return to en-
trepreneurs. . . comes through increasing the value of the business. Reducing the tax rate on capital gains
will provide a climate that encourages businesses to invest in new technologies and products" (President and
CEA, 1990). If large, such investment and entrepreneurship effects would amplify realization elasticities by
shrinking the future corporate tax base in the case of a capital gains tax increase.9
    But the case for large investment effects of lower capital gains rates appears overstated. First, preferential
capital gains treatment incentivizes some income sheltering that may cause misallocation and prevent capital
from being employed in its most productive use. Second, the majority of venture capital comes from large
institutions like pension funds, endowments of universities, charitable foundations, and sovereign wealth funds,
which are already tax-exempt.10 Third, it is hard to imagine entrepreneurs making decisions about investment
    9 Another reason why considering dynamics and longer horizons would be valuable is that longer horizons are needed to de-

tect and quantify these effects.
   10 This was a point made by early work by Poterba (1989) and is even more true today.




                                                              11
and risk on the basis of the capital gains tax regime: Mark Zuckerberg was not focusing on the capital gains
tax when he was in his dorm room coding up Facebook. Bell, Chetty, Jaravel, Petkova and Van Reenen (2019)
reach the same conclusion based on comprehensive data on U.S. inventors, arguing that tax cuts do not produce
more Einsteins. Finally, in a related context, empirical evidence suggests that dividend tax cuts that decrease
firms' cost of capital in similar ways to the capital gains tax do not affect investment (Yagan, 2015).11



5     Implications for Scorekeeping and Revenue Estimates

5.1     Illustrative revenue estimates under different assumptions

Table 1 shows our realization and revenue estimates for capital gains tax rate increases. The first column
starts with CBO's projections for realizations from 2020 to 2029. While the amount of realizations itself is
endogenous, the CBO projections of approximately $1 trillion of realizations per year over the next decade
provide a useful starting point.12 At a 20% tax rate, the table shows that the baseline capital tax revenues
amount to around $200 billion a year.
    We consider two tax changes. The first is a 2 percentage point increase in the rate, which allows us to
compare our approach to published scores from JCT.13 Table 1 shows how much realizations shrink under
different elasticity assumptions. When e = 0, realizations remain at their baseline level. But when e = -0.3
and e = -0.7, the baseline realizations shrink by 3%(= 9.5% × -0.3) and 7%, respectively. These are on the
lower and upper end of the varied realization elasticities estimated by prior work.14 Applying the new 22% tax
rate to the smaller realization levels results in less revenue than the additional $20B per year that would result
if there were no behavioral response. With e = -0.3 and e = -0.7, the annual gains are $13.7 billion and $5.3
billion, respectively.
    The JCT scores capital gains hikes of 2 percentage points as generating around $70 billion over ten years,
which is roughly in the same ballpark as our ten-year estimate using the crude elasticity approach with e = -0.7
of $54 billion. We suspect some of this difference may reflect more careful consideration of other components
that our crude elasticity-based approach misses, but we view this as somewhat validating that the crude
approach is on the same order of magnitude as this public JCT score.
    The second tax change of interest is doubling the rate from 20% to 40%, which would raise the capital gains
rate to top ordinary income levels. This change requires much more extrapolation from observed variation in
the data and more elaborate methods to model behavioral responses to such large changes. Nonetheless, it is
    11 In contrast, Moon (2020) presents evidence that a capital gains tax reform in South Korea had substantial effects on corpo-

rate investment.
    12 Note that CBO's baseline has capital gains as a share of GDP falling slightly, which is why the table shows a relatively

stable base of realizations despite higher nominal GDP. If the capital gains share of GDP is stable, then the revenue potential is
even greater than the estimates we present.
    13 Note that the CBO cites the JCT as the source for the table of revenue effects. https://www.cbo.gov/budget-options/

2018/54788.
    14 Specifically, we take e = -0.3 from Agersnap and Zidar (2020) discussed above (and pick the lower end of their range to

reflect an elasticity that may be consistent with eliminating stepped-up basis and including other base broadeners); e = -0.7
is the midpoint of the current JCT and Treasury elasticity estimates of -.68 and -.72, which we believe may be based in part on
the headline estimate of -0.72 in Dowd, McClelland and Muthitacharoen (2015). The 9.5% comes from the rate change of 2 p.p.
divided by the average of the initial rate of 20% and the post-change rate of 22%.



                                                               12
striking to see how much elasticity assumptions affect revenue scores. Using an elasticity of e = -0.3, raising
the tax rate to 40% would raise just over $1.2 trillion over ten years.15 With the elimination of stepped-up
basis, this estimate rises to $1.4 trillion.16
    Comparing this figure to the case of e = -0.7 illustrates the striking behavioral adjustments that are implied
by such an elasticity. We can see this in multiple ways. First, in the Auerbach (1989) model, we can relate
behavioral responses to changes in the frequency of realization and the extent of deferral until death or via
charitable contribution. In the Appendix, we find that with e = -0.7, if the effect on the capital gains tax base
is driven solely by an increase in deferred realizations, the share of unrealized gains would have to rise from
50% to nearly 70%. If the effect is driven by an increase in turnover, then turnover would decrease from once
every three years (CBO and JCT, 2016) to once every 13 years, increasing by a factor of four.
    For the case of e = -0.3, the impact on unrealized gains would be half as large. The impact on turnover
would also be about half as large, as turnover rises from once every three years to once every seven years. Thus,
the change in underlying investor behavior predicted by applying e = -0.7 is significantly more dramatic than
in the case of e = -0.3. More explicit modeling of turnover behavior and the distribution of unrealized gains
would help provide discipline when modeling large tax changes.17
    Second, simply applying e = -0.7 to the CBO's projections for realized gains implies a gain of only $140
billion over ten years, almost ten times smaller than our estimate using e = -0.3.18 Figure 7 shows the
sensitivity of revenue estimates to a range of elasticities from zero to one. Adjusting our preferred elasticity
toward zero (e.g., if rate hikes are coupled with base-broadening reforms like the elimination of step-up in basis
or death as a realization event) produces estimates approaching $2 trillion.19
    These calculations are far from a final word on the tax revenue at stake from these reforms. Moreover, we
suspect that, for a large change in tax rates, scorekeepers have developed more elaborate revenue models than
our stylized approach implies. Our objective is to illustrate that the many issues we raise above suggest the
capital gains tax base overall is likely less elastic than previously understood. Therefore, should scorekeepers
be moved to revisit elasticity assumptions and the modeling of deferred gains, the impact on official revenue
estimates could be substantial.
   15 The mechanical revenue of a 40% rate on a $1 trillion base is $400 billion in annual revenue, or an additional $200 billion

in revenue per year. Using an elasticity of e = -0.3 shrinks the base by 20% which is - 0.3 × (20+40)  20
                                                                                                          /2
                                                                                                               to $800 billion,
generating around $320 billion in annual revenue, or about $120 billion more per year.
   16 The impact of stepped-up basis elimination is based on the JCT score, which at current rates is estimated to raise $105

billion over a decade (CBO, 2018). Since we are focused on the revenue effect of raising capital gains rates to ordinary in-
come levels, we double this estimate. An alternative approach would be to follow Penn-Wharton Budget Model and scale
the realization elasticity down by 20% from -0.65 to -0.52 (https://budgetmodel.wharton.upenn.edu/issues/2020/9/14/
biden-2020-analysis). Of course, a more sophisticated approach to estimating the interaction of various capital gains reform
proposals would yield a more accurate estimate.
   17 This calculation abstracts from reductions in the overall base due to real responses, which can also contribute to the change

in gains and place less burden on turnover in accounting for the total response.
  18 Using   e = -0.7, the $1 trillion baseline realizations shrink by 47% which is - 0.7 ×       20
                                                                                              (20+40)/2
                                                                                                          to $530 billion per year.
With only $530 billion in realizations, a 40% tax rate would raise $212 billion, or just $12 billion more than the baseline rev-
enues of $200 billion per year.
   19 To facilitate comparisons to prior estimates, we express calculations in terms of elasticities with respect to the tax rate.

In general, we prefer the net-of-tax formulation because it measures the relevant price governing behavior, is standard in the
broader tax literature, and better reflects the economic magnitude of the tax shock. The net-of-tax estimates are similar to the
estimates we present and do not alter the conclusion.




                                                                13
Revenue estimates from scorekeeping community. To our knowledge, there are no recent official esti-
mates available for raising capital gains rates to ordinary income levels. Estimates offered during this election
cycle from unofficial scorekeepers (see Table 2) suggest that large increases in capital gains rates can raise
significant revenue. The general consensus appears to be that an increase in capital gains rates of the size
we contemplate is likely to raise hundreds of billions of dollars in the coming decade. Still, these scores are
far below the crude estimate that we offer in Section 5.1.20 In part, this difference reflects the much more
significant taxpayer response assumed by the scorekeeping community, which we think is worth revisiting in
light of the considerations we offer.


5.2     Elasticity depends on broader capital gains context

Unique features of capital gains taxation make the tax base more sensitive to rate changes than other types of
taxes (Dowd and Richards, 2021). Most obviously, the existence of a step-up in basis upon the death of the
taxpayer dissuades holders of unappreciated assets from realizing their gains in a high-rate environment, in the
absence of consumption needs or a desire to diversify. Eliminating stepped-up basis would diminish incentives
to lock-in gains, which is why we estimate an added $200 billion in additional capital gains taxes collected if
raising capital gains rates is combined with this change. Making death a realization event for capital gains
tax collection would likely raise even more, because the value of deferral, especially in a low-rate environment,
would be minimal if taxes were sure to be collected at death (abstracting away from policy risk that such a
change would be rolled back by future policymakers).
    In the current code, deferring gains until death is not the only capital gains avoidance tactic. When an
individual donates an asset to charity (e.g., share of stock) that has appreciated in value, capital gains on that
asset go untaxed, and the individual receives a credit equivalent to the full value of the gift, despite not paying
any taxes on the gain. Further, investors can place existing assets with accumulated gains into Opportunity
Zones (meant to spur investment in economically distressed communities) to defer payment of capital gains; or
can avoid taxation all together, for example through the use of like-kind exchanges for real estate transactions.
On top of this, investing in small businesses can mean up to $10 million in gains is excluded from capital gains
taxation. Broadening the capital gains tax base by limiting these preferences raises the revenue potential of
capital gains reform efforts. Conversely, while significant sheltering opportunities exist, there is a legitimate
concern that raising the capital gains rate will result in taxpayers relying more on existing tools to shield gains
from taxation, thus limiting the potential of reform.
    The elasticities that we use are based on the current capital taxation regime, including a step-up in basis at
death, which amplifies the incentive to respond to capital gains tax changes. A broader overhaul of capital gains
taxation--which raises rates while also eliminating sheltering opportunities--could result in a lower realization
elasticity, and thus even more revenue potential, than our estimates suggest.
  20 One  difference between our back-of-the-envelope calculation and these scores is the size of the tax base. These scores focus
on a proposal to raise rates only for those whose AGI exceeds one million, who collectively account for around 70% of all taxable
realizations based on 2019 SCF data. Applying our approach to this group would result in 70% of the revenue from raising rates
across the board or $840 billion + $200 billion = $1040 billion.




                                                               14
5.3      Transparency would improve policy analysis of alternative reforms

Transparency on how dynamic adjustments are made in official scores would be valuable for several reasons.
First, this transparency will facilitate discussion between professional scorekeepers and outside experts about
the extent to which models can be improved and new data collected. Second, it will facilitate comparison of
estimates across a broader set of proposals with confidence that consistent scorekeeping practices are applied.
Ensuring comparability across scores produced for different proposals is essential to informing the policy process.
And comparability depends on transparency of the assumptions that underlie these estimates.
     A few examples are illustrative. Mark-to-market capital gains proposals have yet to be officially scored.
But some available estimates of the likely revenue potential suggest that nearly $200 billion annually could be
raised (Gravelle, 2019; Batchelder and Kamin, 2019). By way of comparison, JCT estimates that taxing capital
gains at death would yield about $40 billion annually (absent any behavioral changes).21 It is unclear how to
get from this realization-at-death score to a mark-to-market estimate of nearly 5 times that amount: In a low
rate environment, the value of deferral is negligible, so the two approaches should yield similar revenue.
     Another example concerns the score for eliminating the carried interest loophole. The JCT approach to
scoring this provision seems to assume even larger shifting responses than in the case of capital gains tax
increases, presumably because they model such a change in the absence of other changes to taxing gains. Es-
sentially, the assumption is that fund managers will devise alternative contractual arrangements to reconstruct
the status quo, so that revenues ultimately rise very little. It is unclear (to us) whether there is an empirical
basis for this assumption.


5.4      A process suggestion

Transparency is a double-edged sword. Given the importance of official scores to legislative decision-making,
making the assumptions underlying scorekeepers' estimation publicly available will invite greater lobbying
around those assumptions by supporters and critics of different reforms.
     Our proposal is not to open the floodgates with respect to scorekeeping writ large. A natural structure is
in place: CBO already has a panel of advisers who provide input on economic issues. This group or a related
subgroup of experts can be convened to advise JCT, as well as CBO and the Treasury Office of Tax Analysis. It
will be important for diverse views to be represented in this body, and it will be valuable to work with the full
set of scorekeepers to select a panel who is thoughtful and likely to be taken seriously by the revenue estimating
community. Short of such a formal gathering, promoting informal conversations and collaborations between
scorekeepers and academics would facilitate advancing the research frontier in the most useful directions.



6      Conclusion
The appropriate tax treatment of capital gains is a major issue. Historically, the consensus of scorekeepers
has been that very sizable behavioral effects diminish the revenue-raising potential of rate hikes, because they
    21 From   the JCT's 2019 tax expenditure estimates: https://www.jct.gov/publications/2019/jcx-55-19/.


                                                              15
encourage taxpayers to lock-in gains and avoid taxation, potentially indefinitely. We believe this conclusion is
worth revisiting in light of recent research, an improved understanding of dynamic responses via medium-run
investor behavior, and the recent evolution in the composition of capital gains.
   Indeed, we argue the revenue potential from substantially increasing tax rates on capital gains may be
greater than previously understood. A crude estimate suggests that raising capital gains rates to ordinary
income levels could raise vastly more revenue than what is implied by applying conventional elasticities. The
striking difference suggests there is much to be gained from refining the approach to scoring capital gains tax
reforms.
   Our call to action is borne from a position of enormous respect and admiration for the integrity and
seriousness of the scorekeepers. The ultimate goal is to continue to advance our understanding of taxpayer
behavior and the revenue potential of capital gains (and other) tax reform efforts to inform the policymaking
process.
   For example, it would be valuable for scorekeepers to explicitly model the consequences of capital gains tax
changes on turnover, taking into account the large stock of yet unrealized gains, how it varies across types of
gains, and how it may evolve. We're optimistic that focusing on turnover is one avenue towards potentially
improving revenue estimates and the analysis of capital gains taxation.




                                                      16
References
Agersnap, Ole, and Owen Zidar. 2020. "The Tax Elasticity of Capital Gains and Revenue-Maximizing
 Rates." NBER Working Paper No. 27705.
Auerbach, Alan J. 1989. "Capital gains taxation and tax reform." National Tax Journal, 42(3): 391­401.
Auten, Gerald E, and Joseph J Cordes. 1991. "Policy watch: cutting capital gains taxes." Journal of
 Economic Perspectives, 5(1): 181­192.
Barber, Brad M, and Terrance Odean. 2000. "Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The common stock
 investment performance of individual investors." Journal of Finance, 55(2): 773­806.
Batchelder, Lily L., and David Kamin. 2019. "Taxing the Rich: Issues and Options." Available at SSRN.

Bell, Alex, Raj Chetty, Xavier Jaravel, Neviana Petkova, and John Van Reenen. 2019. "Who
 becomes an inventor in America? The importance of exposure to innovation." The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 134(2): 647­713.
CBO. 2018. "Options for Reducing the Deficit: Change the Tax Treatment of Capital Gains From Sales of
 Inherited Assets." https://www.cbo.gov/budget-options/54792.

CBO and JCT. 2016. "The Distribution of Asset Holdings and Capital Gains." https://www.cbo.gov/
 sites/default/files/114th-congress-2015-2016/reports/51831-capitalgains.pdf.
Dowd, Tim, and Robert McClelland. 2019. "The Bunching of Capital Gains Realizations." National Tax
 Journal, 72(2): 323­358.

Dowd, Tim, and Zach Richards. 2021. "Contextualizing Elasticities for Policymaking: Capital Gains
 and Revenue-Maximizing Tax Rates." Available on SSRN: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?
 abstract_id=3767121.
Dowd, Tim, Robert McClelland, and Athiphat Muthitacharoen. 2015. "New evidence on the tax
 elasticity of capital gains." National Tax Journal, 68(3): 511.

Feldstein, Martin. 2006. "The effect of taxes on efficiency and growth." NBER Working Paper No. 12201.
Gravelle, Jane. 1991. "Limits to Capital Gains Feedback Effects." Congressional Research Service, Library
 of Congress.
Gravelle, Jane. 2019. "Mark-to-Market Taxation of Capital Gains." https://www.taxpolicycenter.org/
 sites/default/files/mark-to-market_taxation_of_capital_gains.pdf.
Joint Committee on Taxation, Staff. 1990. "Explanation of Methodology Used to Estimate Proposals
  Affecting the Taxation of Income from Capital Gains." Vol. JCS-12-90.
Moon, Terry S. 2020. "Capital gains taxes and real corporate investment." Princeton University Working
 Paper.

Odean, Terrance. 1998. "Are investors reluctant to realize their losses?" Journal of Finance, 53(5): 1775­
 1798.
Odean, Terrance. 1999. "Do investors trade too much?" American Economic Review, 89(5): 1279­1298.
Poterba, James M. 1989. "Venture Capital and Capital Gains Taxation." Tax Policy and the Economy,
 47­67.
President and CEA. 1990. "Economic Report of the President." https://fraser.stlouisfed.org/title/
 economic-report-president-45/1990-8161.
Saez, Emmanuel, Joel Slemrod, and Seth H. Giertz. 2012. "The Elasticity of Taxable Income with
  Respect to Marginal Tax Rates: A Critical Review." Journal of Economic Literature, 50(1): 3­50.


                                                   17
Smith, Matthew, Danny Yagan, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick. 2019. "Capitalists in the Twenty-first
 Century." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(4): 1675­1745.
Smith, Matthew, Owen M Zidar, and Eric Zwick. 2020. "Top Wealth in America: New Estimates and
 Implications." Working Paper.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. 1983. "Some aspects of the taxation of capital gains." Journal of Public Economics,
  21(2): 257­294.
Yagan, Danny. 2015. "Capital tax reform and the real economy: The effects of the 2003 dividend tax cut."
 American Economic Review, 105(12): 3531­63.




                                                  18
                                   Figure 6: Evolution of Wealth and Capital Gains Tax Rates

                                                            (a) Fixed income assets

                          80




                                                                                                                                        40
                          70




                                                                                                                                        30
       Share of GDP (%)




                                                                                                                                            Tax rate (%)
                          60
                          50




                                                                                                                                        20
                          40
                          30




                                                                                                                                        10
                            1965     1975                   1985                           1995                               2005   2015

                                                 Fixed income wealth              Max long-term capital gains tax rate


                                                      (b) Pass-through equity wealth
                          70




                                                                                                                                        40
                          60




                                                                                                                                        30
       Share of GDP (%)




                                                                                                                                            Tax rate (%)
                          50
                          40




                                                                                                                                        20
                          30
                          20




                                                                                                                                        10
                            1965     1975                   1985                           1995                               2005   2015

                                                 Pass-through wealth              Max long-term capital gains tax rate


                                                  (c) Equity and fixed income wealth
                          200




                                                                                                                                        40
                          180




                                                                                                                                        30
       Share of GDP (%)
                          160




                                                                                                                                            Tax rate (%)
                          140




                                                                                                                                        20
                          120
                          100




                                                                                                                                        10




                            1965     1975                   1985                           1995                               2005   2015

                                            Equity and fixed income wealth             Max long-term capital gains tax rate




Notes: These graphs plot fixed income assets, pass-through equity wealth, total equity and fixed income wealth,
and the maximum long-term capital gains tax rates between 1960 and 2014 as a share of GDP. In panel (a), fixed in-
come assets include taxable and non-taxable fixed income assets, in addition to non-interest bearing deposits. In panel
(b), pass-through wealth includes assets from partnerships, sole-proprietorships, and S-corporations. In panel (c), eq-
uity includes C-corporation and pass-through assets. Data on wealth from Smith, Zidar, and Zwick (2020). Data on tax
rates from the U.S. Treasury (https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/tax-policy/tax-analysis/Documents/
Taxes-Paid-on-Capital-Gains-for-Returns-with-Positive-Net-Capital-Gains.pdf) and the Tax Foundation (https:
//taxfoundation.org/federal-capital-gains-tax-collections-1954-2009/). GDP data from the World Bank (https:
//data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD).




                                                                             19
                                               Figure 7: Illustrative Revenue Estimates for Different Elasticities



                                      2
    Change in 10-year revenue ($ T)
                                      1
                                      0
                                      -1




                                           0           .2                 .4              .6                    .8       1
                                                                 Elasticity with respect to tax rate

                                                        20% to 22% tax rate                        20% to 40% tax rate


Notes: We base our estimates on CBO projections of capital gains realizations from 2020 to 2029 (accessible at https://www.
cbo.gov/data/budget-economic-data under "Revenue projections, by category"). See Table 1 for underlying CBO projections
and realizations estimates corresponding to e = -.3 and e = -0.7. We assume a starting tax rate of 20%. When multiplied by
- 1-0.22
   0.22
         , tax rate elasticities at a tax rate of 22% become net-of-tax rate elasticities.




                                                                               20
                             Table 1: Realization and Revenue Estimates for 2 p.p. and 20 p.p. Tax Rate Increases, by Elasticity

                                                                    t = 22%                                                        t = 40%
               CBO Projections                   Realizations                     Revenue                       Realizations                     Revenue
             Realizations Revenue       e = 0    e = -0.3   e = -0.7     e = 0   e = -0.3 e = -0.7     e = 0    e = -0.3   e = -0.7     e = 0   e = -0.3 e = -0.7
      2020   1,013         203          1,013    984        945          223     216      208          1,013    810        540          405     324      216
      2021   1,009         202          1,009    980        942          222     216      207          1,009    807        538          404     323      215
      2022   1,004         201          1,004    975        937          221     215      206          1,004    803        535          402     321      214
      2023   987           197          987      959        921          217     211      203          987      790        526          395     316      211
      2024   986           197          986      958        920          217     211      202          986      789        526          394     316      210
      2025   996           199          996      968        930          219     213      205          996      797        531          398     319      212
      2026   1,016         203          1,016    987        948          224     217      209          1,016    813        542          406     325      217
      2027   1,043         209          1,043    1,013      973          229     223      214          1,043    834        556          417     334      223
      2028   1,074         215          1,074    1,043      1,002        236     230      221          1,074    859        573          430     344      229
      2029   1,110         222          1,110    1,078      1,036        244     237      228          1,110    888        592          444     355      237
      SUM    10,238        2,048        10,238   9,945      9,555        2,252   2,188    2,102        10,238   8,190      5,460        4,095   3,276    2,184


     Notes: CG base taken from January 2020 CBO predictions for capital gains realizations over the next ten years (accessible at https://www.cbo.gov/
     data/budget-economic-data under "Revenue projections, by category"). We assume a starting tax rate of 20% to compute baseline total revenues.
21
    Table 2: Unofficial estimates of revenue potential from taxing capital gains at ordinary income levels

                    Revenue
 Source             estimate    Elasticities                           Notes
                    ($B)
                                                                       Reported estimate includes $178B from
 Penn Wharton                   With step-up in basis: -0.66           taxing capital gains and dividends at or-
                    382
 Budget Model                   Eliminating step-up in basis: -0.53    dinary rates, and $204B from repealing
                                                                       step-up in basis
                                                                       Tax capital gains and dividends at the
                                Long-run: -0.79                        same rate as ordinary income for those
 Tax Foundation     469
                                Transitory: -1.2 (year 1) and -1.0     with income $1M+ and repeal step-up in
                                (year 2)                               basis
                                                                       Tax capital gains and dividends at the
 Tax Policy Cen-                With step-up in basis: -0.7            same rate as ordinary income for those
                    373
 ter                            Eliminating step-up in basis: -0.4     with income $1M+ and tax unrealized
                                                                       gains at death


Notes: All rows present 10 year revenue estimates for raising the tax on capital gains and dividends to ordi-
nary rates (39.6%) for income above $1 million and eliminating the step-up in basis at death.
Penn Wharton Budget Model revenue and elasticity estimates can be found at https:
//budgetmodel.wharton.upenn.edu/issues/2020/3/10/the-biden-tax-plan-updated
and https://budgetmodel.wharton.upenn.edu/issues/2019/12/4/
the-revenue-maximizing-capital-gains-tax-rate-with-and-without-stepped-up-basis-at-death.
Tax Foundation revenue and elasticity estimates are available at https://taxfoundation.org/
joe-biden-tax-plan-2020/ and https://taxfoundation.org/2020-capital-gains-tax-proposals/.

Estimates from the Tax Policy Center can be found at https://www.taxpolicycenter.org/
model-estimates/updated-analysis-former-vice-president-bidens-tax-plan-october-2020/
t20-0246-former and https://www.taxpolicycenter.org/sites/default/files/publication/158624/
An_Analysis_of_Former_Vice_President_Bidens_Tax_Proposals_1_2.pdf.




                                                       22
Appendix For Online Publication
A      A model of capital gains realizations
This appendix describes and updates the asset turnover model in Auerbach (1989), which we use to relate
capital gains elasticities to changes in investor behavior. The two key parameters are f , which is the fraction
of assets that never face capital gains, and  , which is the fraction of assets that face capital gains and are sold
every year. The main idea is that a given change in capital gains realizations can be related to changes in these
two parameters, which represent investors holding assets until death and asset turnover frequency.
    We need to define a few more variables to relate capital gains realizations Gt in to these two key parameters.
The nominal value of assets sold in year t is denoted at , and g is the annual growth rate of asset value (and
output growth). With these components, we can express capital gains realizations Gt as the sum of accumulated
gains from assets held at different durations:

                     Gt = gat-1 + [(1 + g )2 - 1] (1 -  )at-2 + [(1 + g )3 - 1] (1 -  )2 at-3 + ...                         (A.1)

Auerbach (1989) shows that one can express the steady-state ratio of realizations to sales at each date:

                                                          G    g
                                                            =    .                                                          (A.2)
                                                          a   g+
As Auerbach argues, the total value of assets ever sold S is sum of those last realized one year ago, at current
value, (1 + g )at-1 plus those two years ago, at current value, (1 + g )2 (1 -  )at-2 , plus those three years ago,
at current value, (1 + g )3 (1 -  )2 at-3 , etc. Given the steady state condition that at = (1 + g )at-1 , the sum
S = at + (1 -  )at-1 + (1 -  )2 at-2 + ... = a  . Since a fraction f of all assets are never realized, this result (i.e.,
                                                t

             at
A = (1 - f )  ) and equation A.2 imply that the ratio of gains to assets each year is:

                                                      G             g
                                                        = (1 - f )                                                          (A.3)
                                                      A            g+
Thus, the ratio of realized gains to the total value of assets that are ever sold is a function of our two main
parameters f and  , as well as the rate of growth g . We cannot observe f and g directly, but we can re-arrange
these expressions to estimate them using nominal rates of return, the ratio of gains to sales, and the ratio of
gains to assets. Specifically, we can rewrite equation A.2 and A.3:
                                                                     G
                                                            g (1 -   a)
                                                       =        G
                                                                                                                            (A.4)
                                                                a
                                                                G
                                                                A (g  + )
                                                      f =1-                                                                 (A.5)
                                                                     g

Auerbach (1989) sets g = .1 and estimates that G                    G
                                                   A = 0.033 and a = 0.303. The resulting estimates using
inputs from the late 1970s and early 1980s give  = 0.23 and f = 0.526, suggesting that half of assets never
face capital gains, and those that do turn over roughly every four years.
    Updating the inputs to this calculation gives slightly higher estimates of  and similar estimate of f . If
we set g = .06 based on nominal annual wealth growth since 1990, G                   G
                                                                      A = .0257, and a = 0.158, then we get
updated estimates   ^ = .32 and f^ = .49.22



A.1      Using model to quantify implications of elasticity estimates for  and f
Taking log differences of A.3, gives an expression for log changes in the realizations in terms of parameters:

                                                                           g
                                      ln G =  ln(1 - f ) +  ln                    +  ln A                                   (A.6)
                                                                          g+
  22 Note  that G
                A
                  = .0257 is the ratio of realized gains divided by household public and private equity holdings plus real estate
wealth less housing wealth. For G
                                a
                                   = 0.158, we use the ratio of net gains to sales price in Table 1C, which has long term gains in
2010. https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-soi/soi-a-inca-id1604.pdf



                                                               23
We can use this expression to relate our parameters to capital gains realization elasticities, (i.e., e =  ln G
                                                                                                           ln  ) with
respect to capital gains tax rates  . For a change in tax rates and a given elasticity, the change in realizations
is  ln G = e ×  ln  . Using this expression allows us to go from an elasticity value and a tax change to see
how much f and  might have to change.


                                                                                g
                                      e ×  ln  =  ln(1 - f ) +  ln                      +  ln A                              (A.7)
                                                                               g+

Quantitatively, we can start with the updated calibration values described above: f0 = .49 and 0 = .32,
g = .06 as a baseline. Consider a capital gains tax rate increase that increases rates from 0 = .22 to 1 = .396,
so  ln   60%.23 With an elasticity of -.7, the left-hand-side is e = -0.7 × .6 = -.42, which means that
gains would fall by 42%. Applying equation A.7, we can obtain this decline by 42% through changes in f ,
 , or some combination (assuming, for simplicity, that  ln A = 0). Using only changes in f , we'd need
 ln(1 - f ) = -.42  f1 = 66.5. In other words, if all the response to the tax increase came from changes f ,
the share of gains that are held until death would have to increase by 17.5 percentage points from an initial
level of f0 = .49. Using only changes in  , we'd get 1 = .075, which is a substantial decline in asset turnover
frequency relative to an initial value of 0 = .32. With an elasticity of e = -0.3, the percentage point increase
in f would be half as large (i.e., the increase would be 8.5 p.p.), and the value of 1 = .15 would be twice as
high.




  23 Note   that this stylized calculation abstracts from state capital gains tax rates as well as other tax interactions.


                                                                   24
