                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               FISCAL MULTIPLIERS:
                        A HETEROGENOUS-AGENT PERSPECTIVE

                                          Tobias Broer
                                           Per Krusell
                                           Erik Öberg

                                      Working Paper 28366
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28366


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2021




We thank Valerie Ramey for the key impetus to this paper. We also thank seminar participants
and Søren Ravn for useful comments. All errors are our own. Financial support from
Handelsbanken's research foundations is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Tobias Broer, Per Krusell, and Erik Öberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Fiscal Multipliers: A Heterogenous-Agent Perspective
Tobias Broer, Per Krusell, and Erik Öberg
NBER Working Paper No. 28366
January 2021
JEL No. E0

                                          ABSTRACT

We use an analytically tractable heterogeneous-agent (HANK) version of the standard New
Keynesian model to show how the size of fiscal multipliers depends on i) the distribution of
factor incomes, and ii) the source of nominal rigidities. With sticky prices but flexible wages, the
standard representative-agent (RANK) model predicts large multipliers because profits fall after a
fiscal stimulus and the resulting negative income effect makes the representative worker work
harder. Our HANK model, where workers do not own stock and thus do not receive profit
income, predicts smaller fiscal multipliers. In fact, they are smaller with sticky prices than with
flexible prices. When wages are the source of nominal rigidity, in contrast, fiscal multipliers are
close to one, independently of income heterogeneity and price stickiness.


Tobias Broer                                     Erik Öberg
IIES, Stockholm University                       Department of Economics
10691 Stockholm                                  Uppsala University
Sweden                                           P.O. Box 513
and CEPR                                         SE-751 20 Uppsala, Sweden
Tobias.Broer@iies.su.se                          erik.oberg@nek.uu.se

Per Krusell
Institute for International Economic Studies
Stockholm University
106 91 STOCKHOLM
SWEDEN
and CEPR
and also NBER
per.krusell@iies.su.se
1        Introduction

As monetary policy interest rates have reached their lower bound of zero, a grow-
ing literature has looked at the ability of fiscal policy to stimulate aggregate activ-
ity. Particular attention has been paid to the fiscal multiplier (the ratio of the equi-
librium output response to the increase in government spending) in New Keynesian
economies where price rigidities make output partly demand determined. Because
standard representative-agent New Keynesian (RANK) models are inconsistent with
key empirical features of household consumption-savings behavior, this literature is
moving fast towards heterogeneous-agent New Keynesian (HANK) models as its new
benchmark.1 This paper presents a very simple HANK environment to study the role
of two central determinants of the fiscal multiplier in New Keynesian economies: i)
the distribution of factor incomes (profit vs wage income), and ii) the source of nom-
inal rigidities (sticky prices vs wages). In particular, our model allows us to clarify
the role of income heterogeneity and wage stickiness for fiscal multipliers in richer,
quantitative HANK economies compared to simpler RANK economies.2
        Our HANK model extends the one we studied in an earlier paper (Broer, Hansen,
             ¨
Krusell, and Oberg, 2020) to include government spending shocks. In particular, rela-
tive to the standard RANK environment, the model has a more realistic specification of
worker income that allows for idiosyncratic risk and accounts for the fact that the vast
majority of workers do not own stock and thus do not receive firm profits in the form
of dividends. This is in contrast to the representative worker in RANK who receives all
factor incomes.3 A particularly attractive feature of our model is that the government
spending multiplier has a closed-form solution in the benchmark cases of fully flexible
and fully rigid wages.
        The analysis of our simplified HANK environment shows, first, that in the RANK
    1
        For an introduction to the study of fiscal multipliers, see Farhi and Werning (2016). For a survey of
the HANK literature, see Kaplan and Violante (2018).
   2
     The importance of wage rigidity for the transmission mechanism that we document is, in our view,
an appealing feature as it captures the importance of wage setting institutions for monetary transmission
                                                                   ¨
in data for advanced economies Olivei and Tenreyro (2007, 2010), Bjorklund et al. (2018).
   3
     The distinction between workers who earn labor income and capitalists who only earn dividends
captures the strong concentration of equity holdings in the data. It also makes our model different from
the two-agent New Keynesian ("TANK") model of Bilbiie (2008), which has a fraction of households
that only earn labor income and consumes hand-to-mouth, and another fraction of households that earn
both labor and profit income and are unconstrained. See also Colciago (2011).


                                                       2
model without wage rigidity the sticky-price amplification of fiscal shocks results en-
tirely because workers receive profit income. The key intuitive insight here is that the
representative worker adjusts her labor supply due to the combined income effects
caused by the changes in taxes, wages and profits relative to the substitution effect
caused by changes in wages. When a fiscal expansion increases wages, the output
and labor supply response is thus stronger, the less positively total worker income re-
sponds relative to wages. By providing households with an extra source of income
that is less procyclical than wages (in fact countercyclical in the typical version of the
model), firm profits thus boost the output and labor supply response to a fiscal shock.
This mechanism whereby sticky prices raise the fiscal multiplier through an income ef-
fect is implausible, not only because profits are procyclical in the data but also because
workers barely hold stock. As any reasonably calibrated HANK model would respect
this fact--and our simple HANK model makes this point by assuming workers own no
stock at all and thus do not receive profits through dividends--we conclude that such
models cannot offer large fiscal multipliers (at least not without adding other featuers).
Moreover, while the countercyclical response of profits does not affect labor supply in
our simple HANK model it implies more procycical wages than with flexible prices.
Workers thus reduce their labor supply, and the spending multiplier is therefore lower,
compared to the flexible-price equilibrium.
   A second feature of fiscal transmission in New Keynesian models that our simpli-
fied HANK model highlights is that, with rigid wages, the multipliers are larger rela-
tive to the flexible-price equilibrium in both the RANK model and our HANK model.
In fact, with fully rigid wages, the multiplier is exactly equal to one in both models.
More generally, when wages are rigid, households are constrained to supply whatever
hours are needed to satisfy consumption demand, ignoring any labor-supply consid-
erations. Therefore, it is sufficient to analyze the "demand side" of the economy to
understand the fiscal multiplier in this case. The fiscal multiplier is larger than in the
flexible-price benchmark because rigid wages dampen the response of inflation to fis-
cal shocks, which limits the monetary tightening that otherwise crowds out the fiscal
stimulus. And because different assumptions regarding the distribution of factor in-
comes leave consumption demand unaffected, the dynamics of the HANK and RANK
economies are isomorphic. A quantitative analysis shows that this result, of amplified
and equal mutipliers in RANK and HANK, also holds with a more realistic, partial


                                            3
degree of wage rigidity.
       We believe these results are useful for clarifying the interaction of household het-
erogeneity and nominal rigidities in determining the stablizing effect of fiscal policy.
In particular, models with flexible wages may obscure the role of heterogeneity in af-
fecting aggregate dynamics, through their implausible implications for the dynamics
of profit income. Based on our analysis, nominal wage rigidity makes a more plausi-
ble starting point, in line with the quantitative HANK models developed in Auclert,
Rognlie, and Straub (2018) and Hagedorn, Manovskii, and Mitman (2019) to study
fiscal multipliers.4
       Our analysis also highlights the fact that the transmission of fiscal shocks in the
NK setting is rather different from that of monetary shocks (which we analyzed in
our previous paper), for at least two reasons. First, since a fiscal shock directly affects
households' budgets, its effect directly depends on other sources of income and their
endogenous dynamic responses over time. Assumptions about the distribution of fac-
tor incomes thus have a first-order effect on the propagation of fiscal shocks. Second,
it is well known that the effect of fiscal shocks depends on the response of real interest
rates (Woodford, 2011). Here, we note that accounting for wage rigidity dampens the
inflation response to fiscal shocks, and thus the endogeneous reaction of monetary pol-
icy that, typically, counteracts the demand-effect of fiscal shocks. This raises the fiscal
multiplier relative to the standard version of the model with only price rigidities, but
also makes it less sensitive to the current stance of monetary policy. In particular, pre-
vious analysis based on representative-agent models has shown that fiscal multipliers
can be particularly potent in situations where the monetary authority is constrained
by a zero lower bound (ZLB) on the nominal interest rate.5 In our concluding section
we discuss the ZLB constraint and argue that the ZLB is actually not critical from the
perspective of the simple models we consider here. The RANK model's high multipli-
ers in such situations only materialize due to the implausible transmission mechanism,
   4
                                                                           ´
       Two recent and complementary papers support this view: Auclert, Bardoczy, and Rognlie (2020)
show that it is impossible for New Keynesian models with flexible labor markets to simultaneously
match empirical estimates for marginal propensities to earn, marginal propensities to consume and
fiscal multipliers. Cantore and Freund (2020) show that the implausible income effect of profit on labor
supply can be reduced by introducing portfolio adjustment costs in a two-agent New Keynesian (TANK)
model, but that this also implies smaller fiscal multipliers.
  5
    See, e.g, Woodford (2011), Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011), and Eggertsson (2011).




                                                   4
and the sticky-wage fiscal multiplier, whether in a RANK or HANK model, is close to
one and largely unaffected by the presence of the ZLB.



2        Fiscal multipliers in RANK and HANK

The goal here is to compare the responses to fiscal shocks across two models: the stan-
dard RANK model and our simple HANK model. We describe the two models in turn.
Like the "textbook" representative-agent New Keynesian (RANK) model we abstract
from physical capital and government bonds, which allows us to solve the models
analytically.


2.1        RANK

The representative household has "KPR preferences" over consumption and leisure as
in King, Plosser, and Rebelo (1988), to be consistent with balanced growth; for conve-
nience, we use the additively separable version from MaCurdy (1981), where  regu-
lates the (constant) Frisch elasticity of labor supply. Each of a continuum of the house-
hold's members provides a differentiated labor service in a monopsonistic fashion and
pays a Rotemberg (1982)-type adjustment cost when changing the wage.6 There is a
continuum of monopolistically competitive firms operating a production function that
is linear in the Dixit-Stiglitz composite of the differentiated labor inputs. Firms set their
output prices subject to the Calvo (1983) friction.
        The monetary authority sets interest rates according to a Taylor rule that only reacts
to inflation and the fiscal authority taxes the household lump-sum to fully finance its
spending.7
        The log-linear approximation of the equilibrium around a zero-inflation steady
    6
        An isomorphic model would also be obtained if assuming a Calvo-type friction in the wage setting
problem, as in Erceg, Henderson, and Levin (2000). We opt for the Rotemberg adjustment cost as it
is easier to solve when we move to our heterogeneous-agent version of the NK model, given that the
equilibrium wage distribution becomes degenerate.
   7
     In other words, we abstract from the distortionary effects of taxes and government debt.




                                                     5
state is described by the following equations.8

                                                                                p
                                            IS :      c       ^t+1 - (^
                                                      ^t = Et c       it - E t  t +1 )                         (1)
                                                      p      p
                           Price Phillips :           t = Et t +1 + p ^t                                       (2)
                                                      w      w
                           Wage Phillips :            t = Et t +1 - w (^
                                                                       t - (^
                                                                            ct + n
                                                                                 ^ t ))                        (3)
                                                                   w   p
                    Wage accounting :                 ^t = ^ t-1 + t - t                                       (4)

                               Resources :            (1 -   ct + 
                                                           ¯)^    ¯^t = n
                                                                        ^t                                     (5)
                                                     ^       p
                              Taylor rule :          it =    t                                                 (6)

                               Tax policy :           ^t = ^t-1 + t .                                          (7)

Here, x
      ^t denotes the log-deviation of x at t from its steady state value. Let us now
briefly describe the equations one by one.
       Equation (1) in the New Keynesian IS curve, an Euler condition that links current
consumption c
            ^ to expected future consumption and the expected real interest rate.
Equation (2) is the New Keynesian Phillips curve, relating current price inflation  p to
expected inflation and the current real marginal cost; the latter, with linear production,
equals the real wage  . p is a combination of structural preference parameters and
the price-resetting probability, which together govern the price response to changes
in marginal costs.9 Equation (3) is the Phillips curve for wages implied by the house-
hold's wage-setting problem. It describes how nominal wage inflation  w responds
to changes in the difference between the real wage and the marginal rate of substitu-
tion between consumption and hours, where w is another combination of structural
parameters, including the adjustment-cost parameter for wages.10 Equation (4) is an
accounting identity, describing the evolution of the real wage in terms of wage and
price inflation. Equation (5) is the economy's resource constraint, with ¯ = g rep-
resenting the share of government expenditures, g , in output, c + g . It thus sets the
share-weighted average of consumption and taxes equal to output, which absent pro-
ductivity shocks and under linear production equals hours worked n
                                                                 ^.
       For given expectations, the system (1)­(5) determines the five unknown endoge-
   8                                                                                                 ¨
       The derivation of our results here are standard; for details, see Broer, Hansen, Krusell, and Oberg
(2020).
   9                       (1-p )(1-p )
       Specifically, p =         p      ,   where  is the discount factor and p the per-period Calvo probabil-
ity that a firm cannot reset its price.
   10                       -1
      Specifically, w = - w     where        w   is the elasticity of substitution between labor inputs and  is the
Rotemburg adjustment-cost parameter.

                                                             6
                ^,  p ,  w , 
nous variables--c                    ^ --uniquely as a function of the policy variables ^
                             ^ , and n                                                  i
and ^. Equations (6) and (7) then provide the policy rules (a Taylor rule and an AR(1)
for the fiscal shock) and for our calibrated model the implied full dynamic system has
a unique stable solution around its zero-inflation steady state, which is also uniquely
determined.
   Income in this economy is the sum of labor earnings,    ^ , and dividends from the
                                                        ^ +n
monopolistic firms, d; time-t dividends can therefore be solved residually from

                 Household income :       n    ¯(^
                                          ^t = S     ^ t ) + (1 - S
                                                 t + n              ^t .
                                                                  ¯)d                 (8)

                  ¯ and 1 - S
Here, the weights S         ¯ are the steady-state shares in output of earnings and

dividends, respectively. The role of dividends is key for the intuitive comparison to
the HANK model.
   In the flexible limit of wage setting, w   in the wage Phillips curve (3), implying
that the real wage equals the marginal rate of substitution:

                                   ^t = c
                                        ^t + n
                                             ^t.                                      (9)

In this case, the model equations can be collapsed into the familiar 3-equation repre-
sentation, augmented with the tax policy equation.


2.2   HANK

The HANK model is the natural extension of the RANK model to the kind of incomplete-
markets model studied in Huggett (1993): households can only imperfectly insure
themselves against idiosyncratic labor productivity shocks by trading a risk-free bond
subject to a borrowing constraint. We consider a particularly simple HANK model
here. In particular, the household sector consists of workers and a (small) mass of
capitalists. These are ex-ante identical in all aspects (including their tax share of in-
come) except that the capitalists own the firms and derive income from firm dividends,
whereas workers only receive wage income. This assumption captures the fact that eq-
uity ownership is extremely concentrated (see, e.g., Kuhn and Rios-Rull (2016)). As
we shall see, the fact that workers do not receive dividends makes a crucial difference
for the workings of the model. We also follow Krusell, Mukoyama, and Smith (2011),
Werning (2015), McKay and Reis (2017), and Ravn and Sterk (2018) and assume a zero
borrowing constraint such that households cannot borrow at all, and have no saving in

                                           7
equilibrium. This assumption allows closed-form expressions for our key aggregates
but is not essential for the key insights. We moreover posit that aggregate shocks are
small relative to idiosyncratic shocks to worker productivity (and thus income), to-
gether with a small fixed cost of employment, implying that the agent with the highest
propensity to save is always a worker in this economy and that capitalists do not work.
                                             ¨
For details, see Broer, Hansen, Krusell, and Oberg (2020).
       In terms of the implied equations, the HANK model is different to the RANK model
in two ways. One is that consumption, c
                                      ^, now refers to worker (and not aggregate)
consumption. The second, and implied, difference is that the resource constraint (5)
is now replaced by the worker's budget constraint, evaluated at equilibrium (where
bond holdings are zero):

                           Worker income :          (1 -   ct + 
                                                         ¯)^    ¯^t = ^t + n
                                                                           ^t.                       (10)

The key here is that income, on the right-hand side, is not aggregate income n
                                                                             ^ (which,
expressed in terms of factor payments as in (8), would include dividends) but rather
worker earnings:    ^.
                 ^ +n
       Before moving on to the analysis of fiscal multipliers let us quickly note that our
HANK model, which is really like a two-agent model with workers and capitalists, is
different than other so-called TANK models (see, e.g., Gal´
                                                          i, Lopez-Salido, and Valles
(2004) and Bilbiie (2008)), where the typical assumption is that a fraction of the con-
sumers is hand-to-mouth, with the remainder being standard permanent-income con-
sumers. The difference--that our workers do not receive dividend income whereas the
hand-to-mouth consumers do--is crucial, and in all essential respects that we discuss
below, the typical TANK model really functions like the RANK model.11


2.3       Fiscal multipliers

We now consider the implications of an innovation in government spending in the
RANK and HANK models. In particular, we ask how the models' output multipliers
are affected by the source of the nominal rigidity: sticky prices or sticky wages. In
all results we assume that  > 1 and that all other parameters are restricted to their
respective standard domain (  (0, 1),   (0, ), etc.).
  11
       See Gal´
              i and Debortoli (2017) for a discussion of the implications of different profit-distribution
schemes in a TANK model.


                                                     8
Flexible wages     Consider first the case with flexible wages (w  ). Define the cu-
mulative fiscal multiplier M as the ratio of the cumulative output (and therefore hours)
response to the cumulative increase in fiscal spending following a positive innovation
in period 0:
                                             
                                             t=0 n
                                                 ^t
                                   M=                                                  (11)
                                         ¯    t=0 ^t

Furthermore, define Mnat as the cumulative fiscal multiplier in "natural" equilibrium,
where both prices and wages are flexible. The multiplier gap, M - Mnat , is a measure
of the contribution of sticky prices to the equilibrium response of output. Proposition
1 establishes that multiplier gap is positve in RANK but negative in HANK. In other
words, sticky prices amplify the response to fiscal shocks in RANK only because the
representative agent receives profit income.

Proposition 1 Suppose w   and  > 1. Then in response to a positive fiscal innovation
in period 0, 0 > 0, we have that

                              M - Mnat > 0 in RANK
                              M - Mnat < 0 in HANK

   Proof: See the Appendix.

   What is the mechanism that induces households to work more when prices are
sticky in RANK but less in HANK? To see this, we combine the optimality condition
for labor supply (9) with the worker's equilibrium budget--(5) and (8) for the RANK
model and (10) for the HANK model--to obtain the following conditions for the de-
termination of hours worked:

               RANK:      (1 -      ¯ n
                               ¯) + S ^t =   t - 
                                           ¯(^                ¯)(^
                                                 ^ t ) + (1 - S      ^t )
                                                                 t - d                 (12)

               HANK:      [(1 - ¯) + 1] n
                                        ^t   =  t - 
                                              ¯(^   ^t)                                (13)

Note that with flexible prices, the real wage is constant at its steady state level in both
models (because production is linear in labor), implying ^ t = 0. In this case, the profit
share of income is constant, and hours rise in both models solely because of the neg-
ative income effect of the increased taxes. With rigid prices, inflation and real wages
rise in both models in response to a fiscal expansion. In HANK, this depresses hours
worked because post-tax labor income is smaller than wage earnings (as the the share
of government expenditures ¯ is positive), such that the income effect of wage rises

                                             9
dominates the substitution effect in (13) with standard KPR preferences. In RANK, the
wage rise stimulates labor supply, for two reasons: First, workers also receive profit
        ¯ < 1 in 12), which reduces the relative income effect of the wage rise. Sec-
income (S
ond, wage rises imply smaller profits, which in itself has a negative income effect on
hours worked. In the realistic case where the profit share is smaller than the tax share
                     ¯ <  ), profit income is not high enough to make households work
of total income (1 - S
more in response to higher wages. In this case, sticky prices deliver a higher spending
                                                                           ^t .
multiplier solely because they imply a countercyclical response of profits d


Rigid wages         With rigid wages hours worked are not determined by income and
substitution effects on labor supply. Instead, households supply whatever hours are
needed to satisfy consumption demand. Proposition 2 establishes that with fully rigid
wages, the fiscal multiplier equals one in both models, irrespective of the degree of
price stickiness.12 In other words, there is amplification relative to the flexible-price
equilibrium, but its strength does not depend on the distribution of factor incomes.

Proposition 2 Suppose w  0. Then in response to a positive fiscal innovation in period
0, 0 > 0, we have that the cumulative fiscal multiplier M = 1 > Mnat in both RANK and
HANK.
       Proof: See the Appendix.

       To understand the intuition behind Proposition 2, the key insight is that constant
nominal wages imply constant prices set by firms, and thus constant real wages. With
constant real wages, the profit share of income is again constant, so labor income and
firm profits respond in exactly the same way to the fiscal expansion. This implies that
in HANK worker and capitalist consumption aggregate to an IS equation for aggre-
gate consumption that is identical to that in RANK (see equation (1)). Moreover, this
consumption path is the same as in the flexible-price equilibrium, since prices, and
therefore the real interest rate are affected by the fiscal shock. And with unchanged
consumption, output increases exactly by the same amount as government spending,
  12
       Proposition 2 focuses on the natural equilibrium where the output deviation is a function of the
fiscal shock, the only state variable in the model. With fully rigid wages, there is an obvious multiplicity
in the model (as wages never adjust to any constant deviation of output from its steady state) that
disappears with a more general Taylor rule (that puts an arbitrarily small weight on the output gap), or
when considering only equilibria that converge as w  0.



                                                    10
implying a multiplier of unity.


Quantitative illustration We illustrate these results with a numerical example, in
which the degree of price and wage rigidity are set to standard values. We look at
three different cases: no rigidities, price rigidities, and wage rigidities.13 We set the
tax/output share of 30 percent and study the quarterly response to a 1 percent shock
to government spending with autocorrelation  = 0.5. The other parameter values are
taken from Gal´
              i (2008, Ch. 3 and 6). The discount factor equals 0.99, the Frisch elasticity
1/ is set at 1, the elasticity of substitution between goods as well as that between labor
inputs equals 6, the price reset probability is 1/3 and the Rotemberg adjustment cost
for wage setting is set so as to replicate a corresponding Calvo wage reset probability
of 1/4, and the Taylor coefficient on inflation is 1.5.
       The resulting IRFs are displayed in Figure 1, where the blue solid lines are the
responses of the RANK model and the red dashed lines are the responses of the HANK
model. All responses are expressed in terms of percent or percentage-point deviations
from the steady state. The cumulative multiplier is displayed in Table 1.

                                            No rigidity        Price rigidity      Wage rigidity
              Model                      RANK      HANK      RANK      HANK       RANK      HANK
              Cumulative multiplier      0.59        0.59      0.78      0.53      0.98      0.98


                                  Table 1: Cumulative Fiscal Multipliers


       Using these standard parameter values, two things are worth noting. First, the price
                                     ¯ = 1 , which is lower than our 
elasticity is = 6, which implies 1 - S                               ¯ = 0.3, so the net
                                         6

effect of the real wage increase on hours is negative. In RANK, sticky prices increase
the output multiplier in RANK solely because price-stickiness implies a negative profit
response. Second, even with a degree of wage rigidity that is far from the limit of
full rigidity, the response of the RANK and the HANK model are still close to being
equivalent.
  13
       In the case of wage rigidities, we assume no price rigidities; the behavior of this version of the model
does not depend on whether or not there are price rigidities.




                                                       11
                                     No rigidity                            Sticky prices                       Sticky wages

                               Government spending                      Government spending                 Government spending
                          1                                        1                                   1
          Percent

                                                     RANK
                        0.5                          SHANK       0.5                                 0.5


                          0                                        0                                   0
                               1     2     3    4      5     6          1   2     3    4     5   6          1   2     3    4     5   6
                                    Real interest rate                      Real interest rate                  Real interest rate
      PPt, ann. level




                         0.6                                      0.6                                 0.6
                         0.4                                      0.4                                 0.4
                         0.2                                      0.2                                 0.2
                           0                                        0                                   0
                        -0.2                                     -0.2                                -0.2
                               1     2     3    4      5     6          1   2     3    4     5   6          1   2     3    4     5   6
                                          Inflation                              Inflation                           Inflation
      PPt, ann. level




                        0.4                                      0.4                                 0.4
                        0.2                                      0.2                                 0.2
                          0                                        0                                   0
                        -0.2                                     -0.2                                -0.2
                               1     2     3    4      5     6          1   2     3    4     5   6          1   2     3    4     5   6
                                           Output                                 Output                              Output
          Percent




                        0.2                                      0.2                                 0.2

                        0.1                                      0.1                                 0.1

                          0                                        0                                   0
                               1     2     3    4      5     6          1   2     3    4     5   6          1   2     3    4     5   6
                                         Real Wages                             Real Wages                          Real Wages
                        0.2                                      0.2                                 0.2
      Percent




                          0                                        0                                   0


                        -0.2                                     -0.2                                -0.2
                               1     2     3    4      5     6          1   2     3    4     5   6          1   2     3    4     5   6
                                           Profits                                Profits                             Profits
                        0.5                                      0.5                                 0.5
      Percent




                          0                                        0                                   0

                        -0.5                                     -0.5                                -0.5

                         -1                                       -1                                  -1
                               1     2     3    4      5     6          1   2     3    4     5   6          1   2     3    4     5   6
                                          Quarters                               Quarters                            Quarters



                                   Figure 1: Responses to 1 percent rise in government spending


3    Concluding remarks

For robustness of the quantative illustration, we also examined models with signifi-
cantly less wage rigidity (by doubling the probability that firms can reset prices from
1/4 to 1/2) and found very small differences between the HANK and RANK models
and only marginally lower multipliers. We also found that the assumption of linear
production is not material for our results: with a labor input elasticity of output equal
to 0.7, the responses in the sticky-wage versions of the RANK and HANK models are


                                                                                  12
still close to identical; with sticky prices, the difference between RANK and HANK
increases, since profits respond even more countercyclically in this case.
       A more interesting other case is that when the monetary authority is constrained
by a zero lower bound (ZLB) on the interest rate. In particular, representative-agent
models with nominal rigidities have been found to predict multipliers that can be sig-
nificantly larger that one in those circumstances, providing a rationale for using dis-
cretionary fiscal policy as a stabilization tool (see, e.g, Woodford (2011), Christiano,
Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011), and Eggertsson (2011)). The intuitive reason for their
prediction is simple. With active monetary policy, real interest rates rise in response
to higher inflation and partly crowd out the positive effect of a fiscal shock on out-
put. When monetary policy is constrained and nominal interest rates unaffected by
shocks, in contrast, the rise in inflation in response to a fiscal stimulus implies a fall
in real interest rates, thus further stimulating consumption and increasing both the
output response and the multiplier. What can we learn about this mechanism from
our analysis? First, under sticky prices, the insight that under reasonable paramet-
ric restrictions, countercyclical profits are a necessary condition for amplification does
not depend on the state of monetary policy, but follows directly from the household's
labor supply decision together with the market clearing condition. Thus, the amplifica-
tion of the multiplier is only consistent with the representative agent's optimal choice
of labor supply because profits respond countercyclically. That is, for multipliers to
be larger in the ZLB case, it must be that profits respond more strongly (negatively)
to the fiscal stimulus. I.e., to the extent one agrees with our term "implausible" to
describe the sticky-price model's amplification mechanism, this mechanism becomes
even more implausible in the case of the ZLB. How does the behavior of the rigid-wage
model change when monetary policy is constrained? Virtually not at all: the multiplier
remains one. As is clear from the impulse responses with rigid wages in Figure 1, there
is virtually no response of inflation and the interest rate to the fiscal shock and, hence,
the lower bound on the nominal interest rate has virtually no effect. More broadly, the
rigid-wage setting dampens the fluctuations in marginal costs, and therefore restrains
the amplification of the multiplier at the zero lower bound.14
  14
       The ZLB can clearly play a role in a HANK setting with sticky prices and sticky wages, not only
since the degree of wage rigidity is ultimately an (open) question for empirical research, see, e.g., Beraja,
Hurst, and Ospina (2019). However, for modest departures from the benchmark here, including to cases
where the production has some curvature, we found that the ZLB plays a very limited role.


                                                     13
   The main take-away from our present note is not a critique of the three-equation
representative-agent New Keynesian model. We do think that the representative-agent
focus of this model is problematic and that the supply side is inadequate, but this
model has been very important in providing a clear mechanism for the dynamics of
demand (through its dynamic IS equation and monetary policy). Instead, the main
goal here is to provide some guidance in the construction of quantitative HANK mod-
els. In particular, models with flexible wages may obscure the role of heterogeneity
in affecting aggregate dynamics, through its implausible implications for the dynam-
ics of profit income. Based on our analysis, nominal wage rigidity is a more plausible
benchmark, which is also in line with recent developments of the HANK literature con-
cerning fiscal multipliers (Auclert, Rognlie, and Straub, 2018, Hagedorn, Manovskii,
and Mitman, 2019). We also think that there is a need to develop such models of rigid
wages--in particular their foundations--further; they have received much less atten-
tion than models with price rigidities. Such work is at least on our own agenda.



References

A. Auclert, M. Rognlie, and L. Straub. The Intertemporal Keynesian Cross. NBER
  Working paper, 2018.

                   ´
A. Auclert, B. Bardoczy, and M. Rognlie. MPCs, MPEs and Multipliers: A Trilemma
  for New Keynesian Models. NBER Working paper, 2020.

M. Beraja, E. Hurst, and J. Ospina. The Aggregate Implications of Regional Business
  Cycles. Econometrica, 87(6):1789­1833, nov 2019.

F. O. Bilbiie. Limited asset markets participation, monetary policy and (inverted) ag-
  gregate demand logic. Journal of Economic Theory, 140(1):162­196, may 2008.

     ¨
M. Bjorklund, M. Carlsson, and O. N. Skans. Fixed Wage Contracts and Monetary
  Non-Neutrality. Forthcoming in American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2018.

                                              ¨
T. Broer, N.-J. H. Hansen, P. Krusell, and E. Oberg. The New Keynesian Transmission
  Mechanism: A Heterogeneous-Agent Perspective. The Review of Economic Studies, 87
  (1):77­101, jan 2020.




                                          14
G. A. Calvo. Staggered prices in a utility-maximizing framework. Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 12(3):383­398, sep 1983.

C. Cantore and L. B. Freund. Workers, Capitalists, and the Government: Fiscal Policy
  and Income (Re)Distribution. SSRN Electronic Journal, apr 2020.

L. J. Christiano, M. Eichenbaum, and S. T. Rebelo. When Is the Government Spending
  Multiplier Large? Journal of Political Economy, 119(1):78­121, 2011.

A. Colciago. Rule-of-Thumb Consumers Meet Sticky Wages. Journal of Money, Credit
  and Banking, 43(2-3):325­353, mar 2011.

G. B. Eggertsson. What fiscal policy is effective at zero interest rates? NBER Macroeco-
  nomics Annual 2010, 25:59­112, 2011.

C. J. Erceg, D. W. Henderson, and A. T. Levin. Optimal monetary policy with staggered
  wage and price contracts. Journal of Monetary Economics, 46(2):281­313, oct 2000.

E. Farhi and I. Werning. Fiscal Multipliers: Liquidity Traps and Currency Unions. In
  Handbook of Macroeconomics. sep 2016.

      i. Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New
J. Gal´
  Keynesian Framework. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2008.

J. Gal´
      i and D. Debortoli. Monetary Policy with Heterogeneous Agents: Insights from
  TANK models. Mimeo, 2017.

J. Gal´
      i, J. Lopez-Salido, and J. Valles. Rule-of-Thumb Consumers and the Design of
  Interest Rate Rules. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 36(4):739­763, 2004.

M. Hagedorn, I. Manovskii, and K. Mitman. The Fiscal Multiplier. National Bureau of
  Economic Research, 2019.

M. Huggett.      The risk-free rate in heterogeneous-agent incomplete-insurance
  economies. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 17(5-6):953­969, sep 1993.

G. Kaplan and G. L. Violante.      Microeconomic heterogeneity and macroeconomic
  shocks. In Journal of Economic Perspectives, volume 32, pages 167­194. American Eco-
  nomic Association, jun 2018.



                                            15
R. G. King, C. I. Plosser, and S. T. Rebelo. Production, growth and business cycles.
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 21(2-3):195­232, mar 1988.

P. Krusell, T. Mukoyama, and A. A. Smith. Asset prices in a Huggett economy. Journal
  of Economic Theory, 146(3):812­844, may 2011.

M. Kuhn and J.-V. Rios-Rull. 2013 Update on the US earnings, income, and wealth dis-
  tributional facts: A View from Macroeconomics. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
  Quarterly Review, 37(1), 2016.

T. E. MaCurdy. An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life-Cycle Setting. Journal of
  Political Economy, 89(6):1059­1085, dec 1981.

A. McKay and R. Reis. Optimal Automatic Stabilizers. Mimeo, 2017.

G. Olivei and S. Tenreyro. The Timing of Monetary Policy Shocks. American Economic
  Review, 97(3):636­663, may 2007.

G. Olivei and S. Tenreyro. Wage-setting patterns and monetary policy: International
  evidence. Journal of Monetary Economics, 57(7):785­802, 2010. ISSN 03043932.

M. O. Ravn and V. Sterk. Macroeconomic Fluctuations with Hank & Sam: An Analyti-
  cal Approach. Mimeo, 2018.

J. J. Rotemberg. Sticky Prices in the United States. Journal of Political Economy, 90(6):
  1187­1211, dec 1982.

I. Werning. Incomplete Markets and Aggregate Demand. Mimeo, 2015.

M. Woodford. Simple Analytics of the Government Spending Multiplier. American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3:1­35, 2011.




Appendix

In this appendix, we prove Propositions 1 and 2. Before proving each proposition sepa-
rately, note that the log-linear equilibrium of the RANK model, described by Equations
(1)-(7), and the HANK model, described by Equations (1)-(4), (6), (7) and (10), may both




                                           16
be collapsed to the following five-equation system:

                                                         p       p
                ¯Et ^        nt+1 + i1 Et ^
                    t+1 = Et ^            t+1 - (1 - ¯)( t - Et  t +1 )               (14)
                p      p
                t = Et t +1 + p ^t                                                    (15)
                w      w        2                   1           ¯
                t = Et t +1 - w i ^t -                  + n
                                                          ^t +      ^t                (16)
                                                   1- ¯        1- ¯
                     w   p
                ^
                 t = t - t                                                            (17)

                ^t = ^t-1 + t .                                                       (18)

where i  RAN k, HAN K and

                                    1
                                    RAN K = 0

                                    2
                                    RAN K = 1

                                    1
                                    HAN K = 1

                                    2                 ¯
                                    HAN K = -
                                                     1- ¯


Proof to Proposition 1

Suppose w   and  > 1. It can then easily be verified that the model has a unique
bounded equilibrium. We compute this equilibrium by guess and verify.
   Consider a positive fiscal innovation in period 0, 0 > 0. With w  , Equation
(16) implies that the solution must satisfy

                                     1           ¯
                          i2 ^t =          ^t -
                                         + n         ^t .
                                    1- ¯        1- ¯

The system may therefore be reduced to

                                                         p       p
                ¯Et ^        nt+1 + i1 Et ^
                    t+1 = Et ^            t+1 - (1 - ¯)( t - Et  t +1 )               (19)
                  p            p
                t    = Et t     +1 + p ^t                                             (20)
                                1               ¯
                i2  ^t =            + n   ^t -      ^t                                (21)
                            1-    ¯            1- ¯
                ^t =    ^t-1 .                                                        (22)

                                                                                  p
for t > 0 and 0 = 0 . Given a solution to this system of four unknowns {n
                                                                        ^t, ^ t , t ,^t },
             w
the path for t can be solved residually from Equation (17).
   We reduce the system further. Substituing Equation (21) into Equation (20) gives us

                 p      p           p     1            p ¯
                 t = Et t +1 +                  ^t - 2
                                              + n             ^t                      (23)
                                    i2   1- ¯       i (1 - ¯)

                                              17
First differencing Equation (21) and substituing this into Equation (19) gives us
                        i1 ¯                              i1   1
                ¯+
                     2
                                    Et ^
                                       t+1 =           1+  2
                                                                    +           nt+1
                                                                             Et ^
                     i (1 -  ¯)                           i 1 -   ¯
                                                                p       p
                                                     -(1 - ¯)( t  - Et  t +1 )                 (24)

Furthermore, substituting Equation (22) into Equations (23) and (24), the system may
be reduced to
                i1 ¯                              i1    1
        ¯+   2
                           ( - 1)^
                                 t =            1+ 2
                                                             +         Et ^nt+1
             i (1 -  ¯)                           i 1 -    ¯
                                                         p         p
                                             -(1 - ¯)( t   - E t t  +1 )                       (25)
                                    p            p    p       1                    p ¯
                                    t      = Et t +1 + 2            + n   ^t - 2          ^t   (26)
                                                      i 1 -      ¯              i (1 - ¯)
                                                                                      p
Now, we guess that the solution is linear in                          ^ t = µi
                                             ^t , i.e., we guess that n      n ^t and t =
µi
   ^t . With this guess the system can be written
                i1 ¯                              i1    1
        ¯+   2
                           ( - 1)^
                                 t =            1+  2
                                                             +       µi n ( - 1)^
                                                                                t
             i (1 -  ¯)                           i 1 -   ¯
                                             -(1 - ¯)( µi ^t - µi  ^t )                      (27)
                                                      p      1                     p ¯
                                  µi
                                     ^t    = µi  ^t + 2          +  µi     n^t - 2        ^t (28)
                                                                                          
                                                      i 1 -    ¯                i (1 - ¯)
or
                   i1 ¯                            i1   1
           ¯+   2
                              ( - 1) =            1+2
                                                             +    µi
                                                                   n ( - 1)
                i (1 -  ¯)                         i 1 -   ¯
                                              -(1 - ¯)( µi
                                                          - µ )
                                                               i
                                                                                               (29)
                                                      p    1               p ¯
                                      µi
                                            = µi + 2           +  µi n- 2                      (30)
                                                      i 1 -  ¯          i (1 - ¯)
which constitute a solution if and only if Equations (29) and (30) solve for µi      i
                                                                              n and µ .

Rearranging, we have

                                            µi   i   i i
                                             n = 1 + 2 µ                                       (31)

                                            µi  i   i i
                                              = 3 + 4 µn                                       (32)

where
                                     i2 (1 -    + i1 
                                             ¯)¯     ¯
                       i
                       1 =      2            1
                               i (1 - ¯) + i (1 + (1 -    ¯))
                                                         2
                                        (1 - ¯)( - )i (1 -    ¯)
                       i
                       2     = -           2           1
                                 (1 - )(i (1 -   ¯) + i (1 + (1 - ¯)))
                                         p ¯
                       i
                       3     = - 2
                                 i (1 -  ¯)(1 - )
                               p (1 + (1 -   ¯))
                       i
                       4     = 2
                               i (1 - ¯)(1 - )

                                                     18
The solution to the system (31)-(32) is
                                            i     i i
                                             3 + 1 4
                                   µ =                                            (33)
                                            1 - i2 4
                                                    i

                                            i     i i
                                             1 + 2 3
                                   µn     =                                       (34)
                                            1 - i2 4
                                                    i

which confirms that our guess constitutes a solution. We now compute the cumulative
fiscal multiplier using this solution for each model separately.


RANK model:      In the RANK model  1 = 0 and  2 = 1. In this case,

                               1 = ¯
                                        (1 - ¯)( - )
                               2 = -
                                            (1 - )
                                              p  ¯
                               3    = -
                                        (1 - ¯)(1 - )
                                      p (1 + (1 -  ¯))
                               4    =
                                      (1 -  ¯)(1 - )
and therefore
                                                           p ( -)
                                   ¯                1+   (1-)(1-)
                     µn   =                                     p ( -)
                            (1 + (1 - ¯))            1
                                                (1+(1- ¯))
                                                           + (1-)(1-)
                                     ¯
                          >                 .                                     (35)
                              (1 + (1 - ¯))
In the case of flexible prices, p  , and using l'Hopital's
                                                  ^        rule, we have that
                                                 ¯
                               µn,nat =                                           (36)
                                          (1 + (1 - ¯))
Therefore, the difference between the cumulative fiscal multiplier in the baseline and
the flexible-price model is given by:
                                                            
                                            t=0 µn ^t       t=0   µn,nat ^t
                       M - Mnat =                       -         
                                      ¯       t=0 ^t  ¯           t=0 ^t
                                     1
                                   =   (µn - µn,nat )
                                     ¯
                                   > 0.

                                                      ¯
HANK model:      In the HANK model  1 = 1 and  2 = - 1- ¯
                                                          . In this case,
                                         ¯
                               1 =
                                     (1 + )
                                        ( - )¯  
                               2   =
                                     (1 - )(1 + )
                                         p
                               3   =
                                     (1 - )
                                       p (1 + (1 - ¯))
                               4   = -
                                           ¯(1 - )
                                           

                                             19
and therefore
                                                         p ( -)
                                   ¯               1+  (1-)(1-)
                     µn   =                                   p ( -)
                            (1 + (1 - ¯))         (1+)
                                               (1+(1-¯))
                                                         + (1-)(1-)
                                     ¯
                          <                 .                                         (37)
                              (1 + (1 - ¯))

In the case of flexible prices, p  , and using l'Hopital's
                                                  ^        rule, we have that

                                               ¯
                                µn =                                                  (38)
                                        (1 + (1 - ¯))

Therefore, the difference between the cumulative fiscal multiplier in the baseline and
the flexible-price model is given by:
                                                           
                                           t=0 µn ^t       t=0   µn,nat ^t
                       M - Mnat =                      -         
                                      ¯      t=0 ^t   ¯          t=0 ^t
                                     1
                                   =   (µn - µn,nat )
                                     ¯
                                   < 0.

This completes the proof.


Proof to Proposition 2

Suppose w  0. We compute the resulting equilibrium by guess and verify. Consider
a positive fiscal innovation in period 0, 0 > 0. With w  0, Equation (16) implies that

                                        w
                                        t = 0.

The system may therefore be reduced to

                                                         p       p
                ¯Et ^        nt+1 + i1 Et ^
                    t+1 = Et ^            t+1 - (1 - ¯)( t - E t t +1 )               (39)
                p      p
                t = Et t +1 + p ^t                                                    (40)
                     p
                t = -t
                ^                                                                     (41)

                ^t = ^t-1 .                                                           (42)

                                                                     p
for t > 0 and 0 = 0 . This is a system with four unknowns {n
                                                           ^t, ^ t , t ,^t }. To solve it,
                                                                                  p
we guess that the solution has ^ t = 0. With this guess, it follows directly that t =0
from Equation (40). From Equation (39), we then have that

                                Et ^
                                   nt+1 = ¯Et ^
                                              t+1                                     (43)


                                            20
Further guess that the solution is linear in t : n
                                                 ^ t = µn ^t , we have that

                                µn Et ^
                                      t+1 = ¯Et ^
                                                t+1                                  (44)

which confirms that our guess constitutes a solution if

                                         µn = ¯                                      (45)

                                           i     i
This is true irrespective of the values of 1 and 2 . With fully rigid wages, the solution
to both the RANK and the HANK model is given by

                                        n
                                        ^t = ¯^t ,                                   (46)

                                        ^t = ^t-1 ,                                  (47)

for t > 0 and ^0 = 0 . The cumulative fiscal multiplier in both models is given by
                                                      
                                                      t=0 µn ^t
                                     M =                 
                                             ¯           t=0 ^t
                                                        
                                            ¯           t=0 ^t
                                          =             
                                            ¯           t=0 ^t
                                          = 1.

Furthermore, by Equations (36) and (38), the multiplier in the natural equilibrium of
the HANK and the RANK model is identical and given by
                                           
                                            µn,nat 
                                           t=0     ^t
                            Mnat =          
                                         ¯ t=0  ^t
                                                                  
                                              ¯                   t=0 ^t
                                    =                             
                                      ¯(1 + (1 +   ¯))            t=0 ^t
                                            1
                                    =
                                      1 + (1 +  ¯)
                                    < 1.

This completes the proof.




                                                 21
