                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            LIQUIDITY, PLEDGEABILITY, AND THE NATURE OF LENDING

                                     Douglas W. Diamond
                                         Yunzhi Hu
                                      Raghuram G. Rajan

                                      Working Paper 28377
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28377


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2021




Diamond and Rajan thank the Center for Research in Security Prices at Chicago Booth for
research support. Rajan also thanks the Fama-Miller Center, the Stigler Center and IGM at
Chicago Booth for research support. We are grateful for helpful comments from Ron Kaniel (the
editor), the anonymous referee, Jason Roderick Donaldson, Ye Li, Arvind Krishnamurthy, S.
"Vish" Viswanathan, Ming Yang, and conference /seminar participants at the 2019 AEA, FIFI,
Chicago Booth, Columbia, SFS Cavalcade, FIRS, Rochester, and IMF. This incorporates some
results from a working paper, "Liquidity and Securitization." The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Douglas W. Diamond, Yunzhi Hu, and Raghuram G. Rajan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Liquidity, Pledgeability, and the Nature of Lending
Douglas W. Diamond, Yunzhi Hu, and Raghuram G. Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 28377
January 2021
JEL No. G2,G21,G23,G3,G32,G33

                                          ABSTRACT

We develop a theory of how corporate lending and financial intermediation change based on the
fundamentals of the firm and its environment. We focus on the interaction between the
prospective net worth or liquidity of an industry and the firm's internal governance or
pledgeability. Variations in prospective liquidity can induce changes in the nature, covenants, and
quantity of loans that are made, the identity of the lender, and the extent to which the lender is
leveraged. We offer predictions on how these might vary over the financial cycle.


Douglas W. Diamond                               Raghuram G. Rajan
Booth School of Business                         Booth School of Business
University of Chicago                            University of Chicago
5807 S Woodlawn Avenue                           5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637                                Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                         and NBER
douglas.diamond@chicagobooth.edu                 raghuram.rajan@ChicagoBooth.edu

Yunzhi Hu
Kenan-Flagler Business School
University of North Carolina
CB #3490, 4103 McColl Building
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
Yunzhi_Hu@kenan-flagler.unc.edu
    The nature of lending in an economy changes over the financial cycle.1 Clearly,

the quantity of debt a borrower can take on varies. The extent to which banks play an

important role, or give way to more arm's length lending also changes. So does the

form of debt ­ whether it has many covenants or few, whether enforcement requires

direct lender intervention or whether the loan contract embeds performance pricing

so that interest rates adjust to the borrower's situation automatically. Finally, changes

in the nature of lending also affect the capital structure of intermediaries like banks.

A vast empirical literature examines various aspects of lending, but there is relatively

little theory explaining when one might see some aspects particularly pronounced.2 In

this paper, we present a parsimonious model that attempts to explain why and how the

nature of lending changes with the environment in which lending takes place.

    Since our focus is on the environment, we keep the nature of the borrowing firm

and the cash flows it generates fixed, while altering industry-wide financing conditions.

Specifically, we alter prospective liquidity by which we mean the net worth of potential

buyers for the firm's assets (though we offer other interpretations later). We analyze

how such changes affect the borrower's incentives to improve the internal governance

of the corporation, as well as how it alters the nature of lending. More specifically, we

describe the types of lenders and debt contracts that are selected by borrowers and the

types of actions (such as verifying or monitoring information) that will be undertaken

by lenders as part of these contracts. To summarize our main results, starting from a low

level, higher prospective corporate liquidity will initially reduce monitored borrowing

from a bank in favor of arm's length borrowing, then steadily raise the amount corpo-

rations can borrow arm's length, and eventually reduce the need for internal corporate

governance to support corporate borrowing. In parallel, higher prospective corporate


   1 See, for example, Bradley and Roberts (2015), Benmelech, Kumar, and Rajan (2020), and Halling, Yu,

and Zechner (2020). For a description of the financial cycle, see Borio (2014).
   2 Exceptions include Berlin and Mester (1992), Diamond (1991, 1993), Hackbarth, Hennessy, and Leland

(2007), Hu (2017), and Rajan and Winton (1995).




                                                  2
liquidity will allow banks to operate with less capital or higher leverage.

   Let us elaborate. Consider an economy where expert managers bid for an asset

producing cash flows, henceforth called the firm. Experts fund their bid by borrowing

against the firm. The winning bidder becomes the incumbent manager of the firm. The

other agents in the model are investors and financial intermediaries, henceforth banks.

Investors are individuals with some personal funds to lend, but who do not have the

inclination or ability to engage closely with borrowing firms. Banks, in contrast, can

intervene at a cost when a corporate loan goes off-track. We assume that there are

plenty of investors around, so their ability to finance firms directly, or via banks, is

unlimited. Neither investors nor banks can manage firms.

   The size of the loan that an expert receives for their initial bid depends on the debt

capacity the firm can support. The fundamental agency problem is limited enforce-

ment, i.e., the expert is unwilling to repay if she can avoid it. When at arm's length,

lenders have two sorts of control rights, which allow them to be repaid and are the basis

for the expert's borrowing capacity. First, they have the right to repossess and sell the

firm's assets for going-concern value if payments are missed. This right only requires

the frictionless enforcement of property rights in the economy, which we assume. It

has especial value when there are a large number of potential buyers in the future, will-

ing to pay a high price for the firm's assets. Greater future wealth amongst experts

outside the firm (that is, prospective expert liquidity, or more practically, prospective

corporate net worth of other firms in the industry) leads to higher prices for the firm in

the resale market, with less of a fire-sale discount. This increases the upfront availabil-

ity of this asset-sale-based financing, as in Shleifer and Vishny (1992). Clearly, this

kind of control right is exogenous to the firm and depends on economic and financial

conditions.

   The second right is that lenders can obtain some of the cash flows generated by the

asset directly. Unlike asset-based rights, which depend on the enforcement of property



                                            3
rights, cash flow rights are more endogenous; they stem from the incumbent expert's

actions improving firm governance. These increase the pledgeability of the firm's cash

flows so that they are more directly appropriable by creditors. Raising pledgeability

might entail, for example, improving accounting quality or setting up a stronger board

so that the expert cannot divert project cash flows into their own coffers. Higher pledge-

ability allows the incumbent to borrow more directly against the firm's cash flows.

   A key feature in our model is that the two rights interact. In general, both the higher

prospective wealth of non-incumbent experts outside the firm (that is, prospective liq-

uidity) as well as the higher amount of the firm's future cash flow that a non-incumbent

expert can borrow against (that is, higher future pledgeability of the firm's cash flows)

will increase their future bids for the firm. Higher prospective bids will increase debt

repayments, and the willingness of creditors to lend up front. Higher prospective liq-

uidity and pledgeability increase debt capacity.

   Another key feature is that pledgeability is chosen by the incumbent expert in ad-

vance, and it lasts sometime into the future. Current pledgeability choice clearly has

some impact on the future ­ once in place, reputable accountants and their account-

ing practices cannot be changed instantaneously. Change has to occur slowly, perhaps

at the time the accountant's term ends, if it is not to be challenged. In addition, it is

plausible but not critical to our approach that pledgeability takes time to implement

­ improving accounting quality is not instantaneous because it requires adopting new

systems and hiring reputable accountants.3

   Consider now the expert incumbent manager's incentives while setting cash flow

pledgeability for the next period, after buying the firm with own funds and borrowed

money. For this to be an interesting decision, we assume she may have some likelihood

of selling the firm or some portion of it next period ­ either because she loses ability

and is no longer capable of running it, or because she needs to raise finance for new


  3 Section   4.7 describes the impact of removing the assumption that it takes time to improve pledgeability.



                                                      4
investments.

   If the incumbent has no debt claims outstanding, she would undoubtedly want to

increase pledgeability, especially if the direct costs of doing so are small ­ this would

simply increase the proceeds she would obtain by selling the firm to non-incumbent

experts if she lost ability. However, when the incumbent expert has taken on debt,

she will see enhancing cash flow pledgeability as a double-edged sword. The higher

future bid from non-incumbent experts also enables the upfront lender to collect more

payments if the incumbent stays in control because the lender has the right to seize the

firm and sell it when not paid in full. In such situations, the incumbent has to "buy"

the firm from the lender by outbidding experts (or repaying the initial loan fully). The

higher the probability the incumbent will retain ability and stay in control and the

higher the outstanding debt, the lower her incentive to raise pledgeability. This means

that when high pledgeability is needed for debt enforcement, outstanding debt cannot

be very high.

   Another way of seeing this is that any incumbent manager always has mixed mo-

tives in improving governance (that is, pledgeability) ­ it enhances her access to new

external finance but also make existing outside claims stronger. So higher the existing

claims relative to new financing needs, lower her incentives to improve governance.

This is a form of overhang but different from the conventional one.

   Now consider the effect of prospective liquidity on pledgeability choice. When

prospective liquidity is not high, higher pledgeability, as we have seen, helps increase

outside expert bids. However, experts will never pay more for the firm in the future

than its fundamental value. Therefore, when future expert liquidity is very high, non-

incumbent experts will have enough wealth to buy the firm at the full fundamental

value without needing to borrow against the firm's future cash flows. In this case,

higher pledgeability has no effect on how much experts will bid to pay for the firm. In

other words, high future liquidity crowds out the need for pledgeability in enhancing



                                           5
debt repayments.

    Finally, consider banks. For the most part in our paper, they do not play a direct

role in governance. Instead, they incentivize the borrower to improve pledgeability,

which allows them to lend more upfront. To see this, assume there is a noisy proxy

for pledgeability that is observable and verifiable, and a covenant can be written on

it. For instance, the covenant could be the requirement that the firm submit periodic

audited financial statements. We examine what happens when the bank observes a

covenant violation, for instance a delayed submission of financial statements, which

signals, albeit with noise, that the realized pledgeability is low.

    The bank has a number of advantages over arm's length lenders with respect to

a contractual covenant. It interacts with the borrower continuously and can catch a

violation of the covenant early, it can monitor further to get a more precise read of

pledgeability, and it can liquidate the firm early. Early liquidation is different from

seizing and auctioning the firm for going-concern value or selling plant and equip-

ment piecemeal. The liquidation value is not negligible early on because it includes

the yet-to-be-invested portion of the loan amount. Importantly, unlike going-concern

value, it is not dependent on the human capital of experts (Hart and Moore (1994)),

and therefore liquidation can be used as a credible threat if the incumbent does not

raise pledgeability.

    Arm's length loans can also be tied to the covenant, so long as the consequence of

covenant violation is purely a change in the loan terms. For instance, the contract could

mandate a rise in interest rates if the covenant is violated. We term such a loan contract

performance pricing.

    Our main interest is in studying how the equilibrium choice of borrowing contract

and the type of lender changes over the financial cycle as the level of prospective liquid-

ity varies. Depending on the level of liquidity, different contractual forms of borrowing

with differing extents of financial intermediation will maximize the access to upfront



                                             6
finance. Competition for access to finance will force experts to use the contract and the

type of lender with maximal access.

   When prospective expert liquidity is relatively low, bank lending with covenants is

particularly effective. If the incumbent expert sets pledgeability low, the covenant will

likely be violated and expected future bids for going-concern value will be low. The

(early) liquidation value will exceed expected future bids, so the bank's liquidation

threat will be credible. This then means the incumbent will set pledgeability high even

when facing large repayments, knowing that otherwise she risks liquidation.

   As prospective liquidity rises further, expected going-concern value will start domi-

nating the early liquidation value. The bank's threat to liquidate will no longer be cred-

ible, which renders its ability to verify information early and monitor of little value.

Yet lending will not cease. Arm's length lenders will induce the incumbent expert to

set pledgeability high by limiting the amount of straight debt they offer. In such a

situation, faced with only moderate levels of repayment of existing debt, and the need

potentially to sell the firm (or, equivalently, raise more finance), the incumbent expert

will choose high pledgeability.

   It turns out that with little aggregate uncertainty, even though performance pric-

ing debt offers more contractual flexibility than straight debt, it adds nothing to the

amount of funds that can be raised. It will be dominated if there are small transaction

costs associated with its enforcement. However, with sufficient aggregate uncertainty

and high prospective liquidity, arm's length performance pricing debt can raise more

than straight debt, when the aggregate state cannot be contracted upon directly. In par-

ticular, the automatic rise in interest rates conditional on covenant violation gives the

incumbent stronger incentives to increase pledgeability, and allows her to borrow yet

more.

   Finally, as the level of prospective liquidity gets very high, higher pledgeability has

little incremental impact on likely debt repayment. Indeed, the ceiling on debt needed



                                            7
to maintain incentives for pledgeability becomes onerous. Instead, experts will take on

high leverage up front, without any intent to raise pledgeability. Investors will be happy

making large "covenant-lite" loans without covenants or monitoring, relying solely on

high prospective liquidity for repayment.

   Importantly, the bank's capital structure depends on the nature of the loans it makes

­ whether the loans need the bank to take costly unobservable actions such as infor-

mation acquisition or whether they are arm's length loans that could be made by any

passive investor. If the former, the bank will have to maintain some "skin in the game,"

that is, a stake in the loans it has made so that it has the incentive to take these ac-

tions: Bank capital has to be positive when costly bank intermediation services are

needed. However, as prospective liquidity rises and the bank can switch to making

passive arm's length loans, it can become a complete pass through, transferring the

amounts collected from investors to the firm and vice versa. It will need no skin in the

game, that is, bank capital. Equivalently, experts will be financed directly by investors

through arm's length loans or bonds. More generally, periods of high prospective liq-

uidity are periods of substantial arm's length lending, high corporate leverage, and high

bank leverage. As we will see, this has implications for how episodes like the run-up

to the Global Financial Crisis of 2007-2009 are interpreted.

   We have associated higher liquidity with high expert/corporate net worth (stem-

ming from an economy-wide boom in the real sector). It is plausible that higher expert

bids could also result from accommodative monetary policy, easier credit conditions,

rapid financial development, lax supervision, or even irrational exuberance in financial

markets. Any of these will ease the financing of expert bidders, induce higher future

bids, and higher leverage today, which in turn induces lower pledgeability and more

need for financial intermediation. This generalization would be useful in taking the

model to the data.

   Our paper follows an earlier paper (Diamond, Hu, and Rajan, 2020) on industry



                                            8
liquidity and firms' pledgeability choices. It is closely related to Shleifer and Vishny

(1992), where the liquidity of asset acquirers increases the resale value of assets, to

Acharya and Viswanathan (2011), where this allows highly levered entities to borrow,

and Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006, 2008) where this reduces moral hazard. Dow, Gorton,

Krishnamurthy (2005) study the choice of pledgeability, assuming that debt finance in-

creases pledgeabilty. Philippon (2006) presents a model where investors tolerate poor

corporate governance in booms which creates over-investment. This can lead to worse

outcomes as shown in Johnson, Boone, Breach, and Friedman (2000). Manove, Padilla

and Pagano (2001) shows that collateral value, if independent of the project's outcome,

weaken the bank's screening incentives. Closely related models where financial inter-

mediation improves access to finance include Diamond (1984), Holmstr¨
                                                                    om and Tirole

(1997) and Rampini and Viswanathan (2010).

   In the rest of the paper, we will formalize our arguments. In section 1, we describe

the basic framework and the timing of decisions in a two-period model. In section 2,

we study the firm's borrowing without aggregate uncertainty, and in section 3 we add

aggregate uncertainty. In section 4 we examine robustness and a few extensions and

then conclude in section 5.


1. The Framework and Model Setup

   Let us start with the simplest setup possible. Consider an economy with two periods

spanning three dates, t = 0, 1, 2. At date 0, there is an asset, specifically a firm, which

is up for sale. At dates 1 and 2, the firm generates cash flows C1 and C2 , respectively.


1.1. Agents

   The economy is populated with three groups of agents: expert managers henceforth

termed experts, financial intermediaries whom we refer to as banks, and investors. All

agents are risk neutral and do not discount the future. Therefore, the prevailing gross

interest rate is 1. Experts have the ability to produce cash flows with the firm. However,

                                            9
they need to bid against each other for the firm at date 0 (their initial bid also includes

any amount required for firm investments), as well as possibly at date 1 (see shortly).

Experts can bid with their wealth, supplemented with any amount they can borrow.

We will determine the form of borrowing that allows an expert to raise the maximum

possible at date 0. The winning expert manager will become the incumbent expert

manager of the firm.

   Let  be a measure of the firm's stability ­ the extent to which the firm's technology

or the skills it needs are unchanging. With probability 1 -  during period 1, the in-

cumbent learns that her skills have become mismatched with the technologies needed,

so after producing period-1 cash flows, she will lose her ability to produce cash flows

in period 2. If this occurs, she will want to sell the firm at date 1. We assume there

are plenty of non-incumbent experts around at date 1 who can run the firm, and will

therefore bid for it. Importantly, the event of the incumbent losing ability offers her a

reason to increase the date-1 resale value of the firm.


1.2. Payment Enforcement

   In general, a lender has two ways of getting repaid by the incumbent manager on the

date that a payment is due. Define cash flow pledgeability as the fraction of realized

cash flow that can be verified by a court and therefore can go directly to satisfy the

lender's claim. If 2 is the pledgeability of cash flows C2 , the period-2 incumbent can

commit to repay up to 2C2 of date-2 cash flows to a lender. This is the first channel

for repayment.

   Second, just before the end of the period, the lender gets the right to seize and

auction the firm to the highest expert bidder if it has not been paid in full. This allows

it to extract repayment either by the threat of, or by actually, seizing and auctioning the

firm. In this auction, both other experts and the incumbent manager are allowed to bid

­ we assume the incumbent can always bid using other proxies, so contracts that ban




                                            10
her from participating in the auction are infeasible.4


1.3. More on Cash flow Pledgeability

    Cash flow pledgeability is endogenous, and chosen by the incumbent expert one pe-

riod in advance. She can raise pledgeability by adopting more informative accounting

practices, hiring better accountants, setting up escrow accounts for cash flows, simpli-

fying corporate organizational structures and enhancing their transparency, or putting

in place better governance structures such as a more expert and independent board

(see Rajan (2012)). Essentially, the incumbent can credibly close off tunnels which

divert cash flows generated by the firm. There are also other ways she can change

pledgeability. For instance, the incumbent can invest in projects that require significant

managerial inputs (or not make such investments) and thus increase the rents future

managers will capture because of the need to provide them incentives for effort. This

too will affect the fraction of cash flow that can be pledged (see Shleifer and Vishny

(1989)).

    The range of feasible values for pledgeability 2  , ¯ , where 0   < ¯ < 1 are

determined by the economy's institutions supporting corporate governance, both oper-

ating within the firm (such as the availability of better auditors and accounting norms)

and through outside institutions (such as laws protecting investors and the effectiveness

of the judiciary). Linearity allows us to focus on the extremes of the range, without loss

of generality. That is, we analyze only 2 =  or 2 = ¯ . To keep notation simple, we

assume the interim cash flows produced during period 1 are not pledgeable, so that

1 = 0 (this is simply a normalization).

    The process of improving pledgeability ­ for example, selecting and installing a

reputable auditor ­ takes time. The incumbent manager has to invite applications,


    4 If the incumbent could be prohibited from bidding, strategic defaults would be ruled out and debt con-

tracts would raise far more. More generally, credible threats by the incumbent to withdraw her human capital
from the project (as in Hart and Moore (1994)) would result in similar outcomes where the lender's outside
option (of selling the firm to others) matters.



                                                    11
do due diligence to screen out unsuitable applicants, interview the final candidates,

and select one at the end. Moreover, there could be some noise/errors in the process

of improving pledgeability. So we assume if the incumbent in period 1 exerts effort

  , ¯ in raising pledgeability, where 0 <  < ¯ < 1, then Pr {2 = ¯ } = .

Note therefore that effort ¯ results in a high probability ¯ of high pledgeability being

realized one period later. The cost to the incumbent of high effort is . Throughout the

paper, the result will be presented in the limiting case   0, as we focus primarily

on the benefits to the incumbent of higher pledgeability (which can be negative), rather

than her direct cost. We also assume that high effort is generally attractive so that

¯ (1 - ) >  (intuitively, this is because high pledgeability can benefit the incumbent

with probability (1 - ) ).


1.4. More on Wealth and Liquidity

   We assume experts start with no wealth or net worth at date 0, so that 0 = 0 (this is

again just a normalization, what matters is the need for outside funds). Then 1
                                                                              I
                                                                                = C1 is

the incumbent's personal wealth at date 1. Let 1
                                               E
                                                 be the date-1 wealth of other experts

who do not own any firm ­ they do generate some wealth by working independently

over period 1. In the spirit of Shleifer and Vishny (1992), we term this date-1 net worth

of industry experts prospective "liquidity". Prospective liquidity is exogenous to the

model and driven by the economic environment. It will be important in what follows.


1.5. Financial Contracts and Intermediation

   At date 0, each expert applies to one lender for funding. We assume the financial

contract between the expert and the lender (bank or investor) is a one-period debt con-

tract: the lender lends l0 at date 0 in return for which the expert promises to repay D1

at date 1. We examine various forms of one-period debt contracts, each with different

enforcement costs. We could allow for long-term debt, but it will always be diluted and

adds nothing if ¯ is sufficiently high, as we have shown in Diamond, Hu, and Rajan



                                           12
(2020). In the absence of aggregate uncertainty, one-period debt will turn out to be

optimal, without loss of generality.

    With straight debt, only the repayment, D1 is specified. The lender has the right

to seize the firm and auction it if not fully paid. Straight debt requires no additional

information. In case of non-payment, only the transfer to the lender of the right to

auction the firm has to be enforced.

    Alternatively, the loan may contain a covenant: After the incumbent chooses her

pledgeability effort, a noisy and verifiable binary signal   H , L about 2 will

become available. If 2 = , the signal is  = L . If 2 = ¯ , the signal is  = H with

probability 1 - e1 and  = L (a "type I" error) with probability e1 < 0.5, so the signal is

informative. When  = L , the covenant is deemed tripped or violated.5 The covenant

in our model is representative of a variety of real world covenants that are violated when

governance is deficient. Covenants requiring periodic audited financial statements,

requiring compliance with certain accounting principles, or requiring earnings to be

a minimum ratio of debt, get tripped when governance is of poor quality or cash flow

tunneling is excessive. Alternatively, covenants requiring maintenance of a certain

amount of liquid assets/working capital or covenants prohibiting mergers ensure that

the rents associated with managing the assets are limited. Such covenants get tripped

when pledgeability of future cash flows is likely to be low.

    The loan contract may itself specify a new interest rate based on the signal. We term

this a performance pricing loan contract.6 Since we have one-period contracts, this
                                                      ~ 1 upon a covenant violation,
means the face value D1 is automatically augmented to D

 = L .7 We assume the lender incurs a small verification cost to establish the value of


    5 We examine Type II errors in the appendix, where the covenant trips even if pledgeability is high ­ apart

from making it harder to incentivize pledgeability, it changes little qualitatively.
    6 In practice, performance pricing contracts are based on a pricing grid. The most commonly used trigger

is the debt to EBITDA ratio (see Asquith et al (2005)). For ease of comparison, we tie both the loan covenant
and the pricing grid to the same information, so we use the term "covenant violation" both for performance
pricing contracts as well as bank loan contracts.
    7 Asquith, Beatty, and Weber (2005) describe interest increasing and interest decreasing performance




                                                     13
 at date 1. This cost is assumed negligible (to avoid unnecessary notation) and is used

only to break ties between contracts.

    A bank loan covenant is also violated if  = L ­ there is no finer information that

the bank can contract on. However, the bank can verify the realization of  earlier (say

at date 1/2). This allows the bank to intervene before the signal becomes public.8 We

will assume that although vanishingly small, the bank's early verification cost at date

1/2 exceeds the verification cost of the signal at date 1 (if used in performance pricing).

These costs will matter only in breaking ties.

    If a lending bank sees the covenant violated at date 1/2, it has two available actions

at that time. First, it can pay an additional cost  > 0, monitor the incumbent, and learn

the realized pledgeability 2 . We term this a monitored loan. The information from

monitoring is privately observed by the bank and therefore is not verifiable. As we will

see later, monitoring is a powerful incentive device to increase pledgeability. However,

its cost  exceeds all of the previously mentioned costs. Second, the bank has the

authority to demand immediate repayment of D1 or propose a new face value. In case

the bank demands immediate repayment, the incumbent can borrow from other banks

to repay. If the incumbent cannot repay or rejects the proposed new face value, the

bank can liquidate and recover L. This recovery or early liquidation value is not simply

the sale of plant and equipment after a violation or loan default (it is not necessarily the

Chapter VII liquidation value in US bankruptcy). This early liquidation value includes

recovering part of the upfront loan amount that has not been spent yet on investment.

It encapsulates the bank's advantage of getting the signal early and being able to act

quickly to recover funds, before the borrower goes seriously off track. We assume

¯ C2 > L so that under high pledgeability, the amount of pledgeable cash flows exceeds


pricing debt contracts. Given we have only two outcomes (covenant tripped or not), either face value can be
thought of as the base. In other words, we do not distinguish between the two forms of debt pricing.
    8 Dichev and Skinner (2002) and Nini, Smith, and Sufi (2012) show that banks intervene long before

distress while Ivashina, Iverson, and Smith (2011) show that arm's length investors like hedge funds enter
the picture only much later.



                                                   14
the liquidation value.


1.6. Timing

   The timing of events is described in Figure 1. After funding the project at date 0,

the incumbent expert chooses her pledgeability effort . The noisy and verifiable signal

 on 2 is realized. If the lender is a bank, it observes the signal early. The bank may

monitor the incumbent to learn realized pledgeability and/or may demand repayment

without further monitoring. If not repaid, the bank may raise the face value or liquidate.

Subsequently, the incumbent's ability in period 2 becomes known to all. If the project

is not liquidated, the cash flows (if any) are produced. At date 1, the incumbent either

pays the remaining debt due or enters the auction. The period ends with potentially a

new incumbent in control.




                            Figure 1: Timeline and Decisions


2. Equilibrium without Aggregate Uncertainty

   We first analyze this simple model, then add aggregate uncertainty. Since experts

start with equal wealth, the expert who can borrow the most upfront will bid the most

at date 0, and becomes the initial incumbent. Our interest is in determining what kind

of debt this might be and how much of it they will issue.

   We fold backward from period 2. Any expert in place at the beginning of period 2

can only commit to repay D2 = 2C2 in period 2, where 2 is the pledgeability set in

period 1. As a result, they can borrow up to 2C2 when bidding for control at date 1.

                                           15
   Turn now to the decisions made during period 1, the most interesting part of the

analysis. Since the pledgeability of period 1 cash flows is assumed to be zero, the

repayment of the debt contracted at date 0 is driven entirely by the face value to be

paid, D1 , and the non-incumbent expert's bid for the firm in a possible date-1 auc-

tion. This is determined by 1
                            E
                              , his wealth on date 1, as well as what he can borrow

against future cash flows, which is determined by 2 . A rational expert's date-1 bid

for the firm will not exceed the value of the future cash flows, C2 , so he will bid
 E
B1 (2 ) = min 1
              E
                + 2C2 , C2 . Similarly, the maximum the incumbent will bid is
 I
B1 (2 ) = min 1
              I
                + 2C2 , C2 . Comparing B1
                                        I
                                          (2 ) and B1
                                                    E
                                                      (2 ), and using the assump-

tion 1
     I
       = C1  1
             E
               , we see that if the incumbent retains ability, she can retain control by

outbidding experts in any possible date-1 auction. Since the continuation value of the

firm, C2 , is identical for the incumbent and experts, the incumbent always wants to re-

tain the firm if she retains ability. To do so, she either pays the amount of debt outstand-

ing or outbids other experts. So she pays min D1 , B1
                                                    E
                                                      (2 ) = min D1 , 1
                                                                      E
                                                                        + 2 C 2 , C 2 .

   Many of our results stem from this expression, so some points are worth noting.

First, so long as outside expert bids are below C2 , the greater the wealth of outside

experts, that is, greater their prospective liquidity, 1
                                                       E
                                                         , the greater will be expert bids,

and the greater will be the debt face value that can be enforced. Similarly, the greater

the pledgeability 2 chosen, the greater the date-1 bid, and hence the greater the en-

forceability of debt payments. However, no rational bidder will pay more than the

residual value of the firm, C2 . So when expert liquidity is sufficiently high (that is,

1
E
   (1 - )C2 ), higher pledgeability is no longer needed to enhance debt capacity ­

bidders have enough wealth of their own to make a bid for full value, without borrowing

any more than the minimum pledgeable cash flows of the asset, C2 . In other words,

high liquidity can crowd out any need for more pledgeability in enhancing borrowing

capacity.




                                            16
2.1. Straight Debt

   We first analyze the (dis)incentives for choosing high pledgeability created by

straight debt without covenants. Given D1 , let V1 D1 ,  be the incumbent's payoff

when she chooses  :


 V1 D1 ,  =  C2 - Min B1
                       E
                          ), D1 +  (1 - ) B1
                         (¯                E
                                              ) - Min B1
                                             (¯        E
                                                          ), D1
                                                         (¯

         + (1 - )  C2 - Min B1
                             E
                               (), D1 + (1 - ) (1 - ) B1
                                                       E
                                                         () - Min B1
                                                                   E
                                                                     (), D1 - 1{=¯}
                                                                          (1)

   The first term on the right hand side is the gross payoff if she retains ability and is

successful in raising pledgeability, the second term is if she loses ability but has raised

pledgeability so she can sell at a high price, the third term is if she retains ability but

pledgeability turns out to be low, and the fourth term is if she loses ability and the

firm has to be sold at a low price because pledgeability is also low. The final term

is the direct cost of pledgeability effort if she sets it high. For any debt level D1 ,

define 1 D1 = V1 D1 , ¯ - V D ,  as the incumbent's benefit from choosing high
                           1 1

versus low effort. The level of contracted debt shifts the benefit, so 1 D1 (weakly)

decreases in D1 . The reason is straightforward. If the incumbent retains her ability,

she has to pay more on the outstanding debt if pledgeability is higher, and the higher

the outstanding debt, the more this is. Similarly, if she loses her ability, she gets the

residual value after the selling the firm, and higher the outstanding debt, the less this

is when pledgeability is higher. So higher outstanding debt reduces the incumbent's

incentive to raise pledgeability. Specifically,

Lemma 2.1: An incumbent's net benefit from choosing high pledgeability is 1 D1 =

¯ -   BE () + (1 - ) BE (¯
       1              1 ) - max B1  , min D1 , B1 (¯
                                 E              E
                                                   )                    - .

   The proof directly follows from the definition of V1 D1 ,  above and is therefore
                        PayIC                             
omitted. Let us define D1       B1
                                 E
                                   () + (1 - ) B1
                                                E
                                                   ) - (
                                                  (¯    ¯ -) as the maximum debt

at which the incumbent still has an incentive to exert high pledgeability effort. Figure

2 plots the net benefit to the incumbent at different levels of debt.



                                            17
                       Figure 2: Net payoff to high pledgeability
            E
   For D1  B1  , debt repayment is not increased by higher pledgeability because

the face value of outstanding debt is low. Instead, higher pledgeability only increases

outside expert bids, which is beneficial to the incumbent when she loses ability and

sells the asset. The expected benefits of higher pledgeability effort are 1 (D1 ) =

             1 ) - B1  - . When D1 rises above B1  , the incumbent has
¯ -  (1 - ) BE (¯   E                           E


to pay more to debt holders when pledgeability is higher. So as the face value of debt
                                                  PayIC
increases further, 1 (D1 ) falls to zero at D1 = D1     and then goes negative. When
     E
D1  B1  ), the incumbent has to pay the entire increment in sale price from in-
       (¯

creasing pledgeability to debt holders when she loses ability ­ she gets nothing from

increasing pledgeability in this case. At the same time, if she retains ability and pledge-
                               E
ability is high she pays debt B1  ) instead of B1
                                 (¯             E
                                                   . Hence the expected benefit of

higher pledgeability effort is negative and equals - ¯ -   BE (¯
                                                            1 ) - B1  - .
                                                                   E


   Finally, note that if liquidity is so high that 1
                                                   E
                                                      1 -  C2 , non-incumbent ex-

perts can pay the full price of the asset C2 even with low pledgeability. In that case,
      E
both B1  ) and B1
        (¯      E
                   equal C2 , and 1 (D1 ) = - for any D1 . Put differently, when

liquidity crosses the threshold of 1 -  C2 , higher pledgeability does not increase bids

by other experts.

   Before moving on, note the role played by . In choosing effort to increase pledge-

ability, the incumbent trades off being forced to make higher possible repayments con-

ditional on retaining ability, when she "buys" the firm back from the lender, against the


                                            18
higher possible resale value when she sells the firm after losing ability. The higher the

stability , the more the disadvantage looms large relative to the benefit, and higher is

the moral hazard associated with raising pledgeability. This is why the maximum debt
                                            PayIC
consistent with high pledgeability effort, D1     , falls in .

    The level of debt determines whether the borrower will choose high or low ef-

fort in pledgeability. For straight debt this implies that one of two levels of debt will

allow the borrower to raise the most. The first is straight debt at the incentive com-

patible limit, which thus encourages high pledgeability effort. Because pledgeability

is induced without outside governance action, we term this internal governance debt.
                                                     IG
The amount the incumbent expert raises at date 0 is l0   ¯ DPayIC + 1 - ¯ BE ().
                                                            1              1

Given high effort, high pledgeability is realized with probability ¯ , in which case the
                  PayIC
incumbent repays D1                              E
                        . Otherwise, she repays B1 ().

    The second possibility is for the expert to issue covenant-free straight debt with

D1 = B1
      E
         ). Since this exceeds the incentive-compatible level, the expert chooses
        (¯

low effort  = . Given the high debt, the low average pledgeability and low internal

and external governance, the debt is best labeled covenant-lite debt. The expert is able

           0 =  B1 (¯
to borrow lCL       ) + 1 -  B1 (). Given low effort, high pledgeability is only
                 E            E


realized with probability . Note that internal governance straight debt and covenant-

lite straight debt are both straight debt, but set at different levels so as to induce, or not

induce, high pledgeability.


2.2. Performance-Pricing Debt versus Straight Debt

    We now evaluate performance-pricing debt, where the face value moves up from D1
   ~ 1 when the covenant is violated. It is without loss of generality to assume D1 , D
to D                                                                                  ~1 
  E
 B1 (), B1
         E
            ) . Payments below B1
           (¯                   E
                                   will never be defaulted on, whereas those
       E
above B1  ) can never be repaid. With some slight abuse of notation, let V1 D1 , D
         (¯                                                                      ~ ,
                                                                                  1

be the incumbent's payoff when she chooses effort , given the debt payments schedule




                                             19
D1 , D
     ~1 :


        ~ 1 ,  =  C2 + (1 - ) B1
V1 D1 , D                      E
                                  ) - (1 - e1 ) D1 - e1 D
                                 (¯                     ~ 1 +(1 - )  C2 - B1
                                                                           E
                                                                             () -1{=¯ }.

                                                                                       (2)

The terms on the right-hand side are straightforward. With probability , the realized

pledgeability is high. In this case, with probability , the incumbent retains her ability

and receive cash flows C2 in period 2. With probability 1 - , the incumbent loses her
                                                           E
ability, in which case she has to sell the asset at price B1  ). In both cases, she repays
                                                             (¯
                                                     ~ 1 if the covenant is triggered in
D1 to the lender if the covenant is not violated but D

error. The two events occur with probability 1 - e1 and e1 , respectively. The second

term is when the realized pledgeability is low 2 =  and the covenant is violated for
                                                     ~ 1 , if she keeps her ability the
sure. In this case, regardless of the new face value D
                       E
incumbent repays only B1 () and retains control of the firm. If she loses her ability,
                       E
however, the proceeds B1 () from selling the firm at a date-1 auction are insufficient to

repay creditors, and the incumbent receives nothing. The last term is the cost  incurred

whenever she chooses high effort  = ¯.

   High effort requires V1 D1 , D
                                ~ ,
                                 1
                                   ¯  V1 D , D
                                          1
                                             ~ ,  , which simplifies to
                                              1



                                               ~ 1  DPayIC .
                             (1 - e1 ) D1 + e1 D                                       (3)
                                                     1


This IC constraint says the maximum expected performance pricing payment consis-

tent with the incumbent choosing high pledgeability effort is the same as the incentive
                                   PayIC        P
compatible maximum straight debt, D1     . Let l0 be the maximum amount that an

expert is able to raise with an incentive compatible perform pricing loan at date 0.

Clearly, for any D1 , D
                      ~ 1 s.t. D1 , D
                                    ~ 1  BE (), BE (¯
                                          1      1 ) , the lender is willing to lend



   ¯ (1 - e1 ) D1 +      ~1 + 1 - 
                    ¯ e1 D           E
                                  ¯ B1 ()  l0
                                            P ¯ DPayIC + 1 - 
                                                                E
                                                             ¯ B1 ()  l0
                                                                       IG
                                                                          .            (4)
                                                 1




                                           20
Therefore, straight internal governance debt leads to the same expected repayment as

performance pricing and also saves on the tiny verification cost incurred in the latter.
                                                    E
Proposition 2.1: If there is no aggregate risk and B1 () < C2 , the incumbent can

borrow more with the internal governance level of straight debt than with performance-

pricing debt.

    The rationale is straightforward hence the proof is omitted. Moreover, the restric-

tion ¯ (1 - ) >  implies high pledgeability effort is in general desirable for borrowing,
         IG
so that l0  > lCL
               0 , as long as B1 () < C 2 . Of course, if the level of industry liquidity gets
                               E

                                               PayIC                  
sufficiently high such that B1
                             E
                               () = C2 , then D1     = C2 -         ¯ - .
                                                                    
                                                                            In this case covenant-

lite debt is best because lCL
                           0  = C2 . It dominates internal governance debt (because

no costly pledgeability effort is needed) and performance-pricing debt (as verification

costs are not needed).


2.3. Bank Early Verification of Covenants With or Without Monitoring

    None of the loan contracts thus far requires non-contractual intervention, nor is

performance pricing dominant, so nothing except payment default needs to be verified.

The loans could well have been held directly by investors. Can bank lending add value

here?

    The bank can intervene early and recover L. In addition, if the bank observes a

covenant violation early, it can monitor for more precise information before it de-

cides to intervene. Throughout this subsection, we assume D1  L without loss of

generality: D1 < L is always riskless so the initial bidder will, at minimum, set
                            ¯ e1                  e1
D1 = L. Let ¯ =        ¯ e1 +(1- ¯)   and  =   e1 +(1-)   be the posterior probability of high

pledgeability conditional on  = L under high and low effort, respectively. Then de-
     ¯CV = 
fine l        E
           ¯ B1  ) + (1 - 
                (¯             E
                          ¯ ) B1 () as the maximum expected payments that the bank
       1

can receive on date 1 upon a covenant violation, conditional on the incumbent manager

having chosen high effort  = ¯ . The subsequent analysis of what happens on covenant

violation depends on the comparison between the liquidation value L, the experts' bid


                                                21
                         E
under low pledgeability B1 () and l
                                  ¯CV .
                                    1


                E
    Case 1: L  B1 ()            The bank never liquidates since it is always better off seizing

and auctioning the firm at date 1 in case of non-repayment. Early verification is of

no use. Therefore, the maximum amount of borrowing with a bank-monitored loan is

(weakly) dominated by arm's length straight debt that induces internal governance.


             E
    Case 2: B1 () < L  l
                       ¯CV
                         1                  Upon covenant violation, the firm is liquidated if

and only if the bank knows that pledgeability is low, which can only happen if it has

monitored. Consider the bank's incentive to monitor. A bank that monitors at date 1/2

has an information monopoly (since the signal and 2 become public only at date 1).
                                                     ~ 1 = BE (¯
It will therefore set the renegotiated face value at D      1 ) if it has learned 2 = ¯

and liquidate to receive L if 2 = . If the bank does not monitor and simply makes a

take-it-or-leave-it offer, then D
                                ~ 1 = BE (¯
                                       1 ). Therefore, the benefit of monitoring comes
                                            9


from the bank's option to liquidate the project upon learning 2 = . If M is the benefit

from monitoring, M = (1 -          E
                          ¯ ) L - B1 () . The bank monitors if and only if M  .

    Turn now to the borrower's IC constraint in choosing high effort. If the bank

does not monitor (and therefore does not liquidate) in equilibrium, the IC constraint
                                                         ~ 1 = BE (¯
is similar to the case of performance-pricing debt, with D      1 ), i.e., (1 - e1 ) D1 +
           PayIC
    E
e1 B1  )  D1
      (¯         . If the bank does monitor, the incumbent's payoff is


  M
 V1 D1 ,  =  (1 - e1 ) C2 + (1 - ) B1
                                    E
                                       ) - D1 + e1  C2 - B1
                                      (¯                  E
                                                             ) - 1{=
                                                            (¯      ¯ } . (5)




With probability  (1 - e1 ), there is no covenant violation. If there is a covenant vio-

lation, there are two possibilities. If the bank finds pledgeability has been set high but

the covenant has been erroneously tripped (with probability e1 ), D1 is augmented


    9 In the subgame following the covenant violation and subsequent monitoring, we assume the bank can

match any offer that outsiders offer. The winners-curse effect therefore allows the monitoring bank to charge
~ 1 = BE (¯
D        1 ).




                                                    22
   ~ 1 = BE (¯
to D      1 ). With probability 1 - , pledgeability is low, and the firm is liq-

uidated with the incumbent getting nothing. The incumbent's IC constraint requires
 M
V1 D1 , ¯  V M D ,  , which holds for any D1 .10
            1   1

    Therefore, with bank monitoring, the face value of debt is not limited by the need

to provide the incumbent incentives. Intuitively, earlier the incumbent was tempted

to lower pledgeability effort because it reduced debt repayment when pledgeability

was low. Because low effort causes a higher probability of covenant violation and the

bank monitors, detects, and liquidates when pledgeability is low, the incumbent has no

incentive to shirk pledgeability effort now, and the face value of debt can be set at the

highest level.
         M
    Let l0 be the maximum initial borrowing under a loan that will induce incumbent

effort and bank monitoring. Clearly, l0
                                      M
                                        =   1 ) + 1 -  L - e1 + 1 -  . Mon-
                                         ¯ BE (¯      ¯    ¯        ¯
                         M
itoring is preferred if l0 > l0
                              IG
                                 and M  . Otherwise, the expert picks the IG level of
            PayIC
debt, D1 = D1     without any covenant, and voluntarily chooses high pledgeability ef-
                                                                              ¯                PayIC
                      M
fort. We can rewrite l0    IG
                        - l0  = ¯ e1 + 1 - ¯              ( M - ) +     ¯ e1 +(1-¯)
                                                                                       E
                                                                                      B1  ) - D1
                                                                                         (¯          ,

which is always positive as long as M  .


             E
    Case 3: B1  )  L > l
               (¯      ¯CV
                         1              Upon the covenant violation here, the project is always

liquidated unless the bank monitors and learns that pledgeability is high. If the bank
                  ~ 1 = BE (¯
monitors, it sets D      1 ) if 2 = ¯ and liquidates to receive L if 2 = . If it doesn't

monitor, it gets L instead. In this case, the benefit of monitoring comes from avoiding

liquidating the project upon learning 2 = ¯ so that M =    E
                                                        ¯ B1  ) - L . The bank
                                                             (¯

chooses to monitor if and only if M  .

    Next, let us turn to the borrower's IC constraint in effort choice. Let superscript

NM denote the case where the bank does not monitor (and therefore liquidates when-
                                                                          NM
ever the covenant is violated, even if in error). The incumbent receives V1  D1 ,  =


  10 Note   that if D1 > B1  ), only B1
                          E (¯           ) is collectible, so we just need to check the condition for all
                                      E (¯

D1        ).
       E (¯
      B1


                                                    23
 (1 - e1 ) C2 + (1 - ) B1
                        E
                           ) - D1 -1{=
                          (¯          ¯ } . The IC constraint V1
                                                               NM
                                                                  D1 , ¯  VNM D , 
                                                                           1   1

is slack for any D1 for reasons similar to the one described earlier. If the bank mon-
                               M
itors, the incumbent receives V1 D1 ,  as in the previous case. Once again, the IC
            M
constraint V1 D1 , ¯  V M D ,  is always slack for any D1 . Then l M = 
                       1   1                                      0       1 ) +
                                                                       ¯ BE (¯

1-¯ L- ¯ e1 + 1 - ¯  is unchanged. Moreover, lN M = 
                                              0                  1 )+ e1 + 1 -  L.
                                                    ¯ (1 - e1 ) BE (¯ ¯        ¯
                                                   PayIC
A simple comparison shows that l0  -l0 = 
                                N M IG
                                            1 ) - D1
                                         ¯ BE (¯         +¯ e1 + 1 - ¯              ¯CV ,
                                                                                  L-l 1

which is greater than zero because L > l
                                       ¯CV . Moreover, it is easily shown that l M > lN M
                                        1                                       0     0

if and only if M > .


2.4. Equilibrium Outcome

Combining the results, we get the following, based roughly in descending order of

liquidity 1
          E
            :

   Proposition 2.2:

          E
  (i) If B1 () = C2 , covenant-lite debt D1 = B1
                                               E
                                                  ) is chosen, which induces low effort.
                                                 (¯
                                                         PayIC
          E
 (ii) If B1 ()  [L, C2 ), internal-governance debt D1 = D1     is chosen, which in-

     duces high effort.
          E
(iii) If B1 () < L  l
                    ¯CV , debt D1 = BE (¯
                     1               1 ) with bank monitoring is chosen if and only
                                                                         PayIC
     if   (1 -          E
               ¯ ) L - B1 () . Otherwise, internal-governance debt D1 = D1     is

     chosen. In either case, high effort is chosen.
         E
(iv) If B1 ()  l
               ¯CV < L, bank debt D1 = BE (¯
                 1                      1 ) is chosen. The bank monitors if and

     only if      E
               ¯ B1  ) - L . Otherwise, the bank does not monitor and it liquidates
                    (¯

     following a covenant violation. In either case, high effort is chosen.




                                           24
                     Figure 3: Equilibrium without Aggregate Risk

    Figure 3 illustrates the equilibrium results as a function of industry liquidity 1
                                                                                     E


and the bank monitoring cost, . We will discuss it shortly.


2.5. Discussion

    Our analysis highlights the difference between external sources of corporate gover-

nance and internal sources of governance, and how this affects the source of financing.

We identify two sources of external pressure on the firm to repay ­ the threat to liqui-

date the project (or halt the further funding of project investment), which will incen-

tivize the expert to enhance her effort to raise pledgeability, and the threat to take away

the going-concern firm and sell it (a form of US Chapter XI), which is augmented by

outside expert liquidity. In many situations, these external threats enhance repayment

most when the incumbent is also incentivized to choose higher pledgeability.

    Of course, if outside experts had plenty of liquidity and could always bid full value,

the threat to sell to them would be sufficient to enforce full repayment. Pledgeability

matters when experts are insufficiently liquid to bid full value.

    Traditional models of agency and debt tend to focus on project choice. Since differ-

ent projects result in different "pies", a differential sharing of those pies with financiers

ensures the incumbent manager chooses the biggest pie. The design of financing con-

tracts is about incentivizing the right choice. In our paper, we essentially have a single



                                             25
pie. The key question is how much internal, and how much external, governance is

brought about by the specific debt contract and by the environment. That determines

how the pie is shared, and the amount financiers will put up initially for their share.

   The key external variables are the early recovery/liquidation value, L, and expert

liquidity, 1
           E
             , which enhances going-concern sale value. It is essential that the liqui-

dation value be something the bank can obtain without the borrower's co-operation ­

only then can seizing it be a strong punishment for non-cooperation. It will certainly be

high if the firm's assets sold piecemeal (as opposed to as a going concern) have strong

secondary market values, but it is also likely to be high when investment in a project

is drawn out and the bank can halt further disbursement of cash. As we have seen, the

threat of liquidation works best when the future going-concern value with low pledge-
                   E
ability (that is, B1 () ) is likely to be low. This is when expert liquidity 1
                                                                             E
                                                                               is low (see

Figure 3). In these circumstances, bank financing with monitoring dominates.

   Two points are worth noting. First, the liquidation value can be much lower than the

contracted debt, and can nevertheless be useful in ensuring it is paid back ­ by ensur-

ing the incumbent enhances the appropriable going-concern value of the firm through

pledgeability effort (see Kermani and Ma (2020) for related evidence). Second, a bank

loan with a covenant also protects the borrower from the bank when the covenant is not

violated, thus improving incentives ­ if the bank always had the right to raise rates, the

incumbent would never set pledgeability high.
                                                                        E
   However, as liquidity increases and the firm's going concern value, B1 (), exceeds

L, the bank's threat to liquidate is no longer credible, and bank finance is no longer

attractive. Interestingly, the upfront debt the firm can issue may actually fall with

higher prospective outside expert liquidity 1
                                            E
                                              as the firm transitions from bank finance

to internal governance: since the firm has to be incentivized to boost pledgeability
                                                             PayIC
without liquidation threats, external debt has to be set at D1                     E
                                                                   rather than at B1  ).
                                                                                     (¯

Therefore, the inability to get the bank to monitor has consequences for borrowing



                                           26
                                                                         PayIC
capacity. Of course, as expert liquidity increases still further, first D1     increases, and

eventually expert liquidity is so high that there is no need to incentivize pledgeability

­ debt can be set as high as C2 and be covenant lite.

    When we have no aggregate risk, performance pricing, which allows more contrac-

tual flexibility than straight debt, cannot improve over incentive compatible straight

debt. The reason is interesting. Performance pricing allows the face value of debt to

be raised from the pre-contracted value D1 , conditional on covenant violation. There

are two reasons the covenant is violated. First, pledgeability could be low, . It might

seem that raising face value in this situation should penalize the incumbent, and im-
                                                                            E
prove her incentives to choose high pledgeability. However, so long as D1  B1 (),

which it always is, raising the face value further does nothing for payment recov-

ery. Put differently, low pledgeability itself defuses the possible penalty imposed by

performance pricing. Of course, the second situation where the covenant is violated

is when it is violated in error ­ when pledgeability is actually high, ¯ . However,
                                                                E
while the face value can be raised from D1 up to a collectible B1  ), the higher face
                                                                  (¯

value acts as a disincentive to higher pledgeability effort (because it is collected when

high pledgeability is realized). This is why the performance pricing IC constraint is
                          PayIC
(1 - e1 ) D1 + e1 B1
                   E
                      )  D1
                     (¯         . Performance pricing cannot do better than setting
                                 PayIC
the straight debt face value at D1     and leaving it unchanged on covenant violation.

In sum, performance pricing cannot incentivize pledgeability more easily because the

penalty needs to be inflicted when the incumbent shirks effort, but this is precisely

when the penalty is unenforceable. Aggregate uncertainty will alter this conclusion.

    Finally, consider the role played by , the stability of the firm's technology. If

 = 1, the incumbent never loses ability and never has to sell the firm. Consequently,

higher pledgeability always hurts her by strengthening external creditor claims. The

only way to get her to raise pledgeability is for the bank to threaten to liquidate her

if she does not. Otherwise, she can get financing only to the extent available through



                                             27
                           E
external liquidity (up to B1 () ). So monitored bank finance or covenant lite debt are

her only two options. A wider range of financing options open up only when  < 1 and

the incumbent can be incentivized to raise pledgeability. Nevertheless, the availability

of unmonitored finance decreases in  because of the greater difficulty in incentivizing

pledgeability, while the availability of bank finance does not, suggesting that bank

finance dominates arm's length finance when moral hazard over pledgeability is high.

    Another interpretation of  is it is the extent to which the firm can finance new

projects from internal sources. A high  thus is most consistent with a mature firm in a

stable industry with high free cash flows and few investment opportunities ­ a class of

firms that Jensen (1986, 1989) argues is prone to high agency costs and little internal

governance.

    We will examine the empirical evidence in the next section. Note however that

performance pricing is dominated in this section because of small contracting costs

of changing the face value. Let us now add uncertainty to the model to see if that

continues to be the case.


3. Equilibrium with Aggregate Uncertainty

We will now show that with aggregate uncertainty, performance-pricing debt can be

preferred to straight debt when the state cannot be contracted on, even though the

covenant violation (based on firm-specific choices and outcomes) is prima-facie un-

correlated with the aggregate state. Intuitively, through implicit state-contingency,

performance-pricing debt can provide better incentives for high pledgeability than

straight debt.




                                          28
                               Figure 4: States of Nature

Let us introduce the following modifications to the model presented in the previous

section. With probability q, let the economy be in the good prosperous state G at date

1 where the firm generates C1 and industry liquidity is high. With probability 1 - q,

it is in the bad distressed state B, where the firm fails to generate any cash flow and

industry liquidity is low. The aggregate state is realized after pledgeability effort is

chosen, pledgeability realized, and the covenant tripped (or not). Figure 4 illustrates

the evolution of the state of nature. Note that for simplicity, the cash flow at date 2 is

assumed independent of the state at date 1.
       I , s1                                                     I ,G          I ,B
   Let 1      be the incumbent's wealth in state s1 at date 1, so 1    = C1 and 1    =
       E , s1
0. Let 1      be the state- s1 wealth of other experts who do not own any firm. The

wealth of these non-incumbent experts (who work elsewhere when not running a firm)
                                                E ,G   E ,B
is augmented when the economy is in state G, so 1    > 1    . As earlier, we assume
I ,G        E ,G                           E ,B   I ,B
1    = C1 > 1    , and for simplicity that 1    = 1    = 0, so that the incumbent

manager always has (weakly) more wealth than industry experts. Finally, to focus on

the largest number of relevant cases, we assume the difference in liquidity between the

two future states is large enough that regardless of pledgeability, possible repayment is



                                           29
higher in future state G than in future state B, that is,
               E ,G   E ,G               E ,B
Assumption 1: B1      1    + C2 > ¯ C2  B1     )
                                              (¯

Some of the cases described in Proposition 3.2 below will disappear if Assumption 1

is violated.


3.1. Internal-governance and Covenant-lite Debt

    Let us first study straight debt again. In the previous section with no uncertainty, we

determined 1 D1 , the incumbent's benefit from choosing high versus low pledgeabil-

ity effort for any given D1 . Corresponding to the parameters of each state, we can deter-
      B,PayIC        ,PayIC
mine D1       and DG
                   1        , the respective incentive compatible levels of debt if state B

or state G were to occur with certainty. With aggregate uncertainty, the risk-neutral in-

cumbent will choose high pledgeability effort if and only if qG
                                                              1 D1 + (1 - q)1 D1 
                                                                            B

                                               IC
0, where q is the probability of state G. Let D1  be the value of D1 that makes this weak

inequality equal zero. Since both G
                                  1 and 1 are weakly decreasing in D1 , it must be
                                        B

      IC
that D1  , the threshold of debt below which high effort is incentivized when the incum-
                                                                 B,PayIC        ,PayIC 11
bent has to choose effort before the state occurs, lies between D1       and DG
                                                                              1       .
                                   , s1   ¯ -  (1 - ) BE , s1 (¯    E , s1
Following Lemma 2.1, we define max
                               1        =              1       ) - B1       -  and
min, s1   ¯ -   BE , s1  - BE , s1 (¯
1       =        1          1       ) -  as the maximum and minimum of 1
                                                                       s1
                                                                          (D1 )

in state s1  {G, B}. These are the levels of flat regions on the left and right of Fig. 2,

respectively.

Lemma 3.1:

  (i) If
                                           ,G               ,B
                                      qmax
                                       1      + (1 - q) min
                                                        1       0,                                  (6)


       then
                                                   E ,G
                                              IC
                                             D1   B1     .                                          (7)


  11 Let
       D1IC be the highest value if there are multiple solutions to the equation qG D + (1 - q) B D = 0,
                                                                                  1  1         1   1
which only happens in a zero-measure parametric space.


                                                  30
         Otherwise,
                                                          E ,B
                                                    IC
                                                   D1  < B1     ) .
                                                               (¯                                        (8)


 (ii)


                                       E ,G                                           E ,B          ¯ BE , B 
          IG
         l0  =q    IC
                ¯ D1  + 1-       IC
                          ¯ min D1  , B1                       + (1 - q)        IC
                                                                         ¯ min D1  , B1     ) + 1 - 
                                                                                           (¯          1

                  E ,G           E ,G              E ,B            E ,B
          0 = q  B1 (¯
         lCL           ) + 1 -  B1     + (1 - q)  B1     ) + 1 -  B1
                                                        (¯               .


         If q is sufficiently high, there exists a unique  such that l0
                                                                      IG
                                                                         < lCL
                                                                            0 if and only if
         E ,G
         0    >  .

Proof: See appendix.

        It is useful to understand the conditions under which (6) in Lemma 3.1 is more

likely to hold. In particular, it holds when the degree of moral hazard  is low, and the

expected value of raising pledgeability in the G state itself is high. In that case, the
                                                        E ,G
face value of incentive-compatible debt is higher than B1     because there is enough

incentive to raise pledgeability emanating from the G state. Conversely, as liquidity
                E ,G
in the G state, 1    , rises, the value to raising pledgeability emanating from the G
                                           E ,B
state falls.12 If so, D1
                       IC
                          has to be below B1     ) so that some of the incentive to raise
                                                (¯

pledgeability also comes from the B state. As we will see shortly, performance pricing

will be helpful in this situation of lower face value.
                              E ,G
        An extreme case is if 1     1 -  C2 , so that higher pledgeability does not

enhance expert bids in the G state because the expert has enough wealth to bid full

value with pledgeability even at . All the incentive to raise pledgeability then comes

from state B. So to incentivize high effort, the promised payment cannot exceed D1
                                                                                 IC
                                                                                    =


                                                                        E ,G                          E ,G
  12 The   left-hand side simplifies to q (1 - ) ¯ -  C2 -   ¯ -
                                                             
                                                                   when 1    < (1 - ¯ ) C2 . But when 1    
               E ,G                                                       E ,G                           E ,G
(1 - ¯ ) C2 , B1     ) is capped at C2 , so it becomes q (1 - ) 1 -  C2 - 1
                    (¯                                                         -    ¯ -   which falls in 1
        E ,G                              
until   1       1 -  C2 , when it is -q ¯ - < 0.




                                                      31
 B,PayIC
D1       . If the probability of the good state q is sufficiently high (as shown in the ap-

pendix), it may be best to raise funds without incentivizing pledgeability ­ as covenant
                                          E ,G                 E ,G
lite debt. Even in the general case where 1    < 1 -  C2 , if B1    () is much larger
      IC
than D1  (either because liquidity in the G state is high or the moral hazard associated
                                    IC
with pledgeability is high so that D1  is low), the incumbent could commit to more
                                                 E ,G
repayment (and thus raise more) by setting D1 = B1    () and disincentivizing effort.

    The broader point is that the prospect of a highly liquid future state not only makes

feasible greater promised straight debt payments, but these high promised payments

also eliminate incentives to enhance pledgeability ­ the covenant lite situation. To

restore those incentives, debt may have to be set so low that funds raised are greatly

reduced ­ something the incumbent will not want to do if she needs to compete to

buy the firm at date 0. This situation where low-pledgeability covenant-lite loans are

attractive can occur even if the probability of the low state is significant, and even if the

direct cost  of enhancing pledgeability is zero.


3.2. Performance-Pricing Debt

    Once again, let D1 , D
                         ~ 1 be the performance-pricing debt contract. We prove in

                                                                          ~ 1 = BE ,G (¯
Lemma A.1 in the appendix that it is without loss of generality to assume D            )
                                                                                 1

                                             ~ 1 = BE ,G (¯
following a covenant violation. Intuitively, D            ) provides the harshest pun-
                                                    1

ishment for low effort choice under performance-pricing debt.

Lemma 3.2: Under Assumption 1 and e1 < e                            P
                                       ¯ 1 , there exists a unique D1 such that the

incumbent chooses high effort if and only if D1  D1
                                                  P              ~ 1 = DP , BE ,G (¯
                                                    . Under D1 , D                 ) ,
                                                                        1    1

the incumbent can raise


    P
   l0 =¯ qDG,PayIC + (1 - q) DB,PayIC + 1 - ¯ qBE ,G  + (1 - q) BE ,B  .                 (9)
           1                  1                 1                1



The expressions for e
                    ¯ 1 is contained in the appendix. Interestingly, and unlike the case

without the aggregate risk, performance pricing can do strictly better than internal-



                                             32
governance debt when there is aggregate uncertainty. Summarizing the analysis above,

we get the following result.

Proposition 3.1: Under aggregate uncertainty, if condition (6) in Lemma 3.1 holds, (i)
 IG
l0  = l0
       P
         . Internal-governance debt raises more than performance-pricing debt (by the
                                                  P
amount of the enforcement cost). Otherwise, (ii) l0 > l0
                                                       IG
                                                          so that performance-pricing
                                                                P
debt raises more than internal-governance debt. Finally, (iii) l0 > lCL
                                                                     0 always holds as
        E ,B
long as 1    < 1 -  C2 .

     Recall that if (6) holds, Lemma 3.1 states that the incentive compatible level of
                                     E ,G
                IC
straight debt, D1  , is higher than B1     . Performance pricing allows the face value
                                                                 IC
to be raised conditional on covenant violation. In the B state, D1  is already above the
                              E ,B         E ,B
possible enforceable values, B1     ) and B1
                                   (¯            , so raising the face value any further

would not alter the amount the lender could recover in that state. This then means that

from the perspective of incentivizing effort, the two states effectively reduce to the one

G state. However, we know from our analysis in the previous section that performance
                                                                   E ,G
                                                             IC
pricing cannot improve over straight debt in the G state if D1  > B1    .

     If (6) does not hold, then Lemma 3.1 states that the incentive compatible level of
                                    E ,B
                IC
straight debt, D1  , is lower than B1     ). In this case, performance pricing can indeed
                                         (¯

improve over straight debt. In particular, if the covenant is violated, the face value of
                                      E ,G
debt can be raised in the G state to B1     ) so that a higher payment can be collected.13
                                           (¯

This higher payment penalizes the incumbent if low pledgeability is realized, which

improves her incentive for high pledgeability effort.

     Of course, performance pricing can also be triggered in error when the realized

pledgeability is actually high. We know, however, that any disincentive effect of the

higher repayment triggered by covenant error can be offset by setting the payment

commensurately lower when pledgeability is high and there is no covenant error. In


                                              E ,G
  13 If   the covenant is correctly tripped, B1     can be repaid. If triggered by the type-I error, the actual
            E ,G
payment is B1     ).
                 (¯




                                                       33
sum, when the incentive compatible face value for straight debt is low as in Proposi-

tion 3.1 (ii), it can be improved upon by raising the face value and collecting more when

low pledgeability is realized in the G state. Not only does this directly increase repay-

ment to the lender, it improves the incumbent's effort incentives, and thereby further

enhances the incentive compatible level of baseline debt.

   Finally, Proposition 3.1 (iii) suggests performance-pricing debt outraises covenant-

lite debt so long as higher pledgeability improves recovery in some state. We have


         ¯ (1 - ) -  q BE ,G (¯    E ,G             E ,B       E ,B                      
l0 -l0 = 
 P CL
                              ) - B1     + (1 - q) B1     ) - B1
                                                         (¯                       -¯        > 0,
                        1
                                                                                       ¯ -
                                                                                       (10)

which always holds when ¯ (1 - ) > , E ,B < 1 -  C2 , and  is small.
                                     1



3.3. Bank Monitoring

                                              ¯CV =     E ,G               E ,B
   With some abuse of notation, let us define l 1   ¯ qB1     ) + (1 - q) B1
                                                             (¯                  ) +
                                                                                (¯
           E ,G               E ,B
(1 - ¯ ) qB1    () + (1 - q) B1    () . This is the maximum expected payment that the

bank can receive on date 1 upon a covenant violation, conditional on the incumbent

manager having chosen high effort  = ¯ . The subsequent analysis depends on the

comparison between the liquidation value L, the minimum expected continuation value
                                           E ,G               E ,B
when realized pledgeability is low, l1 = qB1    () + (1 - q) B1    (), and l
                                                                           ¯CV . Again, we
                                                                             1
                            E ,G               E ,B
assume D1  L and that L < qB1     ) + (1 - q) B1
                                 (¯                  ) ; otherwise, the firm will always
                                                    (¯

be liquidated. Since the solution with aggregate risk is qualitatively similar to that with

no aggregate risk, we will only sketch the analysis. The cases are ordered according
                                 E ,G
to decreasing state G liquidity, 1    . Recall that beyond some level of liquidity, per-

formance pricing debt will dominate internal governance debt as an alternative to bank

debt.


   Case 1: L  l1      It does not make sense to liquidate since continuation values are

always higher. Therefore, the maximum amount of borrowing under a loan that induces



                                            34
bank monitoring is always (weakly) dominated by straight debt or performance-pricing

debt, whichever raises more following Proposition 3.1.


   Case 2: l1 < L  l
                   ¯CV
                     1         Upon the covenant violation, the project is liquidated

if and only if the bank knows that pledgeability is low, which can only happen if it

has monitored. As earlier, the benefit of monitoring, M , is (1 - ¯ ) L - l1 . The bank

chooses to monitor if and only if M  .

   Next, let us turn to the borrower's IC constraint in effort choice. If the bank does

not monitor, the IC constraint is identical to the IC constraint in case of performance-

pricing debt described in Lemma 3.2. So there will be a maximum incentive compatible
               E ,G
 P
D1        P
   where D1 < B1     ). If the bank does monitor, the incumbent's IC constraint is
                    (¯
                              E ,G
always satisfied for any D1  B1     ). This is because after monitoring, the bank
                                   (¯

will liquidate the project whenever realized pledgeability is low, in which case the

incumbent receives nothing ­ there is no advantage to her to lower pledgeability.


   Case 3: L > l
               ¯CV
                 1     Upon covenant violation, the project is always liquidated unless

the bank monitors and learns that pledgeability is high. Once again, if the bank moni-
              ~ 1 = BE ,G (¯
tors, it sets D            ) if it has learned 2 = ¯ and liquidates if 2 = . The benefit
                     1

of monitoring comes from the option to avoid liquidating the project upon learning
                      E ,G               E ,B
2 = ¯ so that M = ¯ qB1     ) + (1 - q) B1
                           (¯                  ) - L . The bank chooses to monitor if
                                              (¯

and only if M  .

   It is easily shown that the incumbent's IC constraint V1 D1 , ¯  V D ,  is
                                                                     1 1

always satisfied for any D1 , regardless of whether the bank chooses to monitor (M) or
                                                                              NM
not (NM) - any liquidation on covenant violation is a powerful threat. Also, l0  >

       , l0 as long as L > l
     P IG
max l0                     ¯CV . Finally, as earlier, l M > lN M if and only if M > .
                             1                         0     0


3.4. Equilibrium Outcomes

Combining the results in the previous three cases, we have

   Proposition 3.2:

                                           35
  (i) If (6) in Lemma 3.1 holds, internal governance debt with D1 = D1
                                                                     IC
                                                                        is preferred to
                                                                   E ,G
                                                              P
     performance-pricing debt, else performance-pricing debt D1 , B1    () is chosen.

 (ii) If L < l1 , the form of debt found superior in (i) is preferred.
                 ¯CV , a monitored loan D1 = BE ,G (¯
(iii) If L  l1 , l                                  ) is chosen if and only if  
                  1                           1

     (1 - ¯ ) L - l1 . Otherwise, the form of debt found superior in (i) is preferred.
           ¯CV , a monitored loan D1 = BE ,G (¯
(iv) If L  l                                  ) is chosen if and only if       E ,G
                                                                           ¯ qB1                  E ,B
                                                                                     ) + (1 - q) B1
                                                                                    (¯                  ) - L .
                                                                                                       (¯
             1                          1
                      E ,G
     Otherwise, D1 = B1     ), and the bank liquidates the project following a covenant
                           (¯

     violation.




                       Figure 5: Equilibrium with Aggregate Risk

   Figure 5 offers a graphic illustration of the equilibrium described in Proposition 3.2,
                                              E ,G
where we have implicitly assumed the level of 1    that ensures condition (6) is satis-

fied with equality is above the level that satisfies L = l1 . Otherwise, the dashed red line

shifts towards the left, which further squeezes the region where internal-governance

debt can be optimal. The qualitative features are unchanged from those in Figure 3 ex-

cept that covenant-lite loan is always dominated by performance-pricing loan, as long
                                                                         E ,G     E ,B
as the liquidity in state B remains sufficiently low. Of course, if both 1    and 1

rise above 1 -  C2 (not illustrated in Figure 5) so that pledgeability is not needed in

either state, then covenant-lite debt always dominates all the other options.




                                             36
3.5. Discussion and Empirical Evidence

   The purpose of examining aggregate risk combined with debt contracts was to illus-

trate the rationale for performance pricing. Note that the probability of the realization

of various aggregate states is orthogonal to the probability of the covenant tripping ­

the latter is tied only to the incumbent's decision on pledgeability. Nevertheless, we

still get performance pricing as a dominant contract. The rationale is interesting. The

need to give the incumbent incentives to raise pledgeability in the presence of aggregate

uncertainty forces down the face value of the incentive compatible debt contract, and

creates room for the interest rate to be credibly raised conditional on genuine covenant

violation. This allows the face value increase to punish the shirking borrower. Note

that if state-contingent face values are hard to contract on, performance pricing brings

in state contingency through the back door because an expert's bid, and therefore re-

payment enforcement, is state contingent. Allowing loan pricing contingent on the

firm-specific news about pledgeability effort can therefore strictly improve the avail-

able set of contracts. Of course, if covenant violations and the state were correlated,

this would only strengthen the result.

   There is an extensive literature on covenants (see, for example, Smith and Warner

(1979) on covenants in public debt contracts, Bradley and Roberts (2015) in private

debt contracts, and Stromberg and Kaplan (2003) in VC contracts). There are various

categorizations of covenants. Christensen and Nikolaev (2012) term covenants that

limit leverage, or require a minimum amount of equity, "capital" covenants. Perfor-

mance covenants, on the other hand, are formulated directly in terms of cash flows or

in combination with balance sheet data (such as a debt to EBITDA ratio). Performance

covenants align well with the covenant in our paper. Since t Ct is the verifiable cash

flow, the covenant will be tripped in practice whenever the entrepreneur diverts cash

flows or puts in place weak governance, so verifiable cash flows are low. Christensen

and Nikolaev argue that performance covenants are the ones that are associated with



                                           37
contract renegotiation.

    In a more extensive study of the conditions under which contracts are renegotiated,

Nikolaev (2018) finds a positive correlation between the audit premium and the fre-

quency of renegotiation.14 The audit premium is a proxy for low pledgeability, and to

the extent that covenant violations are necessary for creditor-initiated renegotiations,

the positive correlation between audit fees and renegotiation is consistent with the

structure of our model. Interestingly, Nikolaev (2018) finds that performance pricing

contracts are significantly less likely to be renegotiated ­ the performance pricing grid

substitutes for renegotiation. Asquith, Beatty, and Weber (2005) also provide sugges-

tive evidence that performance pricing contracts are more arm's length contracts meant

to reduce the costs of monitoring and renegotiation ­ performance pricing contracts

are associated with larger loan syndicates rather than single banks (also see Saavedra

(2018)).

    Turning to predictions, we find a role for performance pricing contracts (relative

to straight debt contracts or bank debt contracts with extensive covenants) when there

is aggregate risk and prospective liquidity is high so that the baseline incentive com-

patible level of debt is low. Relative to internal governance debt (straight debt with no

covenants), our model suggest performance pricing is more likely when moral hazard

is high. Asquith, Beatty, and Weber (2005) find that performance pricing contracts

are positively associated with their proxy for moral hazard ­ whether the contract is

predicted to contain material restrictions on the borrower's financing and investment

behavior.

    The covenant in our model is also representative of what Smith and Warner (1979)

call maintenance covenants (requiring say a minimum amount of working capital)

as well as covenants requiring compliance (such as regular audited statements) and


   14 The audit premium is the unexplained variation in a linear regression of the natural log of audit fees on

a set of their determinants. It is an accounting measure of low transparency and information quality about a
firm's performance



                                                     38
covenants limiting mergers and acquisitions (so as to limit entrenching investment).

Entrenching investment, which requires substantial management input in the future,

and thus entrenches future managerial rents, reduces future pledgeability. Covenants

that limit capital expenditure thus discourage managerial actions lowering pledgeabil-

ity. More research on when such covenants are used is warranted.


4. Extensions

   It is useful to relax assumptions/extend the model in some directions.


4.1. Covenant Tightness

   Suppose the type-I error of the covenant violation e1 is chosen by the bank. It incurs

some convex cost  (1 - e1 ) that satisfies,  (1 - e
                                                  ¯ ) = 0,  > 0 and  > 0, where e
                                                                                ¯

can be thought as the maximum probability of a type-I error. A higher e1 corresponds

to a slacker covenant. What would the optimal choice be? Consider the case without

aggregate uncertainty, the uncertainty case is qualitatively similar.

   If liquidity is sufficiently high such that B1
                                                E
                                                    L , e1 = e
                                                             ¯ is chosen. This is be-

cause early liquidation never occurs. This corresponds to the loosest covenant, when

bank debt is equivalent to arm's length debt (this is an alternative interpretation of

covenant lite). Recall that if the bank chooses to monitor upon a covenant violation,
                                            M
the amount that the incumbent can raise is l0 =   1 ) + 1 -  L - e1 + 1 -  .
                                               ¯ BE (¯      ¯    ¯        ¯

Clearly, a lower e1 reduces the cost the bank incurs in unnecessary monitoring, so e1

is chosen to maximize -¯ e1  -  (1 - e1 ). If the bank always liquidates the project
                                                                            NM
following a covenant violation, the amount that the incumbent can raise is l0  =

             1 ) + e1 + 1 -  L. Clearly, a lower e1 reduces the chances the bank
¯ (1 - e1 ) BE (¯  ¯        ¯

liquidates inefficiently, so e1 is chosen to maximize -      1 ) - L -  (1 - e1 ). In
                                                       ¯ e1 BE (¯

both cases, e1 is optimally set less than e
                                          ¯ . The broader point is that bank covenants are

more detailed and precisely set than covenants in public debt because bank monitoring



                                           39
costs and the value consequences of bank actions are higher (see, for example, Kahan

and Tuckman (1995)).


4.2. Maximizing borrowing vs. maximizing payoff

   For simplicity, we have assumed the expert's objective is to maximize her upfront

borrowing. An alternative is to assume an expert owns the project idea and needs to

borrow to make a fixed amount of investment upfront. Conditional on being able to

borrow that amount, the incumbent will try to avoid loan contracts that cause a surplus

loss. First, under the assumption C2 > L, liquidation is always costly. Since liquidation

will occur only under bank financing, this suggests a reason why the incumbent would

prefer internal-governance debt and performance-pricing debt over bank financing. The

second source of surplus loss comes if the incumbent loses her ability and must resell
                                                                             E
the asset. In this case, the future incumbent earns rents amounting to C2 - B1 (2 ).

Clearly, a contract that induces higher effort ¯ reduces the rents to future acquirers and

increases the initial incumbent's surplus.

   In a model that requires a fixed amount of investment, the expert will be forced to

use bank debt if this is the only contract that allows her to borrow enough. Otherwise,

she would avoid using it, because it which might lead to early liquidation.


4.3. Banks Contributing to Pledgeability

   Thus far, banks only choose whether to intervene if there is a covenant violation.

In practice, intermediaries may do more to improve the governance of their borrower

(this may be a role played by banks in less financially developed markets; in devel-

oped markets by banks for small young firms, by venture capitalists (VCs) for young

innovative firms, and by private equity for large mature firms). For instance, VCs often

work to make the enterprise more transparent, governable, and acceptable to the stock

market (see Hellmann and Puri (2002), Rajan (2012)).




                                             40
   We extend our model to study this role of financial intermediaries. For simplicity,

we assume ¯ = 1 and  = 0 so that there is a one-to-one mapping between the incum-

bent's effort and the realized pledgeability. Before the incumbent sets pledgeability,

the bank could augment its final value by 2 after paying an additional cost  where

2  0, ¯ . The date-1 bid of experts is then BE (2 , 2 ) = min E + (2 + 2 ) C2 , C2 .
                                             1                1

   Following the analysis in section 2, it is straightforward to show that the incumbent
                                                                PayIC
expert will choose high pledgeability 2 = ¯ if and only if D1  D1     (2 ), where
 PayIC                                                 PayIC ¯  PayIC
D1     (2 ) =  B1
                E
                  , 2 + (1 - ) B1
                                E
                                   , 2 ) - . Clearly, D1
                                  (¯                           D1     (0),
                                             E
with the inequality being strict so long as B1 , 0 < C2 . So high bank-determined

pledgeability 2 = ¯ will increase the incumbent's incentive-compatible level of debt

(unless liquidity is high enough that pledgeability is never needed).

   Next, let us turn to the bank's incentive in choosing pledgeability. The bank chooses

2 = ¯ if and only if


                    min D1 , B1
                              E
                                2 , ¯ - min D1 , B1
                                                  E
                                                    (2 , 0)  .                      (11)


   It is straightforward to show that the banker's incentive to increase pledgeability
                                                                   PayIC ¯
(the left hand side of the constraint above) is maximized at D1 = D1      . This illus-
                                                                 PayIC ¯
trates an interesting double-blessing effect. Intuitively, D1 = D1      is the highest

claim that incentivizes 2 = ¯ if 2 = ¯ . However, such a high level of debt will in-

duce the incumbent to choose 2 =  if 2 = 0. This means the incumbent expert will

choose high pledgeability if and only if the bank also increases pledgeability. There-
                                                                              PayIC ¯
fore, in addition to giving the bank the maximum benefit of raising 2 , D1 = D1     

will also induce high firm pledgeability. In this sense, firm internal governance and

bank governance can complement each other. Any higher debt level will induce only

the bank to raise pledgeability (a "single-blessing", which lowers the bank's incentive

to do so), while a lower debt level will diminish the bank's incentive to incur cost .




                                           41
4.4. Intermediation and Intermediary Capital

    So far, we have implicitly assumed the bank will retain all the loans on its balance

sheet and that the banker is self-financed. If the bank originates loans and finances

them by raising money from investors, it will need to be provided incentives to take

costly actions such as verification or monitoring. We now analyze the implications for

bank capital (skin in the game).

    Incentive compatibility requires that a sufficiently large part of the benefit from a

costly action accrues to the intermediary. In other words, the intermediary must retain

"skin in the game," a sufficiently large claim whose value is increased by the costly

action. We can see this most easily in the case of certainty. For instance, consider
                             E
Case 2 in section 2.3 where B1 () < L  l
                                       ¯CV . Without monitoring, the bank will not
                                        1
                                              E
liquidate the project. The repayment is then B1  ) with probability 
                                                (¯                         E
                                                                    ¯ and B1 () with

probability 1 - ¯ . We would like to implement monitoring and liquidation following a

covenant violation. This can be accomplished as long as M = (1 -          E
                                                                 ¯ ) L - B1 ()  .

The required bank capital structure is, in general, not unique, once the bank's stake is

sufficiently sensitive to its actions. One feasible capital structure is for the bank to issue
                                       E
debt claims on itself with face value B1 (). Next, it sells a fraction  of the equity and

retains a fraction 1 - , which satisfies (1 - ) (1 -          E
                                                     ¯ ) L - B1 () = .15

    Of course, when monitoring and verification are not needed (for example, inter-

nal governance debt or covenant lite debt), the intermediary can sell or borrow against

the entire loan. Thus the demand for intermediary to have skin in the game is high-

est in times of low prospective liquidity. Conversely, full pass through funding (with

no requirement for intermediary skin in the game) will occur in times of high future

liquidity.

    More generally, he form of the intermediary's skin in the game may vary with the


                                   om and Tirole (1997), DeMarzo and Duffie (1999), and Park (2000). Hu
  15 Similar results are in Holmstr¨

and Varas (2020) present a dynamic model in which intermediary cannot commit to its skin-in-the-game.
The pricing impact deters the intermediary from selling too soon and too aggressively.



                                                  42
nature of the desired intermediary intervention. If the intermediary is simply required

to collect information to verify covenant violation (or screen out bad borrowers in a

model of adverse selection), it is sufficient that the skin in the game take the form of a

pari passu share in the loan repayments, or a junior stake in them (bank or securitization

equity). Of course, if the intermediary could delegate some of this information produc-

tion to an accounting firm (by requiring timely audited financial statements), the cost

of information production might be (close to) zero, and the loan could (almost) totally

sold or borrowed against, with little intermediary skin in the game. If, however, the in-

termediary has to exert costly effort to decide whether to liquidate, it must get a strictly

positive payment from liquidation. In this case, it can help to have the loan made by the

intermediary be effectively senior to some other claims on the project (see Park (2000),

Rajan and Winton (1995)), and the intermediary's stake in the loan repayments should

be sufficiently large and sensitive to its monitoring and liquidation actions.

    Empirically, periods with extremely high liquidity would thus be associated with

either entry by highly levered intermediaries (such as pass through securitization ve-

hicles) who do not screen or monitor and have a tiny fraction of junior claim retained

as "skin in the game", or a switch by banks to higher leverage and a suspension of

monitoring.16 The securitization vehicles can buy loans originated by banks or other

intermediaries and the loans will be covenant lite. Thus covenant lite loans will have a

large market share at times when intermediary leverage is high and non-bank lending

increases. From a policy perspective, demanding that intermediaries hold more skin in

the game during the period of high liquidity may be ineffective. It may simply accen-

tuate the move toward lending structures that minimized intermediary involvement.

    In sum, our discussion in this subsection focuses on the demand for intermedi-

ary services and consequently for intermediary capital as liquidity conditions vary. In


  16 See Diamond (1984), DeMarzo (2005), DeMarzo and Duffie (1999), and Gorton and Souleles (2006)

for related work on the benefits of securitization.




                                               43
contrast, most of the analysis of intermediary asset pricing and intermediary capital has

studied the effects of variation in the supply of intermediary capital (see Holmstr¨
                                                                                   om and

Tirole (1997), Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014), Rampini and Vishwanthan (2019)

and He and Krishnamurthy (2013) for example). In such models, fluctuations in re-

payments shock intermediary net worth, and thus the supply of intermediary capital.

Because some types of monitored lending can only occur if the intermediaries have

sufficient own net worth, these shocks have pervasive effects of their own (in addition

to their direct effects on intermediary net worth).


4.5. Alternative Interpretations of Liquidity and Agency Problems

     Note that a range of agency problems can be addressed by future bidders bidding

with their own wealth. Underlying this is the assumption that there is no problem with

the underlying asset (the firm), and its full production possibilities can be obtained

in large measure by seizing and selling the asset to the right expert. If, however, the

asset itself (and the cash flows that can be produced with it), rather than the human

capital that controls it, is of variable and hidden quality, future liquidity will be of little

help in correcting malfeasance. Similarly, if the incumbent can make away with the

asset in period 1 before it can be sold upon default, date-1 liquidity will be of little

use. The broader point is that prospective liquidity can correct a variety of problems of

asymmetric information and moral hazard, not all.


4.6. Complete Contracts

     If the aggregate state were observable and verifiable and could be written into con-

tracts, and there was no other reason to use debt contracts (such as tax advantages), then

the face values on date 1 could be made state contingent.17 If so, the results without ag-

gregate risk apply, state by state. The contract which raises the largest initial proceeds


   17 Our results are unchanged if the incumbent's project is risk free and only industry liquidity varies by

state. In that case, to justify debt contracts, it is sufficient (and plausible) to require that contracts cannot be
contingent on outside expert liquidity.


                                                        44
in that state is chosen. There will be no need for performance pricing to deal with

pledgeability incentives. With debt contracts (as we have seen) or contracts contin-

gent on a noisy measure of the aggregate state, we will recover a role for performance

pricing.

   Finally, even with debt contracts let alone complete contracts, there is no gain from

making contract payments contingent on the loss of ability of the incumbent. To see

this, let us assume the one-period debt is denoted as D     1-
                                                       1 , D1  , where the payment due

depends on whether the incumbent retains her ability or not. In the case without the

aggregate uncertainty, the IC constraint in choosing high effort is

                                                      
            C2 - D            E
                                 ) - D1
                  1 + (1 - ) B1 (¯
                                        -
                                          -               C2 - B1
                                                                E
                                                                  () ,             (12)
                                      1
                                                    ¯ -


which implies the expected payments satisfy  D            1-
                                              1 + (1 - ) D1
                                                               PayIC
                                                              D1     . Therefore, in

the case of straight debt, making debt payments contingent on the incumbent's ability

does not alter either the incumbent's IC constraint or the expected amount that the

lender can collect.


4.7. Immediate Increases in Pledgeability

   We have shown that current pledgeability choices and the incentives for improved

governance depend on prospective liquidity through its effect on future bids by experts.

This follows because we assume that the effort decision made by the initial incumbent

influences future pledgeability, i.e., cash flows produced on date 2. Meanwhile, the

pledgeability of date-1 cash flows stays unchanged (with pledgeability being zero).

While this is plausible, our key results go through without assuming it. In Appendix

A.2, we analyze the model where the incumbent's effort changes both the current and

future pledgeability, i.e., cash flows produced on both dates. A main difference between

pledging out cash flows C1 and C2 is that, the former forces the incumbent to pay more

and does not affect how much the incumbent can sell the firm for in the event that she



                                           45
loses her ability, whereas the latter does affect the sale price. Therefore, compared

to the model where 1 , the pledgeability of date-1 cash flows, is fixed, the maximum

amount that an expert can raise at date 0 is never increased. If straight debt is used, this

amount may actually be lower, because the incentive to choose high effort is further

reduced.

   Bank verification and monitoring become more attractive, because the threat of

liquidation remains a powerful incentive device. Essentially, pledgeable cash flows

paid out before financing or sale needs arise cannot either reduce the cost of financing

or increase the proceeds from selling the firm. Instead, they may even disincentivize

pledgeability effort when pledgeability efforts sets pledgeability from now into the fu-

ture. This is a downside associated with cash flows that mature before financing needs

arise: pledging them is akin to securing short term debt, potentially crowding out in-

centives for internal governance, and forcing the lender to rely on monitoring plus

liquidation.

   The broader point is that allowing for effort to change both current and future

pledgeability only changes the model quantitatively. It will not eliminate the result

that the governance incentives decrease with increased prospective liquidity.


5. Conclusion

    While this paper describes how financial intermediation varies with prospective

liquidity in the underlying real borrowing sector, there is a more general point here.

Liquidity tends to diminish the consequences of many kinds of moral hazard over re-

payment. Internal governance matters little if the firm can be seized and sold for full

repayment in a chapter 11 bankruptcy. Therefore, prospective liquidity encourages

leverage at both the borrower and intermediary level, even while requiring less gover-

nance. Equivalently, because the intermediary performs fewer useful functions, high

prospective liquidity encourages disintermediation.



                                            46
   Risky loans to highly leveraged borrowers, made by highly leveraged intermedi-

aries, may therefore not be evidence of systemic moral hazard or over-optimism, but

may simply be a consequence of high prospective liquidity crowding out intermedia-

tion. Such crowding out may, of course, have adverse consequences. As prospective

liquidity fades and the demand for intermediation services expands again, the need for

intermediary capital also increases. To the extent that intermediary capital is run down

in periods when liquidity is expected to be plentiful, it may not be available in sufficient

quantities when liquidity conditions turn and demand for capital ramps up. Prospective

liquidity breeds a dependence on continued liquidity for debt enforcement as it crowds

out other modes of enforcement, especially corporate governance. This will make debt

returns more skewed.

   We have not examined multiple claims on the same firm and the relationship be-

tween creditors (see, for example, Bolton and Scharfstein (1996) or Diamond (1993)).

We have also not explored how intermediaries might behave as the demand for their

services wax and wane. Can they shrink easily after having expanded, or do they com-

pete for mandates even when they have little comparative advantage relative to other

forms of finance? Does this contribute to financial fragility? We have also not explored

other factors that would increase prospective liquidity such as accommodative mon-

etary policy or irrational exuberance. Finally, at a macroeconomic level, liquidity is

endogenous and deserves to be explored further (see, for example, Kiyotaki and Moore

(1997)). These are important areas for future research.




                                            47
Appendix A. Proofs

                                   s1
Proof of Lemma 3.1. Let us define V1  D1 , ¯ , V s1 D ,  , and  s1 (D1 ) as in section
                                                1    1         1
                          E ,G     E ,B             ,G               ,B
2. Assumption 1 leads to B1     > B1     ). If qmax
                                        (¯      1      + (1 - q) max
                                                                 1      > 0, then


             ,PayIC     (1 - q)   E ,B       E ,B           E ,G
     IC
    D1  = DG        -            B1     ) - B1
                                       (¯          +     > B1     .             (A.1)
           1               q                         ¯ -


Otherwise,


         B,PayIC      q          E ,G       E ,G          E ,B
   IC
  D1  = D1       +       (1 - ) B1     ) - B1
                                      (¯          -    < B1     ) .
                                                               (¯               (A.2)
                     1-q                            -
                                                    ¯

                 IC
The solution to D1  is unique unless


          E ,G       E ,G                        E ,B       E ,B      
q (1 - ) B1     ) - B1
               (¯          -         = (1 - q)  B1     ) - B1
                                                      (¯          +       ,
                                  -
                                  ¯                                 -
                                                                    ¯
                                                                      (A.3)
                                                E ,G                B,PayIC
in which case we pick the highest solution. At B1     = C2 , D1
                                                              IC
                                                                 = D1       . In this
             B,PayIC              ¯ BE ,B  , and lCL = qC2 +(1 - q)  BE ,B (¯         E ,B
       IG
case, l0  = D1       +(1 - q) 1 -    1            0                   1     ) + 1 -  B1     .
                                      IG
A comparison between them shows that l0  < lCL
                                            0 if and only if



                     B,PayIC           ¯ (1 - ) -  BE ,B (¯    E ,B
             q C2 - D1       > (1 - q)              1     ) - B1     ,          (A.4)


which holds if q is sufficiently high. In this case,  exists. The uniqueness follows
                                                  E ,G       E ,G          E ,G
                                0 with respect to 1                < C2 = B1     ).
                          IG
from the monotonicity of l0  - lCL                     once B1                  (¯




                                         48
Proof of Lemma 3.2. Let us write down the incumbent's IC constraint in choosing high

effort:


 ¯ (1 - e1 ) q C2 + (1 - ) BE ,G (¯                             E ,B
                                  ) - D1 + (1 - q) C2 + (1 - ) B1                   E ,B
                                                                      ) - min D1 , B1
                                                                     (¯                   )
                                                                                         (¯
                            1

 +¯ e1 q C2 - BE ,G (¯                  E ,B
                     ) + (1 - q)  C2 - B1     ) + 1 - 
                                             (¯       ¯ q C2 - BE ,G  + (1 - q)  C2 - BE ,B    -
               1                                                1                      1
                            E ,G                                E ,B                E ,B
   (1 - e1 ) q C2 + (1 - ) B1     ) - D1 + (1 - q) C2 + (1 - ) B1
                                 (¯                                   ) - min D1 , B1
                                                                     (¯                   )
                                                                                         (¯
             E ,G                     E ,B                   E ,G                   E ,B
 +e1 q C2 - B1     ) + (1 - q)  C2 - B1
                  (¯                        ) + 1 -  q C2 - B1
                                           (¯                      + (1 - q)  C2 - B1          .
                                                                  (A.5)

While seemingly complicated, the inequality is straightforward: with probability  (1 - e1 ),

the realized pledgeability is high, and the covenant is not violated. In this case, the in-
                                      E , s1                         E , s1
cumbent manager receives C2 + (1 - ) B1       ) and repays min D1 , B1
                                             (¯                              ) . With
                                                                            (¯

probability e1 , however, the type-I error occurs, in which case D1 is augmented
   ~ 1 = BE ,G (¯                                                        E , s1
to D      1     ). Therefore, the incumbent only receives a payoff C2 - B1       )
                                                                                (¯

if she retains her ability. With probability (1 - ), the realized pledgeability is low

and the covenant is correctly triggered. In this case, the incumbent receives a payoff
      E , s1
C2 - B1       if she retains her ability. Finally, the incumbent incurs the cost of effort

. This constraint is easily simplified to

                       E ,G                        E ,B                    
          (1 - e1 ) q B1     ) - D1 + (1 - q) max B1
                            (¯                           ) - D1 , 0 -
                                                        (¯               ¯ -
                                                                                       (A.6)
               E ,G       E ,G             E ,B       E ,B
            q B1     ) - B1
                    (¯          + (1 - q) B1     ) - B1
                                                (¯                   .


Given that the left-hand side is decreasing in D1 , the condition on e1 follows from

evaluating the constraint at D1 = 0. In particular, the detailed expression is

                   E ,G       E ,G             E ,B       E ,B                 
                q B1     ) - B1
                        (¯          + (1 - q) B1     ) - B1
                                                    (¯                   +   ¯ -
    ¯1 = 1 -
    e                             E ,G               E ,B
                                                                                   .   (A.7)
                                qB1     ) + (1 - q) B1
                                       (¯                  )
                                                          (¯

                                   E ,B
Evaluating the constraint at D1 = B1     ), we get two cases.
                                        (¯




                                            49
 (i) If
                                 E ,G       E ,B            
                    (1 - e1 ) q B1     ) - B1
                                      (¯          ) -
                                                 (¯       ¯ -   
                                                                                         (A.8)
                        E ,G       E ,G             E ,B       E ,B
                     q B1     ) - B1
                             (¯          + (1 - q) B1     ) - B1
                                                         (¯                     ,


     then

             E ,G                       E ,G       E ,G             E ,B       E ,B
        P
       D1 = B1     ) -
                  (¯      q(1-e1 )   q B1     ) - B1
                                             (¯          + (1 - q) B1     ) - B1
                                                                         (¯         
                         E ,B
       - q(1-e )(¯ -) > B1 (¯ ) .
                1
                                                                                         (A.9)

 (ii) Otherwise,

              E ,G               E ,B                        E ,G       E ,G             E ,B       E ,B
        P
       D1 = qB1     ) + (1 - q) B1
                   (¯                  ) -
                                      (¯           1-e1   q B1     ) - B1
                                                                  (¯          + (1 - q) B1     ) - B1
                                                                                              (¯         
                       E ,B
       - (1-e )(¯ -)  B1 (¯ ) .
            1
                                                                                        (A.10)

Lemma A.1: in performance-pricing debt, it is without loss of generality to assume
~ 1 = BE ,G (¯
D            ).
       1

Proof: Let us write down the IC constraint under D1 , D
                                                      ~1 :


 ¯ (1 - e1 ) q C2 + (1 - ) BE ,G (¯                             E ,B
                                  ) - D1 + (1 - q) C2 + (1 - ) B1                   E ,B
                                                                      ) - min D1 , B1
                                                                     (¯                   )
                                                                                         (¯
                            1

 +¯ (1 - e1 ) q C2 + (1 - ) BE ,G (¯   ~ 1 + (1 - q) C2 + (1 - ) BE ,B (¯
                                   ) - D                                        ~ 1 , BE ,B (¯
                                                                        ) - min D            )
                             1                                    1                    1

 + 1-¯ q C2 + (1 - ) BE ,G  - D                                      ~ 1 , BE , B 
                              ~ 1 + (1 - q) C2 + (1 - ) BE ,B  - min D                                        -
                      1                                  1                  1
                                  E ,G                                      E ,B                    E ,B
   (1 - e1 ) q C2 + (1 -       ) B1       ) - D1 + (1 - q) C2 + (1 -
                                         (¯                              ) B1     )
                                                                                 (¯   - min   D1 , B1     )
                                                                                                         (¯
                                 E ,G                                       E ,B            ~ 1 , BE ,B (¯
 + (1 - e1 ) q C2 + (1 -      ) B1       ) - D
                                        (¯   ~ 1 + (1 - q) C2 + (1 -     ) B1     )
                                                                                 (¯   - min D      1     )
                       E ,G   ~ 1 + (1 - q) C2 + (1 - ) BE ,B  - min D
                                                                     ~ 1 , BE , B 
 + 1 -  q C2 + (1 - ) B1     -D                          1                  1                                 .
                                                                  (A.11)

Meanwhile, the goal is to maximize


  P
 l0 =¯ (1 - e1 ) qD1 + (1 - q) min D1 , BE ,B (¯
                                               ) +              ~ 1 + (1 - q) min D
                                                   ¯ (1 - e1 ) qD                 ~ 1 , BE ,B (¯
                                                                                               )
                                         1                                               1

 + 1-   ~ 1 + (1 - q) BE ,B  - .
     ¯ qD
                       1
                                                                                        (A.12)


                                              50
     1 , D1 be the solution. If we increase D1 and decrease D1 such that l0 is un-
Let D    ~                                  ~                             P


changed, it is straightforward to see that the IC constraint gets more slack because

¯ > .

Q.E.D.


Appendix A.1. Type-II error

     For simplicity, we have assumed that the signal  only involves a type-I error. A

type-II error, where low pledgeability may not trigger a covenant violation, will only

change the results qualitatively, as we show in this subsection ­ it makes it harder to

incentivize effort. Specifically, let us assume that if 2 = , the signal is  = H with

probability e2 and  = L with probability 1 - e2 . In this case, we need to redefine
             ¯ e1
¯=   ¯ e1 +(1-  ¯ )(1-e2 ) .   Again, we are going to focus on the case without the aggregate risk.

     In the case of performance-pricing debt, the incumbent's payoff stays unchanged

(and remains no better than straight debt.) The incumbent could retain control by
        E
paying B1 ().

     The presence of the type-II error reduces the incumbent's incentive to choose high

effort under monitoring. To see this, suppose that the bank monitors following a

covenant violation and liquidates the project if it learns the pledgeability is low. In

this case, the incumbent's IC constraint in choosing high effort becomes


 ¯ (1 - e1 ) C2 + (1 - ) BE (¯
                          1 ) - D1 + e1  C 2 - B1 (¯
                                     ¯          E
                                                   ) + 1 - ¯ e2  C2 - BE  - 
                                                                       1

   (1 - e1 ) C2 + (1 - ) B1
                          E
                             ) - D1 + e1  C2 - B1
                            (¯                  E
                                                   ) + 1 -  e2  C2 - B1
                                                  (¯                  E
                                                                          .
                                                                   (A.13)

If e2 = 0, this constraint is always slack whenever D1  B1
                                                         E
                                                            ). Under a general e2 ,
                                                           (¯
                                                    (1-e2 )C2 +(1-e1 -) B1    +e2  B1
                                                                          E (¯ )    E
                                                                                                
the constraint holds if and only if D1                            (1-e1 )                - (¯ -)(1-e1 ) . The

higher is e2 , the lower the right hand side, and lower the incentive compatible level of

debt.

     By a similar argument, in the case of aggregate uncertainty an increase in the proba-

bility of a high type-II error will reduce the amount that can be raised with performance

                                                      51
pricing, whenever performance pricing raises more than straight debt.


Appendix A.2. Current and Future Pledgeability

     Let us elaborate on how our results vary when the incumbent's effort affects both

contemporaneous and future pledgeability. We keep assuming 2  , ¯ and now

allow 1   , ¯ 1 . The model presented in the paper corresponds to the case where
               1

 =¯ 1 = 0. In this model, whenever the incumbent chooses effort   ,
                                                                  ¯  , with
 1

probability , 2 = ¯ and 1 = ¯ 1 . With probability 1 - , 2 =  and 1 =  .
                                                                                        1

Throughout, we focus on the case without aggregate uncertainty so that the results can
                                                    ~ 1 D ,  be the incumbent's payoff
be directly comparable with those in section 2. Let V    1

when she chooses  :
 ~ 1 D ,  =   C2 - Min BE (¯
                        1 ), D1 + (1 - ) B1 (¯
                                             ) - Min B1  ), D1 + (1 - 
                                          E           E
 V    1                                                 (¯            ¯ 1 ) C1

             + (1 - )  C2 - Min B1 (), D1 + (1 - ) B1 () - Min B1 (), D1 + 1 -  C1 - 1{=¯} ,
                                 E                  E           E
                                                                                             1

             =V1 D1 ,  +  (1 - ¯ 1 ) C1 + (1 - ) 1 -  C1 ,
                                                              1
                                                                                    (A.14)

where V1 D1 ,  is the payoff shown in subsection 2.A under 1  0. Similarly, let us

define ~ D = V
        1 1
             ~ D ,
               1 1
                      ~ D ,  , which simplifies into 
                   ¯ -V
                       1 1
                                                     ~ D =  D -
                                                      1 1  1 1

¯ -                                                            ~ PayIC =
    ¯ 1 -  C1 , where 1 D1 is the same as in Lemma 2.1. Define D
               1                                                 1
                                                                      ~ PayIC = DPayIC -
 B1
  E
    () + (1 - ) B1
                 E
                    ) -
                   (¯     ¯ 1 -  C 1 - (
                                        ¯ -) , which is shown also as D1         1
                                 1

¯ 1 -  C1 . There are two cases.
        1

        ~ PayIC > BE (), then under straight debt, D
 (i) If D                                          ~ PayIC is the maximum face value
          1        1                                 1

      that still induces high effort. In this case, the initial expert can borrow


                      ~IG  
                      l 0
                           ¯         ~ PayIC + 1 - 
                             ¯ 1C1 + D             ¯  C1 + B1
                                                            E
                                                              () .                  (A.15)
                                       1                          1



      Note that in the benchmark model where 1   ,
                                                          1


                IG
               l0  ¯  C1 + DPayIC + 1 - 
                                        ¯  C1 + B1
                                                 E      ~IG .
                                                   () = l0                          (A.16)
                          1 1                         1




                                             52
     In other words, the ability to increase current pledgeability 1 does not increase

     the overall amount that the experts can borrow under internal-governance debt.

     Obviously, the amount that can be raised under covenant-lite debt will stays un-

     changed. Given so, the amount under performance-pricing debt also stays un-

     changed. Bank loan with monitoring is able to raise more


                  ~M = 
                  l    ¯ ¯ 1C1 + B1
                                  E
                                     ) + 1 - 
                                    (¯       ¯ L- ¯ e1 + 1 - ¯ ,                 (A.17)
                   0



     which exceeds the amount


                      M
                     l0 =¯  C1 + B1
                                  E
                                     ) + 1 - 
                                    (¯       ¯ L- ¯ e1 + 1 - ¯                   (A.18)
                              1



     if 1   . Therefore, bank loans can be more attractive.
              1
         ~ PayIC  BE (), then under straight debt, high effort in choosing pledgeability
 (ii) If D 1       1

     can never been induced. Performance-pricing debt cannot do better either, be-

     cause the elevated face value later will require an even lower face value to begin

     with. Bank monitoring in this case will be more helpful, because the threat of

     liquidation is still sufficient to induce high effort.



Appendix B. References


Asquith, P., Beatty A., Weber, J., 2005. Performance Pricing in Bank Debt Contracts.
Journal of Accounting & Economics 40, 101-128.

Acharya, Viral and S. Viswanathan (2011), " Leverage, Moral Hazard, and Liquidity,"
Journal of Finance 66: 99-138.

Adrian, T., & Shin, H. S. (2010). Liquidity and leverage. Journal of Financial Inter-
mediation, 19(3), 418-437.

Begley, Taylor A., and Amiyatosh Purnanandam. "Design of financial securities: Em-
pirical evidence from private-label RMBS deals." The Review of Financial Studies 30,
no. 1 (2016): 120-161.

                                             53
Benmelech, E., Dlugosz, J., & Ivashina, V. (2012). Securitization without adverse
selection: The case of CLOs. Journal of Financial Economics, 106(1), 91-113.

Benmelech, E., Kumar, N., Rajan, R., 2020. The decline of secured debt. Working
Paper

Berlin, M., and L. J. Mester. 1992. Debt covenants and renegotiation. Journal of
Financial Intermediation 2:95­133.

Ben S. Bernanke and Mark Gertler, "Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of
Monetary Policy Transmission", The Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 9, No. 4
(Autumn, 1995), pp. 27-48

Patrick Bolton and David Scharfstein (1996), Optimal Debt Structure and the Number
of Creditors, The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 104, No. 1 (Feb., 1996), pp. 1-25

Bord, Vitaly M., and Joao AC Santos. "Does securitization of corporate loans lead to
riskier lending?." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 47, no. 2-3 (2015): 415-444.

Borio, Claudio, 2014, The financial cycle and macroeconomics: What have we learnt? Jour-
nal of Banking and Finance 45, 182-198.

Bradley, Michael, and Michael R Roberts, 2015. The structure and pricing of corporate
debt covenants. Quarterly Journal of Finance 5. 1­37.

Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Yuliy Sannikov. "A macroeconomic model with a fi-
nancial sector." American Economic Review 104, no. 2 (2014): 379-421.

Chemla, Gilles, and Christopher A. Hennessy. "Skin in the game and moral haz-
ard." The Journal of Finance 69, no. 4 (2014): 1597-1641.

Chava, S., and M. Roberts. 2008. How Does Financing Impact Investment? The Role
of Debt Covenants. Journal of Finance 63:2085­121.

Christensen, Hans B., and Valeri V. Nikolaev. "Capital versus performance covenants
in debt contracts." Journal of Accounting Research 50, no. 1 (2012): 75-116.

Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, Bengt Holmstr¨om, and Guillermo Ordonez. "Banks as
secret keepers." American Economic Review 107, no. 4 (2017): 1005-29.

DeMarzo, P. (2005). The pooling and tranching of securities: a model of informed
intermediation, Review of Financial Studies, 18 (1), 1-35.

DeMarzo P and D. Duffie (1999). A liquidity-based model of security design, Econo-
metrica, 67, 65-99.



                                         54
Diamond, Douglas W., (1984), Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring,
Review of Economic Studies, 51, 393-414.

Diamond, Douglas W., (1991) "Monitoring and Reputation: The Choice Between Bank
Loans and Directly Placed Debt," Journal of Political Economy.

Diamond, D. W. 1993. Seniority and maturity of debt contracts. Journal of Financial
Economics 33:341­68.

Diamond, D. W., Hu, Y., and Rajan, R. G. (2019). Pledgeability, liquidity, and fi-
nancing cycles (No. w23055). National Bureau of Economic Research, forthcoming,
Journal of Finance.

Dichev, I., and D. Skinner. 2002. Large Sample Evidence on the Debt Covenant Hy-
pothesis. Journal of Accounting Research 40:1091­123.

Dow, James, Gary Gorton and Arvind Krishnamurthy (2005), "Equilibrium Investment
and Asset Prices under Imperfect Corporate Control," American Economic Review, 95:
359-681

Eisfeldt, Andrea and Adriano Rampini (2006), "Capital reallocation and liquidity"
Journal of Monetary Economics 53, 369-399.

Eisfeldt, Andrea and Adriano Rampini (2008), "Managerial incentives, capital reallo-
cation, and the business cycle," Journal of Financial Economics 87, 177­199.

Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. "Neglected risks: The psychol-
ogy of financial crises." American Economic Review 105, no. 5 (2015): 310-14.

Gorton, Gary and Andrew Metrick, "Securitization" in Handbook of the Economics
of Finance, edited by George M. Constantinides, Milton Harris and Rene M. Stulz,
Elsevier, Volume 2, Part A, 2013, Pages 1-70.

Gorton, G., & Souleles, N. S. (2006). Special purpose vehicles and securitization. In
R. Stulz & M. Carey (Eds.), The risks of financial institutions. University of Chicago
Press.

Hackbarth, Dirk, Christopher A. Hennessy, and Hayne E. Leland. "Can the trade-off
theory explain debt structure?." The Review of Financial Studies 20, no. 5 (2007):
1389-1428.

Halling, Michael and Yu, Jin and Zechner, Josef, The Dynamics of Corporate Debt
Structure (September 18, 2020). Swedish House of Finance Research Paper No. 20-3,
Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3488471 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3488471

Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 1994, A theory of debt based on the inalienability of

                                         55
human capital, Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 841-879

Hart, Oliver. Firms, contracts, and financial structure. Clarendon Press, 1995.


He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. "Intermediary asset pricing." American Eco-
nomic Review 103, no. 2 (2013): 732-70.

Hellmann, Thomas, and Manju Puri, 2002, Venture capital and the professionalization
of start-up firms: Empirical evidence, Journal of Finance 57, 169-197.

Holmstr¨om, B. and Tirole J. (1997), "Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and
the Real Sector", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 663-91.

Hu, Yunzhi. (2017), "A dynamic theory of bank lending, firm entry, and investment
fluctuations."

Hu, Yunzhi, and Felipe Varas. (2020), "Intermediary Financing without Commitment."

Ivashina, Victoria, Benjamin Iverson, and David C. Smith. "The ownership and trading
of debt claims in Chapter 11 restructurings." Journal of Financial Economics 119, no.
2 (2016): 316-335.

Jensen, M. C., 1986. Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers.
American Economic Review, 76(2):323­29

Jensen, Michael C., 1989, Eclipse of the public corporation.

Johnson, Simon, Peter Boone, Alasdair Breach, and Eric Friedman. "Corporate gover-
nance in the Asian financial crisis." Journal of financial Economics 58, no. 1-2 (2000):
141-186.

Kahan, Marcel, and Bruce Tuckman, 1995, Private versus public lending: Evidence
from covenants, in John D. Finnerty and Martin S. Fridson, eds.: The Yearbook of
Fixed Income Investing (Irwin, New York).

Kaplan, S. N., & Str¨
                    omberg, P. 2003. Financial contracting theory meets the real world:
An empirical analysis of venture capital contracts. The Review of Economic Studies,
70: 281-315.

Kermani, Amir and Yueran Ma, 2020, Two Tales of Debt, working paper, University
of Chicago.

Keys, B. J., Mukherjee, T., Seru, A., & Vig, V. (2010). Did securitization lead to lax
screening? Evidence from subprime loans. The Quarterly journal of economics, 125(1),
307-362.

                                          56
Keys, B. J., Seru, A., & Vig, V. (2012). Lender screening and the role of securitiza-
tion: evidence from prime and subprime mortgage markets. The Review of Financial
Studies, 25(7), 2071-2108.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore, 1997, Credit cycles, Journal of Political Econ-
omy 105, 211­248.

Lisowsky, Petro, Michael Minnis, and Andrew Sutherland. "Economic growth and
financial statement verification." Journal of Accounting Research 55, no. 4 (2017):
745-794.

Manove, Michael, A. Jorge Padilla, and Marco Pagano. "Collateral versus project
screening: A model of lazy banks." Rand journal of economics (2001): 726-744.

Nikolaev, Valeri V. "Scope for renegotiation in private debt contracts." Journal of Ac-
counting and Economics 65, no. 2-3 (2018): 270-301.

Nini, Greg, David Smith, and Amir Sufi (2012), Creditor Control Rights, Corporate
Governance, and Firm Value, Review of Financial Studies, vol 25, no 6.

Park, Cheol (2000), "Monitoring and Structure of Debt Contracts," Journal of Finance,
55: 2157-2195.

Philippon, Thomas. "Corporate governance over the business cycle." Journal of Eco-
nomic Dynamics and Control 30, no. 11 (2006): 2117-2141.

Rajan, Raghuram G. "Presidential address: The corporation in finance." The Journal
of Finance 67, no. 4 (2012): 1173-1217.

Rajan, R. G., and A. Winton. 1995. Covenants and collateral as incentives to monitor.
Journal of Finance 50:1113­46.

Rampini, A. A., and Viswanathan, S. (2010). Collateral, risk management, and the
distribution of debt capacity. The Journal of Finance, 65(6), 2293-2322.

Rampini, A. A., and S. Viswanathan (2019), Financial Intermediary Capital, The Re-
view of Economic Studies, 86: 413­455.

Roberts, M., and A. Sufi. 2009. Control Rights and Capital Structure: An Empirical
Investigation. Journal of Finance 64:1657­95.

Saavedra, Daniel, 2018, Syndicate Size and the Choice of Covenants in Debt Contracts

The Accounting Review (2018) 93 (6): 301­329.

Vishny, Shleifer AR. "Managerial Entrenchment: The Case of Manager Specific In-

                                          57
vestment." Journal of Accounting and Economics 25, no. 5 (1988): 42-67.

Shleifer, A., & Vishny, R. W. (1992). Liquidation values and debt capacity: A market
equilibrium approach. The Journal of Finance, 47 (4), 1343-1366.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W Vishny (2011),"Fire Sales in Finance and Macroeco-
nomics," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25.1, 29-48.

Smith, C. W. and Warner, J. B., 1979. On Financial Contracting: An Analysis of Bond
Covenants. Journal of Financial Economics, 7, 117-161.

Stein, Jeremy C. "Internal capital markets and the competition for corporate resources." The
Journal of Finance 52, no. 1 (1997): 111-133.

Taylor, John B. "Getting back on track: macroeconomic policy lessons from the finan-
cial crisis." Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 92, no. 3 (2010): 165-176.

Vickery, J. I., & Wright, J. (2013). TBA trading and liquidity in the agency MBS
market.




                                          58
