                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  INFORMATION AVOIDANCE AND IMAGE CONCERNS

                                       Christine L. Exley
                                        Judd B. Kessler

                                      Working Paper 28376
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28376


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            January 2021, Revised May 2021




For very helpful feedback on this paper, we thank Russell Golman, Zachary Grossman, Davide
Pace, Matthew Rabin, Joshua Schwartzstein, Marta Serra Garcia, Joël van der Weele, and
Roberto Weber. For funding, we thank Harvard Business School, the Wharton School, and the
Wharton Behavioral Lab. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Christine L. Exley and Judd B. Kessler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Information Avoidance and Image Concerns
Christine L. Exley and Judd B. Kessler
NBER Working Paper No. 28376
January 2021, Revised May 2021
JEL No. C9,C91

                                          ABSTRACT

A rich literature finds that individuals avoid information, even information that is instrumental to
their choices. A common hypothesis posits that individuals strategically avoid information to hold
particular beliefs or to take certain actions--such as behaving selfishly--with lower image costs.
Building off of the classic "moral wiggle room" design, this paper provides the first direct test of
whether individuals avoid information because of image concerns. We do so by introducing a
control condition that makes minimal changes to eliminate the role of image concerns while
keeping other key features of the decision environment unchanged. We analyze data from 4,626
experimental subjects. We find that image concerns play a role in driving information avoidance,
but a role that is substantially smaller--less than half of the magnitude--than the common
approach in the literature would suggest.


Christine L. Exley
Harvard Business School
25 Baker Way
Baker Library 449
Boston, MA 02163
clexley@gmail.com

Judd B. Kessler
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
judd.kessler@wharton.upenn.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28376
1       Introduction
     Why do individuals avoid information that could be instrumental to their decisions? A
number of lines of research suggest that individuals avoid information in order to maintain certain
beliefs (e.g., about themselves as healthy, financially responsible, politically enlightened, kind)
even while taking actions that could suggest the opposite. Such explanations, however, rely on
the sophistication of agents to strategically avoid information in order to maintain certain beliefs
or in order to construct plausible deniability about their actions. In this paper, we introduce a
new experimental approach to directly test whether individuals strategically avoid information
because of image concerns.
     We deploy our new approach in a context that has been the focus of a rich literature building
off of Dana, Weber and Kuang (2007). In that seminal paper, a decision maker must choose
between two options, A and B. Decision makers know that they earn more from choosing A
but do not know whether A or B is better for another participant. They can avoid information
and choose A or B directly, or they can learn which is better for the other participant before
choosing. A set of results from that paper have proven to be robust and influential. First,
individuals frequently avoid information on whether A or B is better for another participant.
Second, individuals make substantially more selfish decisions (i.e., choosing A more often) when
they can avoid information than in an alternative treatment when they cannot avoid information.
Third, the fraction of individuals who avoid information is higher than the fraction of individuals
who might be expected to avoid information because they do not value it (i.e., those who behave
selfishly when information cannot be avoided). These findings have been replicated many times
(Larson and Capra, 2009; Matthey and Regner, 2011; Feiler, 2014; Grossman, 2014; Exley, 2016;
Grossman and van der Weele, 2017) and have raised an important debate about what drives
passive information avoidance.1 A leading explanation in this context is image concerns--namely,
self-image concerns given subjects' anonymity in prior work. Individuals might strategically avoid
information so they can benefit themselves at lower image costs than they would pay if they acted
selfishly after learning that benefiting themselves harmed others.2
     The main contribution of this paper is our ability to directly test whether individuals strate-
gically avoid information because of such image concerns.3 We compare the rates of information
    1
     See conceptual replications in different paradigms (Kajackaite, 2015; Serra-Garcia and Szech, 2020).
    2
     For important work on models of image concerns, see Rabin (1995); Bodner and Prelec (2003); B´          enabou
and Tirole (2004, 2006); Mijovi´c-Prelec and Prelec (2010); B´enabou and Tirole (2011); Nyborg (2011); Grossman
(2015); Grossman and van der Weele (2017); B´   enabou, Falk and Tirole (2018); Foerster and van der Weele (2018).
Significant empirical evidence supports the notion that image costs of acting selfishly are smaller when individuals
do not know for certain they are being selfish. For reviews, see B´
                                                                  enabou and Tirole (2016) and Gino, Norton and
Weber (2016). For the importance of direct tests to narrow in on underlying mechanisms, see Bartling, Fehr and
 ¨
Ozdemir   (2021).
   3
     An important related literature involves how individuals may strategically process information even when it
is not avoided (Babcock et al., 1995; Gneezy, Saccardo and van Veldhuizen, 2018; Schwardmann, Tripodi and
van der Weele, 2019; Gneezy et al., 2020; Saccardo and Serra-Garcia, 2020).


                                                         1
avoidance in the classic Dana, Weber and Kuang (2007) setting to a new setting that makes
minimal changes to remove image motives to avoid information; our new setting holds constant
the structure of the decision, the content of the information, and the timing of information provi-
sion. We then attribute any difference in information avoidance across the two settings to image
concerns.
     In our new setting--our control condition--every aspect of the decision environment is the
same as in the classic setting, except a different participant receives the payoff that would have
gone to the decision maker. In this condition, image concerns cannot drive information avoidance.
To see this, first note that image concerns about selfishness are clearly not relevant because the
opportunity for selfishness is removed. Moreover, even other image concerns (e.g., a desire to
appear fair) cannot drive information avoidance in our control condition. Individuals with such
image concerns should instead acquire information and choose the option aligned with those
image concerns, which they can do without suffering a financial cost. In our control condition,
there is no chance that acquiring information will force a tradeoff between a choice motivated by
image concerns and an option that benefits oneself, since no option benefits oneself.4
     To see why a control condition like ours is necessary to explore whether image concerns drive
information avoidance, consider the common approach in the prior literature for assessing the
role of image concerns. It compares the rate of information avoidance when payoffs are unknown
to the rate of selfishness when payoffs are known. The latter represents the fraction of subjects
who may avoid information because they do not value it (since they will act selfishly regardless).
But this difference does not identify the extent of information avoidance that is due to image
concerns. First, selfish subjects could avoid information because they do not value it, or they
could avoid information strategically to mitigate the image costs of their selfishness. Second,
non-selfish subjects may avoid information for non-image reasons--such as laziness, inattention,
or confusion--rather than image reasons. This is true even if these subjects end up acting
selfishly when uninformed, and even if they enjoy the decreased image costs of acting selfishly;
they could have avoided information for a non-image reason and then been happily surprised by
the opportunity to benefit themselves without knowing for certain they were being selfish.
     Our approach--using a control condition to compare information avoidance across a setting
where it can be driven by image concerns and a similar setting where it cannot--thus differs from
the common approach in the literature that compares rates of information avoidance to rates of
selfishness. As further detailed in Section 2.2, our approach also differs from a rich literature that
examines how other features of the decision environment influence rates of information avoidance
but does not isolate the role of image concerns.5 Given the prevalence of information avoidance
across domains, and the many lines of research exploring the motives of information avoidance,
   4
     See section 2.1 for further discussion. Section 4.4 provides empirical evidence that our control condition does
not introduce additional reasons to avoid information.
   5
     See, for example, Grossman (2014); Grossman and van der Weele (2017); Serra-Garcia and Szech (2020).


                                                         2
we see the use of a control condition like ours as an important methodological advance that could
be applied more widely.
    We deploy our control condition across four studies, including 4,626 experimental subjects.
In each of these studies, we replicate the results of Dana, Weber and Kuang (2007). In each
of these studies, we also find that a subset of subjects indeed avoid information due to image
concerns. This evidence bolsters explanations of information avoidance as being due to image
concerns in the extant literature, including the model and empirical evidence in support of the
model presented in Grossman and van der Weele (2017).
    Across our studies, however, we find that, at most, 19%­34% of information avoidance in
the classic paradigm is due to image concerns. The 66%­81% residual is substantial, suggesting
that the large majority of information avoidance in the classic paradigm cannot be attributed
to image concerns. As shown in Section 3.2, our direct test estimates the role of strategic image
concerns to be less than half of what the common approach in the literature would suggest. The
remaining information avoidance arises for other reasons, potentially including a desire to avoid
interpersonal tradeoffs, a desire to avoid learning bad news (e.g., that you cannot achieve your
preferred payoffs), laziness, inattention, and confusion. We explore the empirical relevance of
these motives in additional treatments, as detailed in Sections 4.1­4.3.
    This analysis leads to two key take-aways. First, image concerns do indeed drive some infor-
mation avoidance. Second, significantly less information avoidance is driven by image concerns
than the common approach in the literature would suggest. The latter result highlights the value
of our direct test of image concerns: it generates a different result than prior approaches.
    We build off of the Dana, Weber and Kuang (2007) paradigm, and we replicate its findings
and the findings of the literature that follows. That prior literature provides compelling evidence
that the ability to act selfishly without knowing that an act was selfish facilitates more selfish
behavior. To examine the extent to which the ability to avoid information influences selfish
behavior, those prior studies have exactly the right set of treatments: one where information can
be avoided and one where information cannot be avoided. We pursue a different identification
approach because we are interested in a different question. We study why individuals avoid
information, rather than the consequences of information avoidance. Better understanding the
causes of information avoidance, and recognizing the large role that factors beyond strategic
image concerns have in driving information avoidance, can help policymakers develop better
methods for encouraging information acquisition when information is instrumental.

2    Design
   This section describes the design of our main treatment conditions. Additional treatment
conditions are introduced later.
   A decision maker chooses between two options: Option A and Option B. The two options
determine payoffs for two players, Player 1 and Player 2. The conditions under which a subject

                                                3
chooses between Option A and Option B vary according to the experimental treatment. In
particular, in Study 1, subjects are randomly assigned to:

   1. the Aligned or Unaligned state,

   2. the Hidden Information or Known Information condition, and

   3. the Self/Other or Other/Other condition.

    How choices map to payoffs depends on the random assignment in (1). Table 1 shows payoffs
by state. Our main treatments use the payoffs in the top panel, which we call the "Classic
Payoffs" since they have the same structure as in Dana, Weber and Kuang (2007).6 Player 1
always earns more from Option A than from Option B, but Player 2 earns more from Option A in
the Aligned state and earns more from Option B in the Unaligned state. Thus, in the unaligned
state (and only the unaligned state), the decision maker faces a tradeoff in terms of benefiting
Player 1 or benefiting Player 2.

                                 Table 1: Payoffs for (Player 1, Player 2)

       Classic Payoffs with Online Participants (used in Studies 1, 2, and 3)
                             Unaligned State                  Aligned State
       Option A                 ($0.60, $0.10)                 ($0.60, $0.50)
       Option B                        ($0.50, $0.50)                            ($0.50, $0.10)
       Classic Payoffs with Penn Undergraduates (used in Study 4)
                              Unaligned State               Aligned State
       Option A                   ($6, $1)                     ($6, $5)
       Option B                           ($5, $5)                                  ($5, $1)
       New Payoffs with Online Participants (used in Studies 2 and 3)
                            Aligned State 1                Aligned State 2
       Option A               ($0.50, $0.10)                  ($0.50, $0.50)
       Option B                        ($0.50, $0.50)                            ($0.50, $0.10)

        Each cell denotes the payoffs given to (Player 1, Player 2) according to whether Option A or Option
        B is chosen by the decision maker and according to the state. In the Self/Other condition, Player 1 is
        the decision maker and Player 2 is another participant. In the Other/Other condition, Players 1 and
        2 are two other participants.


   How information on payoffs is presented depends on the random assignment in (2). In the
Known Information condition, subjects are directly informed of the state and the associated
payoffs and are asked to choose between Option A and Option B directly. In the Hidden Infor-
mation condition, subjects are informed of how the payoffs depend on the state and that there
   6
    Given our online subject pool and study length, we divide their payoffs by 10. In Section 3.3, we replicate
our results in a traditional on-campus experimental lab with payoffs from Dana, Weber and Kuang (2007).

                                                        4
is an equal chance of being assigned to either state. They are then asked whether they would
like to: (i) choose Option A, (ii) choose Option B, or (iii) reveal which state they are in before
choosing between Option A and Option B. We say subjects avoid information if they choose (i)
or (ii) and acquire information if they choose (iii).
    Whether the information avoidance in the Hidden Information condition may be driven by
image concerns depends on the random assignment in (3). In the Self/Other condition, subjects
know that they earn the Player 1 payoffs and another participant earns the Player 2 payoffs,
implying that Option A always benefits themselves. This condition mirrors the classic paradigm
in Dana, Weber and Kuang (2007); we call it the Self/Other condition to emphasize that the
decision maker determines the payoff for themselves (i.e., Self ) and for another participant (i.e.,
Other ). In the Other/Other condition, subjects know that two other participants earn the
Player 1 and Player 2 payoffs, implying that neither option benefits themselves. This is our
new control condition in which image concerns can no longer drive information avoidance; we
call it the Other/Other condition to emphasize that decisions only influence the payoffs of other
participants.

2.1    Why can't image concerns cause information avoidance in the
       Other/Other condition?
     The Other/Other condition removes selfish motives from the decision environment, which
means image concerns about selfishness cannot drive information avoidance. The removal of
selfish motives also prevents image concerns unrelated to selfishness, such as a desire to appear
fair, from driving information avoidance in the Other/Other condition. A participant in the
Self/Other condition may avoid information to avoid facing a tradeoff between appearing fair
and money for themselves. A participant in the Other/Other condition who values appearing fair
does not face this tradeoff between financial incentives and image concerns. This participant can
simply acquire the information and then choose the option aligned with their image concerns.
Consequently, while image concerns may cause participants to acquire information and influence
whether participants choose A or B in the Other/Other condition, image concerns cannot cause
participants to avoid information in the Other/Other condition.
     Since the choice architecture, the content of the information, and the timing of information
provision are all the same across the Self/Other and Other/Other conditions, we attribute the
difference in information avoidance between these two conditions as being due to image concerns.
One may wonder whether we have introduced other reasons for information avoidance in the
Other/Other condition. In Section 4.4, we provide empirical evidence that replacing financial
payoffs for the decision maker with financial payoffs for someone else does not have a direct effect
on information avoidance.




                                                 5
2.2     Why is the Other/Other condition necessary?
     One may wonder whether we could have instead inferred the relevance of image concerns
using data from the Hidden Information and Known Information conditions of the Self/Other
condition only. Indeed, prior work often compares the rate of information avoidance in the
Hidden Information condition to the rate of selfishness in the unaligned state in the Known
Information condition. This prior work consistently finds that information avoidance is more
common than selfishness and suggests that this difference between information avoidance and
selfishness could be due to image concerns. This approach has--importantly--raised the debate
about the motives for information avoidance. However, there are two reasons why this difference
does not identify the role of image concerns in driving information avoidance.
     The first is that individuals may avoid information because of image concerns even in settings
when the information would not affect their choice. Consider an agent who always makes the
most selfish choice. She may still decide to avoid information in the Hidden Information condition
to appear less selfish, even though it does not change her behavior. Assuming that the difference
between information avoidance and selfishness is due to image concerns ignores this possibility
and could underestimate the extent to which image concerns drive information avoidance.
     The second is that individuals who avoid information--and behave more selfishly as a result--
in the Hidden Information condition could do so for reasons unrelated to image concerns. An
agent who acts generously in the Known Information condition but who avoids information and
acts selfishly in the Hidden Information condition may not have avoided information because of
image concerns. She could have decided to avoid information for other reasons (e.g., inattention,
confusion, laziness, a desire to avoid interpersonal tradeoffs, a desire to avoid bad news) but
then acted selfishly (perhaps even enjoying the decreased image costs that came from being
uninformed). Assuming that the difference between information avoidance and selfishness is
due to image concerns ignores this possibility and could overestimate the extent to which image
concerns drive information avoidance.
     In addition, one may wonder whether other approaches in the prior literature have been able
to isolate the impact of image concerns on information avoidance. Prior work has compellingly
shown that rates of information avoidance can be affected by choice architecture, the content
of information, and the timing of information provision. But this work does not isolate the
role of image concerns in driving information avoidance. Changing the choice architecture,
such as making information acquisition an active choice, could matter for image reasons--if
avoiding information under an active choice is a stronger signal of selfishness--or for non-image
reasons, such as laziness, inattention, and confusion.7 Changing the content of the information, as
   7
   After documenting that requiring an active choice about information avoidance substantially reduces infor-
mation avoidance, Grossman (2014) notes that one possible explanation--that should be examined in future
work--is that the "active pursuit of ignorance" could be viewed as "more inappropriate socially." Moreover, prior
work finds that individuals may use the possibility of inattention and confusion as excuses to behave selfishly


                                                       6
frequently occurs when considering avoidance across contexts, could matter for image reasons--if
image concerns are content-dependent--or because subjects differentially value different types of
information.8 Changing the timing of information provision, such as providing it after the relevant
decision has been made, could affect information avoidance for image reasons--if image costs of
learning information are different when the information cannot be instrumental--or because of
associated changes in choice architecture and the value of information.9 An important feature
of our approach is that our Other/Other condition holds constant the choice architecture, the
content of the information, and the timing of information provision while varying whether image
concerns can drive information avoidance.

2.3     Implementation Details
    Subjects were recruited on Amazon Mechanical Turk to complete Study 1 in July 2019.10
We recruited 800 subjects, and approximately 100 were randomly assigned to each of the eight
treatment conditions (resulting from the 2 × 2 × 2 design described above). We twice replicated
the results from Study 1 by recruiting an additional 807 subjects in September 2019 (as part of
Study 2) and an additional 796 subjects in February 2020 (as part of Study 3). These results from
Studies 1­3 are detailed in Sections 3.1 and 3.2. In Section 3.3, we describe another replication
with 222 undergraduate students from the University of Pennsylvania (as part of Study 4). In
Section 4, we present additional design details and results, including treatment variations from
Studies 2 and 3, involving another 2,003 subjects.
    Prior to making any decision, subjects receive detailed instructions and must correctly answer
understanding questions. See Appendix B for full experimental instructions and decision screens.

3     Results
   In this section, we present results from Study 1 and the conditions of Studies 2­4 that replicate
Study 1.

3.1     Replicating the original moral wiggle room findings
    Consistent with prior literature, we find that a large fraction of subjects avoid information in
the Self/Other condition and that this fraction exceeds the rate of selfishness when information
is known. Across the three studies, 0.67 (Study 1), 0.72 (Study 2), and 0.65 (Study 3) of subjects
in the Hidden Information condition avoid information. Across the three studies, 0.32 (Study
1), 0.33 (Study 2), and 0.33 (Study 3) of subjects choose Option A--the selfish option--in the
unaligned state of the Known Information condition.
(Exley and Kessler, 2019).
   8
     As made clear in Serra-Garcia and Szech (2020), however, variations like these can be quite informative for
other purposes, such as examining the elasticity of information avoidance.
   9
     As made clear in Grossman and van der Weele (2017), however, variations like these can be quite informative
for other purposes, such as providing empirical evidence in support of models with image concerns.
  10
     Subjects needed a 95% approval rating or better from at least 100 prior HITs and a US IP address. For this
5-minute study, subjects received $0.50 plus any additional payoffs.

                                                       7
     Also replicating prior literature, we find that the ability to avoid information leads to more
selfish behavior. As shown in Appendix Table A.1, which focuses on results from the unaligned
state, the rates of choosing Option A increase by at least 20 percentage points in the Hidden
Information condition when compared to the Known Information condition. Across the three
studies, 0.56 (Study 1), 0.59 (Study 2), and 0.53 (Study 3) of subjects chose Option A in the
unaligned state of the Hidden Information condition.

3.2     Do individuals avoid information because of image concerns?
     The prior section shows that, when information can be avoided, individuals frequently avoid
information and that more selfish behavior follows. To what extent can this be explained by
subjects in the Self/Other condition avoiding information because of image concerns ?
     Table 2 shows results from all of our Hidden Information conditions. It presents a linear
probability model of whether subjects avoid information on an indicator for whether subjects
are randomly assigned to the Other/Other condition. The coefficient estimates on the constant
show the rates of information avoidance in the Self/Other conditions. As noted in the prior
section, these rates of information avoidance are high. The significant negative coefficient on the
Other/Other indicator shows that we document significantly less information avoidance when
image concerns cannot drive such avoidance. But the magnitude of these estimates, relative to the
constant, implies that the minority of information avoidance in the Self/Other condition is due
                                                             0.13                   0.17
to image concerns. The percentage due to image concerns is 0  .67
                                                                  = 19% in Study 1, 0  .72
                                                                                           = 24% in
               0.14
Study 2, and 0.65 = 22% in Study 3. Equivalently, a large majority of the information avoidance
observed in the Self/Other condition is not due to image concerns: 0      .54
                                                                         0.67
                                                                              = 81% in Study 1,
0.55                          0.51
0.72
      = 76% in Study 2, and 0.65 = 78% in Study 3. In light of this large residual, we consider
additional drivers of information avoidance in Section 4.

            Table 2: Linear probability model of the likelihood of avoiding information

                             Study 1                Study 2               Study 3                Study 4
 Other/Other                  -0.13                 -0.17                 -0.14                  -0.21
                               (0.05)                (0.05)                (0.05)                 (0.07)
 Constant                     0.67                  0.72                  0.65                   0.62
                               (0.03)                (0.03)                (0.03)                 (0.05)
 N                              397                   399                   386                    222
     
       p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. Standard errors are robust and shown in parentheses. The results are
     from a linear probability model of avoiding information, where Other/Other is an indicator for being the
     Other/Other condition. In all columns, the data are restricted to the decisions made in the unaligned or
     aligned state of the Hidden Information condition. In columns 1, 2, 3, and 4, the data are restricted to the
     decisions made in Study 1, 2, 3, or 4, respectively.


    Our identification strategy suggests that a smaller fraction of information avoidance is due
to image concerns than we would have guessed if we had followed the standard approach for

                                                        8
identifying image concerns in the prior literature, as discussed in Section 2.2. In the Self/Other
condition, the fraction of participants who avoid information in the Hidden Information condition
minus the fraction of participants who choose Option A in the unaligned state of the Known
Information condition is 0.67 - 0.33 = 0.34 (Study 1), 0.72 - 0.32 = 0.40 (Study 2), and
0.65 - 0.32 = 0.33 (Study 3). These calculations would imply that image concerns account
                                             0.34
for a majority of information avoidance: 0    .67
                                                  = 51% in Study 1, 0  .40
                                                                      0.72
                                                                           = 56% in Study 2, and
0.33
0.65
     = 51% in Study 3. These percentages are all over twice as large as the percentages of
information avoidance that we attribute to image concerns in the prior paragraph. Thus, not only
is our comparison of the Self/Other to Other/Other conceptually different than this alternative
approach, it is a difference that proves empirically important.

3.3    Do our results replicate with undergraduate students?
    One may wonder whether our results were driven by our subjects being recruited from Amazon
Mechanical Turk. Such concerns may be alleviated by our replication of the results from prior
work (see Section 3.1) and our replication of our results from Study 1 twice (i.e., in Study 2 and
Study 3).
    Nonetheless, for Study 4 we recruited 222 undergraduates from the Wharton Behavioral Lab
at the University of Pennsylvania. There are two main differences with the design of Study 4
relative to the designs for Studies 1­3. First, as shown in the middle panel of Table 1, we increased
the value of payoffs to match the typical values used in this literature for undergraduate student
subjects. Second, given the limited subject pool size, all subjects were assigned to one of the
Hidden Information conditions (i.e., we excluded the Known Information conditions).
    As shown in the Study 4 column of Table 2, our results persist. Information avoidance is
substantial when subjects have a selfish motive to choose Option A. The coefficient estimates
on the constant show that 0.62 of subjects avoid information in the Self/Other condition. In
addition, the coefficient on Other/Other is large, negative and statistically significant (p < 0.01);
information avoidance is 21 percentage points less likely when image concerns cannot drive
                                         0.21
avoidance. Based on our estimates, 0      .62
                                              = 34% of information avoidance from the Self/Other
condition is attributable to image concerns and 0     .41
                                                     0.62
                                                          = 66% arises for other reasons.

4     Additional Results and Discussion
   Table 3 summarizes the rates of information avoidance across all of our Hidden Information
conditions in all of our studies. The results shown in the first two columns were discussed in
Section 3. In this section we report on additional treatments from Studies 2 and 3 to explore
what--beyond image concerns--drives information avoidance.




                                                 9
           Table 3: Fraction avoiding information in Hidden Information conditions

      Payoffs:        Classic                  New                         New, Active Choice
                    S/O    O/O           S/O­New O/O­New                 S/O­Active O/O­Active
      Study 1       0.67        0.55           .              .                .                  .
      Study 2       0.72        0.55         0.44           0.43               .                  .
      Study 3       0.65        0.52         0.47           0.45             0.25               0.20
      Study 4       0.62        0.41           .              .                .                  .
      N             698         706          400            391              199                197
         The first pair of columns involve the "Classic Payoffs" shown in the top panel of Table 1. The
         middle and last pair of columns involve the "New Payoffs" shown in the bottom panel of Table
         1. The last pair of columns involve treatments where participants must actively choose whether
         or not to acquire information before having the ability to choose Option A or Option B. Within
         each pair of columns, results are split according to whether participants were randomly as-
         signed to one of the conditions involving payoffs for themselves and another participant (i.e., the
         Self/Other, Self/Other­New, or Self/Other­Active condition) or one of the conditions involving
         payoffs for two other participants (i.e., the Other/Other, Other/Other­New, or Other/Other­
         Active condition). Note that S/O and O/O refer to the Self/Other and Other/Other conditions,
         respectively.


4.1    Aversion to interpersonal tradeoffs or to learning "bad news"
    Image concerns cannot drive information avoidance in the Other/Other condition. So what
does? One possibility is that participants do not want to be put into a position (like in the
unaligned state) where they have to make a tradeoff between two participants, even if their
own payoffs are not affected. Another possibility is that participants favor the payoffs they can
achieve in one of the two states and so want to avoid learning for certain the "bad news" that
they are in their less-preferred state (Golman, Hagmann and Loewenstein, 2017; Golman and
Loewenstein, 2018).
    To investigate whether these motives drive any residual information avoidance, we introduced
new conditions in Studies 2 and 3. As shown in the bottom panel of Table 1, the "New Payoffs"
are the same as the "Classic Payoffs" except that Option A gives $0.50, rather than $0.60,
to Player 1. This change means the payoffs for the two players are always (weakly) aligned,
eliminating concerns about aversion to interpersonal tradeoffs, and the two states are identical
in what payoffs can be achieved, eliminating concerns that individuals may prefer one state to
the other.
    Consistent with a small role for aversion to interpersonal tradeoffs or bad news driving avoid-
ance, Table 3 shows that the rates of information avoidance are 7­12 percentage points lower
with the new payoffs (compare rates in the O/O­New and O/O columns). These differences are
statistically significant in Study 2 (0.55 vs. 0.43, p < 0.01) but only suggestive in Study 3 (0.52
vs. 0.45, p = 0.23). Combining data from Studies 2 and 3 yields a significant difference (0.54 vs.
0.44, p < 0.01).


                                                       10
    These results reinforce the value of replacing a self-other tradeoff with a comparable other-
other tradeoff to explore the role of image concerns, rather than eliminating--or substantially
changing--the involved tradeoff. If we had attempted to identify the role of image concerns by
comparing information avoidance in the Self/Other and Self/Other­New conditions, we would
have conflated the role of image concerns with the role of aversion to interpersonal tradeoffs or
learning bad news.

4.2    Choice architecture
    Results from the prior section suggest that substantial information avoidance cannot be at-
tributed to image concerns, an aversion to making interpersonal tradeoffs, or the prospect of
learning bad news. To explore this remaining information avoidance, we introduced an Active
Choice version to the Hidden Information condition in Study 3. In this version, subjects again
face the "New Payoffs," but prior to choosing Option A or B, subjects first have to actively
choose whether to reveal or not reveal the state (see screenshot in Appendix Figure B.37).
    As compared to the standard Hidden Information condition, the Active Choice version may
reduce information avoidance for reasons surrounding confusion, inattention, and laziness. The
active choice version makes the decision simpler, so confused subjects might better understand
the value of revealing information. Inattentive subjects, such as those who choose somewhat
randomly, should be less likely to avoid information in the active choice version where 1 of 2
options reveal information, rather than 1 of 3 in the standard version. Lazy subjects who avoided
information in the standard version--by choosing Option A or B directly--to avoid having to
click to a new screen and otherwise think more about the decision should be less likely to avoid
information in the active choice version since they cannot skip the subsequent decision screen.
    This change in the choice architecture proves powerful. As seen by comparing the "New" and
"New, Active Choice" columns of Study 3 in Table 3, information avoidance is substantially lower
when an active choice is required (0.25 vs. 0.47, p < 0.01, in the Self/Other condition; and 0.20
vs. 0.45, p < 0.01, in the Other/Other condition). These results echo those in Grossman (2014),
which finds a similar effect of choice architecture in the classic paradigm when image concerns
may also be relevant. Our results complement the findings in that paper by demonstrating that
choice architecture affects behavior, even independently of how it might affect image costs.
    The results also reinforce the value of holding constant the choice architecture--and the
related confusion, inattention, and laziness channels--in our control treatment that replaces a
self-other tradeoff with a comparable other-other tradeoff.

4.3    Indifference
    While the prior section posits a possible role of inattention, confusion, and laziness in driving
information avoidance, results from our Known Information conditions suggest a limit to the
empirical relevance of such explanations and--more broadly--to subjects being indifferent about


                                                 11
others' payoffs.
    As shown in Appendix Table A.2 (top panel, column 4), in the Aligned state of the Known
Information condition, 98% of subjects (pooling across all studies and conditions) choose Option
A. That is, nearly all subjects choose the option that delivers higher payoffs to both players
when they are directly informed of the payoff information, regardless of whether they are in the
Self/Other or Other/Other condition.
    Results with the new payoffs tell a similar story. Appendix Table A.2 (middle panel, columns
2 and 4) show that 92% of subjects (pooling across studies and conditions) choose the option
that delivers higher payoffs to Player 2 (Option A in Aligned State 1 or Option B in Aligned
State 2 ) in the Known Information condition. That is, when asked directly, over 90% of subjects
choose the option that benefits other participants.
    Thus, while the information avoidance decision may be more cognitively difficult than the
choice of Option A or B in the Known Information conditions, it is clear from these Known
Information choices that very few subjects are completely inattentive, confused, or indifferent.

4.4    Does the Other/Other condition introduce additional motives for
       information avoidance?
    As noted above, the only change we make from the Self/Other condition to the Other/Other
condition is switching the Player 1 payoffs from the decision maker to another subject. This
change keeps constant the choice architecture, the content of information (i.e., the state-dependent
payoffs for Player 2), the timing of information provision, and the possibility of a tradeoff between
payoffs for Player 1 and Player 2 (i.e., in the unaligned state). We can thus compare information
avoidance across these conditions to isolate the role of image concerns.
    Nevertheless, one may wonder whether switching the Player 1 payoffs from the decision maker
to another subject drives information avoidance for some other reason that is independent of its
impact on image concerns, such as subjects being generally less engaged with the game when their
own payoffs are not at stake. To assess this, we can explore how switching the Player 1 payoffs
from the decision maker to another subject affects information avoidance when image concerns
cannot drive information avoidance. We compare avoidance between Self/Other and Other/Other
conditions under our "New Payoffs," in which image concerns cannot drive information avoidance
because Player 1 always earns the same amount, regardless of the state or the decision maker's
choice.
    As shown in the middle two columns of Table 3, there is no difference in information avoidance
across the Self/Other­New and Other/Other­New conditions. As shown in the right two columns
of Table 3, the same pattern arises when comparing information avoidance across the Self/Other­
Active and Other/Other­Active conditions. Indeed, in all of these comparisons, information
avoidance is directionally lower in the Other/Other conditions than the equivalent Self/Other
conditions, highlighting that switching the Player 1 payoffs from the decision maker to another

                                                 12
subject is, if anything, inducing less information avoidance.
   Thus, we observe no evidence of the Other/Other condition inducing additional reasons to
avoid information that are not relevant in the Self/Other condition. If anything, we find the
opposite, implying that our main results may provide an upper bound on the extent to which
image concerns drive information avoidance.

5      Conclusion
    Our experiment explores the extent to which information avoidance is driven by image con-
cerns. We focus on the classic Dana, Weber and Kuang (2007) paradigm. We provide evidence
of more information avoidance when image concerns could motivate information avoidance, high-
lighting that some subjects indeed avoid information because of image concerns. But, we also
show how the common approach in the literature misestimates the role of image concerns in driv-
ing information avoidance and that the majority of information avoidance cannot be attributed
to image concerns. Central to our contribution is our ability--by replacing a self-other tradeoff
with a comparable other-other tradeoff--to consider an environment where image concerns can-
not drive information avoidance, but other factors that could drive information avoidance are
held constant.
    Our exploration of information avoidance opens up additional questions for future work, three
of which we note here. First, our results highlight the potential insights gleaned by having a
comparable "benchmark" level of information avoidance when assessing a particular driver of
information avoidance. In the literature related to selfish motives, replacing a self-other tradeoff
with a comparable other-other tradeoff allows for such a benchmark. In the broader information
avoidance literature, even if a comparable benchmark is not attainable, some benchmark level of
information avoidance will likely be informative. We find that significant information avoidance
can arise due to choice architecture--perhaps related to inattention, confusion, or laziness--
rather than image concerns or payoff preferences.
    Second, our results suggest that it might be worthwhile to revisit the relevance of both
image-driven and non-image-driven motives in a range of other contexts in which information
avoidance is prevalent (see Golman, Hagmann and Loewenstein (2017) for an excellent review of
information avoidance across contexts).11 While we were surprised by the extent of information
avoidance in the classic paradigm that could not be attributed to image concerns, we suspect
there are many contexts where one may be surprised by the extent to which image concerns drive
information avoidance. We hope future work jointly considers reasons related to image concerns
and not related to image concerns to bolster our understanding of information avoidance and
other avoidance decisions (e.g., when individuals avoid the ask or avoid making decisions).12
  11
     Interesting questions also remain on how individuals seek information (see, e.g., Spiekermann and Weiss
(2016)) for image and non-image reasons.
  12
     For work related to how people avoid opportunities to be generous see, e.g., Dana, Cain and Dawes (2006);


                                                     13
    Third, and related, our work suggests gains from further exploring inattention, laziness, and
confusion as potentially important drivers of information avoidance across a number of domains.
It is possible that people rationally avoid information in response to problem complexity as in
models of rational inattention and sparsity (Sims, 2003; Gabaix, 2014, 2017), that they avoid
information because they look at problems the wrong way (see Handel and Schwartzstein (2018)
for an excellent review), or even that the ability to avoid information provides individuals with
an "excuse" not to fully think through decisions. While we have shown that image concerns can
explain part of the information avoidance in a classic paradigm, much information avoidance
remains. We see great promise in exploring the other drivers of information avoidance across
domains.13




Broberg, Ellingsen and Johannesson (2007); Jacobsen et al. (2011); DellaVigna, List and Malmendier (2012);
Lazear, Malmendier and Weber (2012); Trachtman et al. (2015); Andreoni, Rao and Trachtman (2016); Lin,
Schaumberg and Reich (2016).
  13
     Indeed, many interesting questions remain about the conditions under which image concerns prove relevant,
particularly given the findings in van der Weele et al. (2014).


                                                     14
References
Andreoni, James, Justin M. Rao, and Hannah Trachtman. 2016. "Avoiding the ask: A
 field experiment on altruism, empathy, and charitable giving." Journal of Political Economy.

Babcock, Linda, George Loewenstein, Samuel Issacharoff, and Colin Camerer. 1995.
 "Biased Judgments of Fairness in Bargaining." The American Economic Review, 85(5): 1337­
 1343.

Bartling, Bj¨                            ¨
            orn, Ernst Fehr, and Yagiz Ozdemir.    2021. "Does Market Interaction Erode
 Moral Values?" Review of Economics and Statistic.

B´
 enabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole. 2004. "Willpower and personal rules." Journal of Po-
 litical Economy, 112(4): 848­886.

B´
 enabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole. 2006. "Incentives and Prosocial Behavior." American
 Economic Review, 96(5): 1652­1678.

B´
 enabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole. 2011. "Identity, Morals, and Taboos: Beliefs as Assets."
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126: 805­855.

B´
 enabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole. 2016. "Mindful Economics: The Production, Consump-
 tion, and Value of Beliefs." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(3): 141­164.

B´
 enabou, Roland, Armin Falk, and Jean Tirole. 2018. "Narratives, Imperatives and Moral
 Reasoning." Working Paper.

Bodner, Ronit, and Drazen Prelec. 2003. "Self-signaling and diagnostic utility in everyday
 decision making." The psychology of economic decisions, 1: 105­26.

Broberg, Tomas, Tore Ellingsen, and Magnus Johannesson. 2007. "Is generosity invol-
 untary?" Economics Letters, 94(1): 32­37.

Dana, Jason, Daylian M. Cain, and Robyn M. Dawes. 2006. "What you don't know won't
 hurt me: Costly (but quiet) exit in dictator games." Organizational Behavior and Human
 Decision Processes, 100: 193­201.

Dana, Jason, Roberto A. Weber, and Jason Xi Kuang. 2007. "Exploiting moral wig-
 gle room: experiments demonstrating an illusory preference for fairness." Economic Theory,
 33: 67­80.

DellaVigna, Stefano, John List, and Ulrike Malmendier. 2012. "Testing for Altruism and
 Social Pressure in Charitable Giving." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(1): 1­56.


                                             15
Exley, Christine L. 2016. "Excusing Selfishness in Charitable Giving: The Role of Risk."
 Review of Economic Studies, 83(2): 587­628.

Exley, Christine L., and Judd B. Kessler. 2019. "Motivated Errors." Working Paper NBER
 No. 26595.

Feiler, Lauren. 2014. "Testing Models of Information Avoidance with Binary Choice Dictator
  Games." Journal of Economic Psychology.

Foerster, Manuel, and Joel J van der Weele. 2018. "Denial and Alarmism in Collective
  Action Problems." Working Paper.

Gabaix, Xavier. 2014. "A sparsity-based model of bounded rationality." The Quarterly Journal
 of Economics, 129(4): 1661­1710.

Gabaix, Xavier. 2017. "Behavioral Inattention." In Handbook of Behavioral Economics: Ap-
 plications and Foundations 1. Vol. 2, 261­343. Elsevier.

Gino, Francesca, Michael I. Norton, and Roberto A. Weber. 2016. "Motivated Bayesians:
 Feeling Moral While Acting Egoistically." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(3): 189­212.

Gneezy, Uri, Silvia Saccardo, and Roel van Veldhuizen. 2018. "Bribery: Behavioral
 Drivers of Distorted Decisions." Journal of the European Economic Association.

Gneezy, Uri, Silvia Saccardo, Marta Serra-Garcia, and Roel van Veldhuizen. 2020.
 "Bribing the Self." Games and Economic Behavior, 120: 917­946.

Golman, Russell, and George Loewenstein. 2018. "Information gaps: A theory of prefer-
 ences regarding the presence and absence of information." Decision, 5(3).

Golman, Russell, David Hagmann, and George Loewenstein. 2017. "Information Avoid-
 ance." Journal of Economic Literature, 55(1): 1­40.

Grossman, Zachary. 2014. "Strategic ignorance and the robustness of social preferences."
 Management Science, 60(11): 2659­2665.

Grossman, Zachary. 2015. "Self-signaling and social-signaling in giving." Journal of Economic
 Behavior & Organization, 117(0): 26­39.

Grossman, Zachary, and Jo¨     el J van der Weele. 2017. "Self-image and willful ignorance in
 social decisions." Journal of the European Economic Association, 15(1).




                                             16
Handel, Benjamin, and Joshua Schwartzstein. 2018. "Frictions or Mental Gaps: What's
 Behind the Information We (Don't) Use and When Do We Care?" Journal of Economic
 Perspectives, 32(1): 155­178.

Jacobsen, Karin J, Kari H Eika, Leif Helland, Jo Thori Lind, and Karine Nyborg.
  2011. "Are nurses more altruistic than real estate brokers?" Journal of Economic Psychology,
  32(5): 818­831.

Kajackaite, Agne. 2015. "If I close my eyes, nobody will get hurt. The effect of ignorance on
 performance in a real effort experiment." Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization,
 116: 518­524.

Larson, Tara, and Monica C. Capra. 2009. "Exploiting moral wiggle room: Illusory prefer-
  ence for fairness? A comment." Judgment and Decision Making, 4(6): 467­474.

Lazear, Edward P., Ulrike Malmendier, and Roberto A. Weber. 2012. "Sorting in
  experiments with application to social preferences." American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics, 4(1): 136­163.

Lin, Stephanie C., Rebecca L. Schaumberg, and Taly Reich. 2016. "Sidestepping the
  rock and the hard place: The private avoidance of prosocial requests." Journal of Experimental
  Social Psychology, 35­40.

Matthey, Astrid, and Tobias Regner. 2011. "Do I really want to know? A cognitive
 dissonance-based explanation of other-regarding behavior." Games, 2(1): 114­135.

Mijovi´c-Prelec, Danica, and Drazen Prelec. 2010. "Self-deception as self-signalling: a
 model and experimental evidence." Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Bi-
 ological Sciences, 365(1538): 227­240.

Nyborg, Karine. 2011. "I don't want to hear about it: Rational ignorance among duty-oriented
 consumers." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 79(3): 263­274.

Rabin, M. 1995. "Moral preferences, moral constraints, and self-serving biases." Working paper.

Saccardo, Silvia, and Marta Serra-Garcia. 2020. "Cognitive Flexibility or Moral Commit-
  ment? Evidence of Anticipated Belief Distortion." Working Paper.

Schwardmann, Peter, Egon Tripodi, and Jo¨   el J. van der Weele. 2019. "Self-Persuasion:
  Evidence from Field Experiments at Two International Debating Competitions." Working
  Paper.



                                              17
Serra-Garcia, Marta, and Nora Szech. 2020. "The (in)elasticity of moral ignorance." Work-
  ing Paper.

Sims, Christopher A. 2003. "Implications of rational inattention." Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics, 50(3): 665­690.

Spiekermann, Kai, and Arne Weiss. 2016. "Objective and subjective compliance: A norm-
  based explanation of `moral wiggle room'." Games and Economic Behavior, 96: 170­183.

Trachtman, Hannah, Andrew Steinkruger, Mackenzie Wood, Adam Wooster, James
  Andreoni, James J. Murphy, and Justin M. Rao. 2015. "Fair weather avoidance: un-
  packing the costs and benefits of "Avoiding the Ask"." Journal of the Economic Science
  Association, 1­7.

van der Weele, Jo¨  el J., Julija Kulisa, Michael Kosfeld, and Guido Friebel. 2014.
  "Resisting Moral Wiggle Room: How Robust Is Reciprocal Behavior?" American Economic
  Journal: Microeconomics, 6(3): 256­264.




                                            18
APPENDICES (FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION ONLY)
A   Additional Tables

      Table A.1: Linear probability model of the likelihood of choosing Option A

                                                  Study 1         Study 2          Study 3
     Hidden Information                           0.23             0.27            0.20
                                                  (0.07)           (0.07)          (0.07)
     Constant                                     0.33             0.32            0.33
                                                  (0.05)           (0.05)          (0.05)
     N                                              199              200             200
         
           p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. Standard errors are robust and shown in parentheses.
         The results are from a linear probability model of the likelihood of choosing Option A,
         where Hidden Information is an indicator for being the Hidden Information condition.
         In all columns, the data are restricted to the decisions made in the Unaligned state of
         the Self/Other, Hidden Information condition or the Unaligned state of the Self/Other,
         Known Information condition.




                                                 19
                      Table A.2: Fraction choosing Option A

                                 Unaligned State                 Aligned State
                              Hidden       Known             Hidden       Known
                            Information Information        Information Information
Classic Payoffs
Study 1: Self/Other             0.56            0.33           0.87           1.00
Study 1: Other/Other            0.32            0.19           0.71           0.97

Study 2: Self/Other             0.59            0.32           0.84           0.98
Study 2: Other/Other            0.28            0.12           0.69           0.98

Study 3: Self/Other             0.53            0.33           0.78           0.95
Study 3: Other/Other            0.26            0.18           0.70           0.95

Study 4: Self/Other             0.73             .             0.96             .
Study 4: Other/Other            0.34             .             0.82             .

                                 Aligned State 2                Aligned State 1
                              Hidden       Known             Hidden       Known
                            Information Information        Information Information
New Payoffs
Study 2: Self/Other             0.19            0.07           0.69           0.93
Study 2: Other/Other            0.11            0.15           0.69           0.98

Study 3: Self/Other             0.22            0.08           0.68           0.93
Study 3: Other/Other            0.14            0.11           0.71           0.91

New Payoffs with Active        Choice
Study 3: Self/Other            0.25              .             0.79             .
Study 3: Other/Other           0.29              .             0.86             .
N                              1296            1018            1295           1019
  The above results show the fraction of participants choosing Option A, according to the
  treatment condition to which they were assigned.




                                          20
B     Experimental Instructions
    This paper involved four studies. Section B.1 presents the full instructions for Study 1.
Section B.2 presents the full instructions for Study 2. Section B.3 presents the full instructions
for Study 3. Section B.4 presents the full instructions for Study 4. We present the details of
these studies by showing screenshots of our instructions and decision screens. While not shown
in these screenshots--to facilitate readability (i.e., to allow the screenshots to be zoomed-in on
the text)--each screen had a red arrow in the bottom right corner that subjects had to actively
click to advance to the next page.

B.1     Experimental Instructions for Study 1
    Participants in Study 1 were randomly assigned to 1 of 8 conditions that arise from (Hidden
Information, Known Information ) × (Self/Other, Other/Other ) × (Unaligned state, Aligned
state).
    After consenting to participate in the study, subjects are informed of the $0.50 study com-
pletion fee and of the opportunity to earn an additional payment. Figure B.1 shows how this
payment information is explained and the corresponding comprehension question that each sub-
ject must answer correctly in order to proceed.
    To mitigate the relevance of direct reciprocity concerns, in Study 1 (as well as in Studies 2 and
3), subjects are informed that they are randomly assigned into groups of three participants, that
one member of their group will be randomly selected as the decision maker, and that only the
choice of the decision maker will determine additional payoffs for the group. That is, the decision
maker determines additional payoffs for themself and another group member in the Self/Other
condition or for both of their other group members in the Other/Other condition. After subjects
make their decisions, they fill out a short demographic survey.




                                                 21
Figure B.1: Payment Information




              22
    Participants are then provided with instructions about their decisions and asked to answer
comprehension questions. Figures B.2­B.5 show the instructions and comprehension questions
for each of the Known Information conditions. Figures B.6­B.7 show the instructions and com-
prehension questions for the Hidden Information conditions.




                                             23
Figure B.2: Known Information × Self/Other × Aligned State, Comprehension Questions




                                        24
Figure B.3: Known Information × Self/Other × Unaligned State, Comprehension Questions




                                         25
Figure B.4: Known Information × Other/Other × Aligned State, Comprehension Questions




                                        26
Figure B.5: Known Information × Other/Other × Unaligned State, Comprehension Questions




                                         27
Figure B.6: Hidden Information × Self/Other, Comprehension Questions




                                28
Figure B.7: Hidden Information × Other/Other, Comprehension Questions




                                 29
    Participants are then reminded of the instructions and asked to make their decisions. Figures
B.8­B.11 show the decision screens for each of the Known Information conditions. Figures B.12­
B.13 show the decision screens for each of the Hidden Information conditions. If participants
in those conditions choose to Reveal Player Z's payoffs, then the state is revealed and they are
asked to make their decision on the next page, as shown below in Figures B.14­B.17.

           Figure B.8: Known Information × Self/Other × Aligned State, Decision




                                               30
Figure B.9: Known Information × Self/Other × Unaligned State, Decision




                                 31
Figure B.10: Known Information × Other/Other × Aligned State, Decision




                                 32
Figure B.11: Known Information × Other/Other × Unaligned State, Decision




                                  33
Figure B.12: Hidden Information × Self/Other, Decision




                         34
Figure B.13: Hidden Information × Other/Other, Decision




                          35
Figure B.14: Hidden Information × Self/Other × Aligned Condition, After Revealing Player Z's
Payoffs




                                            36
Figure B.15: Hidden Information × Self/Other × Unaligned State, After Revealing Player Z's
Payoffs




                                           37
Figure B.16: Hidden Information × Other/Other × Aligned State, After Revealing Player Z's
Payoffs




                                           38
Figure B.17: Hidden Information × Other/Other × Unaligned State, After Revealing Player Z's
Payoffs




                                            39
B.2    Experimental Instructions for Study 2
    Participants in Study 2 were randomly assigned to 1 of 16 conditions. The first set of 8
involved the same conditions as in Study 1, which we call the "Classic Payoffs" conditions that
arise from (Hidden Information, Known Information ) × (Self/Other, Other/Other ) × (Unaligned
state, Aligned state). The second set of 8 conditions involved new conditions, which we call
"New Payoffs" that arise from (Hidden Information, Known Information ) × (Self/Other­New,
Other/Other­New ) × (Aligned State 1, Aligned State 2 ). See Section B.1 for the conditions that
were also included in Study 1. In what follows, we describe the 8 new conditions.
    After consenting to participate in the study, participants are informed of the $0.50 study
completion fee and of the opportunity to earn an additional payment equivalent to Study 1 (as
shown in Figure B.1). Participants are then provided with instructions about their decision
and asked to answer comprehension questions. Figures B.18­B.23 show the instructions and
comprehension questions for each of the respective conditions.




                                              40
Figure B.18: Known Information × Self/Other­New × Aligned State 1, Comprehension Ques-
tions




                                         41
Figure B.19: Known Information × Self/Other­New × Aligned State 2, Comprehension Ques-
tions




                                         42
Figure B.20: Known Information × Other/Other­New × Aligned State 1, Comprehension Ques-
tions




                                          43
Figure B.21: Known Information × Other/Other­New × Aligned State 2, Comprehension Ques-
tions




                                          44
Figure B.22: Hidden Information × Self/Other­New, Comprehension Questions




                                   45
Figure B.23: Hidden Information × Other/Other­New, Comprehension Questions




                                   46
   Participants are then reminded of the instructions and asked to make their decisions. Figures
B.24­B.29 show the decision screens for each of the conditions. If participants in those conditions
choose to Reveal Player Z's payoffs, the state is revealed on the next page and they are asked to
make their decision, as shown below in Figures B.30­B.33.

       Figure B.24: Known Information × Self/Other­New × Aligned State 1, Decision




                                                47
Figure B.25: Known Information × Self/Other­New × Aligned State 2, Decision




                                    48
Figure B.26: Known Information × Other/Other­New × Aligned State 1, Decision




                                    49
Figure B.27: Known Information × Other/Other­New × Aligned State 2, Decision




                                    50
Figure B.28: Hidden Information × Self/Other­New, Decision




                           51
Figure B.29: Hidden Information × Other/Other­New, Decision




                            52
Figure B.30: Hidden Information × Self/Other­New × Aligned State 1, After Revealing Player
Z's Payoffs




                                           53
Figure B.31: Hidden Information × Self/Other­New × Aligned State 2, After Revealing Player
Z's Payoffs




                                           54
Figure B.32: Hidden Information × Other/Other­New × Aligned State 1, After Revealing Player
Z's Payoffs




                                            55
Figure B.33: Hidden Information × Other/Other­New × Aligned State 2, After Revealing Player
Z's Payoffs




                                            56
B.3    Experimental Instructions for Study 3
    Participants in Study 3 are randomly assigned to 1 of 20 conditions. The first set of 16
conditions were exactly the same as the 16 conditions in Study 2. The additional 4 conditions
are new conditions, which we call "New Payoffs with Active Choice" that arise from (Hidden
Information ) × (Self/Other­Active, Other/Other­Active ) × (Aligned State 1, Aligned State 2 ).
See Sections B.1 and B.2 to learn more about the first 16 conditions included in Study 3. In
what follows, we describe the 4 new conditions.
    After consenting to participate in the study, subjects are informed of the $0.50 study com-
pletion fee and of the opportunity to earn an additional payment equivalent to Study 1 and 2
(as shown in Figure B.1). Participants are then provided with instructions about their decision
and asked to answer comprehension questions. Figures B.34­B.35 show the instructions and
comprehension questions for each of the new conditions.




                                              57
Figure B.34: Hidden Information × Self/Other­Active, Comprehension Questions




                                    58
Figure B.35: Hidden Information × Other/Other­Active, Comprehension Questions




                                     59
    Participants are then reminded of the instructions and asked to make their decisions. Figures
B.36­B.37 show the first decision screen for each of the new conditions. If participants in those
conditions choose to Reveal Player Z's payoffs, the state is revealed on the next page and they
are asked to make their decision, as shown below in Figures B.38­B.41. If participants choose
not to Reveal Player Z's payoffs, they are instead asked to make a decision without learning their
state, as shown below in Figures B.42­B.43.

          Figure B.36: Hidden Information × Self/Other­Active, Revelation Decision




                                               60
Figure B.37: Hidden Information × Other/Other­Active, Revelation Decision




                                   61
Figure B.38: Hidden Information × Self/Other­Active × Aligned State 1, After Choosing to
Reveal Player Z's Payoffs




                                          62
Figure B.39: Hidden Information × Self/Other­Active × Aligned State 2, After Choosing to
Reveal Player Z's Payoffs




                                          63
Figure B.40: Hidden Information × Other/Other­Active × Aligned State 1, After Choosing to
Reveal Player Z's Payoffs




                                           64
Figure B.41: Hidden Information × Other/Other­Active × Aligned State 2, After Choosing to
Reveal Player Z's Payoffs




                                           65
Figure B.42: Hidden Information × Self/Other­Active, After Choosing Not to Reveal Player Z's
Payoffs




                                            66
Figure B.43: Hidden Information × Other/Other­Active, After Choosing Not to Reveal Player
Z's Payoffs




                                           67
B.4     Experimental Instructions for Study 4
    Participants in Study 4 are randomly assigned to 1 of 4 conditions that arise from Hidden
Information × (Self/Other, Other/Other ) × (Unaligned state, Aligned state). That is, they are
always assigned to a Hidden Information condition.
    After consenting to participate in the study, participants are informed of the study completion
fee and of the opportunity to earn an additional payment, as shown in Figure B.44.




                                                68
Figure B.44: Study 4 Payment Information




                  69
    Participants are then provided with instructions about their decisions and asked comprehen-
sion questions. Figures B.45­B.46 show the instructions and comprehension questions for each
of the conditions.




                                              70
Figure B.45: Decision 1: Hidden Information × Self/Other, Comprehension Question




                                      71
Figure B.46: Decision 1: Hidden Information × Other/Other, Comprehension Question




                                       72
    Participants are then reminded of the instructions and asked to make their first decision.
The first decision always involves making a decision in the Hidden Information condition, since
information avoidance is our main outcome of interest. Figures B.47­B.48 show the decision
screens for each of the conditions. If participants in those conditions choose to Reveal Player
Z's payoffs, the state is revealed on the next page, and they are asked to make their decision, as
shown below in Figures B.49­B.52.




                                               73
Figure B.47: Decision 1: Hidden Information × Self/Other, Decision




                               74
Figure B.48: Decision 1: Hidden Information × Other/Other, Decision




                                75
Figure B.49: Decision 1: Hidden Information × Self/Other × Aligned State, After Revealing
Player Z's Payoffs




                                           76
Figure B.50: Decision 1: Hidden Information × Self/Other × Unaligned State, After Revealing
Player Z's Payoffs




                                            77
Figure B.51: Decision 1: Hidden Information × Other/Other × Aligned State, After Revealing
Player Z's Payoffs




                                           78
Figure B.52: Decision 1: Hidden Information × Other/Other × Unaligned State, After Revealing
Player Z's Payoffs




                                            79
   Participants then face two more decisions in a random order. These two decisions may provide
some insight related to how participants make decisions in the Known Information condition, but
participants only ever made these decisions after they make decisions in the Hidden Information
condition, so these latter two decisions could be influenced by their decisions in the Hidden
Information condition. As explained in the main text, this design choice reflected our limited
subject pool for Study 4 and our desire to focus on information avoidance decisions in the Hidden
Information condition. Figures B.53­B.60 show the comprehension questions and subsequent two
decisions.

                Figure B.53: Decision 2: Self/Other, Comprehension Questions




                                               80
Figure B.54: Decision 2: Self/Other, Decision




                     81
Figure B.55: Decision 3: Self/Other, Comprehension Question




                            82
Figure B.56: Decision 3: Self/Other, Decision




                     83
Figure B.57: Decision 2: Other/Other, Comprehension Questions




                             84
Figure B.58: Decision 2: Other/Other, Decision




                     85
Figure B.59: Decision 3: Other/Other, Comprehension Questions




                             86
Figure B.60: Decision 3: Other/Other, Decision




                     87
