                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        PUBLIC ECONOMICS AND INEQUALITY:
                         UNCOVERING OUR SOCIAL NATURE

                                       Emmanuel Saez

                                     Working Paper 28387
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28387


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2021




This paper was presented as the AEA Distinguished Lecture in January 2021. I thank Ulrike
Malmendier, Pascal Michaillat, Thomas Piketty, Stefanie Stantcheva and Gabriel Zucman for
helpful comments and discussions. Akcan Balkir provided outstanding research assistance. I
acknowledge funding from the Berkeley Center for Equitable Growth and the Berkeley Stone
Center on Wealth and Income Inequality. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Emmanuel Saez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Public Economics and Inequality: Uncovering Our Social Nature
Emmanuel Saez
NBER Working Paper No. 28387
January 2021
JEL No. H0

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper argues that the social nature of humans, absent from the standard economic model, is
crucial to understand our large modern social states and why concerns about inequality are so
pervasive. A social solution arises when a situation is resolved at the group level (rather than the
individual level) through cooperation and fair distribution of the resulting surplus. In human
societies, childcare and education for the young, retirement benefits for the old, health care for
the sick, and income support for those in need, is resolved at the social level, and through the
social state in advanced economies. Social situations are pervasive even outside government and
play a significant role in the distribution of pre-tax market incomes.


Emmanuel Saez
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
saez@econ.berkeley.edu
        The standard economic model is based on rational and self-interested individuals
who interact through markets, yet it is obvious that humans are also social beings who
care about and act within groups such as families, workplaces, communities, or nations.
         In the standard model, individuals care only about their own consumption
independently of social context. Taken literally, the model says that a person struggling at
the poverty threshold today gets as much utility as a successful professional two centuries
ago when income per capita was less than one tenth of what it is today. 1 Therefore,
economic growth should beat inequality concerns in the long-run. As Robert Lucas once
put it "Of the tendencies that are harmful to sound economics, the most seductive, and in
my opinion the most poisonous, is to focus on questions of distribution." (Lucas 2004).
Yet, in spite of this extraordinary income growth, concerns about inequality and poverty
remain alive and well in our advanced economies, implying that relative positions matter
to people.2 Indeed, the large increase in income concentration in the United States and a
number of other advanced economies since 1980 has attracted a lot of attention (see e.g.,
Piketty 2014 bestseller success) and figures prominently in the policy debate.
        The evolution of inequality is illustrated on Panel A of Figure 1 which depicts the
share of income earned by the top 10 percent of adults since the early 20th century in the
United States and France using comparable methodology. In this paper, I will contrast the
United States (often described as a small government free-market economy) with France
(with a larger government and more regulated economy). Let us focus first on pre-tax
series before taxes and transfers. Both countries show dramatic variations over the
century. The US experiences a sharp--and lasting--compression in inequality exactly
during World War II at a time of deep government involvement in the war economy.
Around 1980, coinciding with the Reagan revolution, inequality starts to increase and has
now reverted back to its pre-World War II levels. France also experienced a sharp
reduction in inequality during the first half of the 20th century but did not embrace the
Reaganian revolution and experienced only a much more modest increase in inequality in
recent decades. This figure strongly suggests that political developments play a large role
in shaping pre-tax inequality over and above traditional economic forces of technology or
globalization (Alvaredo et al. 2018).
        Perhaps the most striking fact in modern economies illustrating both our social
nature and concerns for inequality is the size of government and the large direct impact it
has on the distribution of economic resources. In advanced modern economies, we pool a
large fraction of the economic output we produce through government. In the richest
countries today, taxes generally raise between 30 and 50 percent of national income and
are used to fund not only public goods needed for the functioning of the economy but
also a wide array of transfers back to individuals both in cash and in-kind. Even though
modern economies generally allocate the fruits of production to workers and owners
through a capitalistic market system with well-defined property rights, as societies, a
significant fraction of market incomes, typically between one third and one half is shared

1
  The Maddison project gathers long-term growth statistics and shows that advanced economies
experienced a more than 10-fold increase in GDP per capita since the industrial revolution of the
mid-19th century (Maddison 2007).
2
  A wide literature has documented relative well-being effects (see e.g., Luttmer 2005 and most
recently Hviberg, Kreiner, and Stantcheva 2020 for systematic surveys).


                                               1
(i.e., effectively "socialized") through government. Panel B in Figure 1 shows how the
tax burden (including all taxes at all levels of government) is distributed across income
groups in 2018 in the United States and France. In both countries, the tax system is
approximately a proportional tax that takes the same percentage of pre-tax income from
each group with some progressivity over most of the distribution and some regressivity at
the top. In France, tax rates are almost 20 points higher than in the US throughout the
distribution, but it is worth re-emphasizing that a tax rate of almost 30 percent in the US
is still a significant share of the economy.
          While a proportional tax does not affect inequality, government spending does
reduce inequality substantially. Many government transfers, such as universal health care
insurance or public education, are allocated on a per-person basis. Others are targeted to
lower earners (such as Medicaid health insurance in the United States). Panel A in Figure
1 illustrates the direct equalizing impact of taxes and government spending on inequality
by depicting top 10 percent income share after subtracting all taxes and adding all
transfers. This share is substantially below the pre-tax income share especially over the
last 50 years when government is bigger (see below). Even though US inequality is
almost as high now as it was in the early 20 th century on a pre-tax basis, it is still
substantially lower on a post-tax basis. For France, inequality on a post-tax basis today is
close to its all-time low. The total equalizing effect of government is much wider than
depicted on the figure as public policies, such as universal public education, also have a
large positive and equalizing impact on pre-tax incomes.

         The standard economic model of self-interested agents who interact through
markets generates efficiency under classical competitive assumptions. Given the
technology and resources constraints, there is no way to reorganize from a market
equilibrium to make everybody better off. The economy that arises from such a complex
web of market interactions generates the illusion of sociality even though sociality is not
part of the model. As Margaret Thatcher put it for a wide audience: "Who is society?
There is no such thing! There are individual men and women and there are families and
no government can do anything except through people and people look to themselves
first." (Thatcher 1987). Public economists have worked primarily within this standard
framework to explain (or criticize) why we nonetheless observe such large governments
in practice. Government intervention is traditionally justified in two domains.
         First, there can be market failures if the standard competitive assumptions do not
hold for example because of externalities, market power, or asymmetric information.
Such situations can often be addressed with a government intervention that can restore
efficiency and sometimes even create a Pareto improvement. For example, corrective
taxation can be used to properly price externalities and get the economy back to market
efficiency. While such government interventions to address market failures are broadly
supported by economists, they can hardly justify the very large size of governments we
observe.
         Second, public economists justify direct redistribution with taxes and transfers as
a way to increase social welfare, generally measured as the straight sum of individual
utilities--the famous utilitarian criterion. Because marginal utility of consumption
decreases with income, redistributing resources from high earners to low earners
increases total utility, a point originally made by Edgeworth (1897). But because



                                             2
individuals care only about themselves, they view taxes as reducing their gain from work
and hence might work less. This creates an equity-efficiency tradeoff that is resolved by
the optimal income tax analysis that Mirrlees (1971) launched. This second aspect is
more controversial among economists because it requires introducing a social welfare
function that is outside the standard framework. In most interpretations, this social
welfare function reflects the views of society embodied into a government that chooses
the tax system. Another interpretation, easier to embed in the standard framework, is that
self-interested individuals would want some redistribution as insurance against the risk of
being poor if such insurance could be obtained before knowing your position on the
economic ladder--behind the veil of ignorance as Rawls (1971) famously put it. The tax
and transfer system effectively provides such insurance. However, as we shall see, the
redistribution done by government is primarily in-kind or targeted to specific groups and
therefore quite different from the across the board redistribution predicted by standard
utilitarian optimal tax theory.

     In this paper, I want to argue that the social nature of humans, absent from the
standard economic model, is crucial to understand our large modern governments and
why concerns about inequality are so pervasive. A social solution arises when a situation
is resolved at the group level--rather than the individual level. For example, providing
classical public goods, such as national defense, funded through taxation of private
incomes is a social solution. Generally, a social solution requires cooperation (such as
obeying tax laws) and fair distribution of the resulting surplus (accepting how the public
good will be financed through taxes). Humans have been shaped, through many millennia
of evolution, to work together for the benefit of the group. This extraordinary ability to
cooperate and find social solutions is pervasive, even outside government which is just
the most obviously visible form of social cooperation in our modern economies. I will
illustrate this through a number of examples taken from various fields of economics:
public economics, labor economics, behavioral economics and lab experiments. The
ideas presented here draw upon large academic literatures in many fields of economics
and the social sciences, of which I know and have cited but a small subset, primarily the
readings that have influenced me the most. The empirical evidence shown is voluntarily
illustrative rather than comprehensive so as to present ideas in the simplest way.
     In human societies, childcare and education for the young, retirement benefits for the
old, health care for the sick, and income support for those in need, is to a large extent
resolved at the social level rather than the individual level. This was traditionally done
informally through the community and the family and is now achieved through the
modern social state in advanced economies. Even though an individual solution through
markets is theoretically possible, in practice, it does not work well without significant
institutional or government help. Human societies are good at providing education, health
care, retirement and income support even though individuals are not. However, such
social aspects are quite different from a general willingness to redistribute out of
utilitarian principles. In all advanced economies, income support is primarily targeted to
groups unable to work and delivered in-kind rather than cash. Income support to groups
expected to work and support themselves always raises concerns and hence is generally
paired with help or push to find work. Societies dislike having to face the equity-




                                            3
efficiency tradeoff and hence try to circumvent it rather than embracing it as standard
optimal tax theory posits.
    The standard concern is that the social state with its large taxes and transfers might
discourage labor supply. However, the social state also intentionally reduces labor supply
by design through various regulations: child labor prohibitions and compulsory education
limit work by the young, retirement benefits sharply reduce work in old age, overtime
hours of work regulations and mandated paid vacation (e.g. 5 weeks in France) reduce
work across the board. This implies that labor supply should be seen partly as a social
choice with society having disutility of labor for the very young, the old, and very long
hours with no vacation break.
    Social solutions are common even outside government, including within private
firms, and play a significant role in the distribution of pre-tax market incomes. Almost
any work activity requires cooperation in production that cannot be mediated solely
through markets. Situations with cooperation in production and ensuing distribution of
surplus are common in all human societies. This has shaped us to be both good at
cooperation and very sensitive to inequality. Even in modern economies, rigid
compensation rules for distributing the fruits of production are a pervasive way to resolve
the distributional issue. This also means that there is more scope to address inequality at
the pre-tax level than economists generally believe. Pre-tax distribution of production
between workers and owners has indeed been historically the place where inequality is
shaped, with government setting the rules of the game and hence having a very large but
indirect impact.
    The paper is organized as follows. In Section I, I discuss how government
redistribution evolved through history to what it is today, revealing our social nature. In
Section II, I describe how the modern social state works. In Section III, I emphasize that
labor supply choices have a very large social component through social state regulations.
In Section IV, I show that this social nature permeates beyond government and helps
understand why inequality concerns are so pervasive. Section V concludes.

    I.     How Social Redistribution Evolved to What It is Today

    A. Pre-history. Hunter-gatherers

Homo sapiens is 200,000 years old and up to 12,000 years ago, humans have been
organized in hunter-gatherer societies (Harari 2014). Therefore, the hunter-gatherer form
of social organization covers 94 percent of human history, and over 99.4 percent of homo
history if one considers our hominins hunter-gatherer ancestors that go back at least 2
million years (Tattersall 2012). A handful of hunter-gatherer societies remain to this day
and have been studied extensively by anthropologists with various studies analyzing
specifically their economic organization.3
        Hunter-gatherer societies are generally small--typically less than 100 people.
They are also fairly egalitarian as they have minimal private wealth and leaders with

3
  Malinowski (1922), Mauss (1925), and Firth (1939) are classic studies. Economic anthropology
is an active field of research within anthropology/sociology but with modest impact (so far) on
mainstream economics. Thurnwald (1932) and Sahlins (1972) are influential economic studies of
early societies and Wilk and Cliggett (2007) for a modern textbook on economic anthropology.


                                              4
limited power. Private wealth is minimal because the land and its natural resources--
animals for hunting and plants for gathering--is communally held. Furthermore,
nomadism drastically limits the accumulation of private housing, goods, and tools
(Woodburn 1982). Leaders have limited power because the rank and file vigilantly keep
leaders from becoming despotic through a reverse dominance strategy as hypothesized
by Boehm (1999). As he summarizes it: "All men seek to rule, but if they cannot rule
they prefer to be equal." (p. 105). A good analogy familiar to the reader is the modern
academic department in universities: faculty are protective of their independence and do
not tolerate a chair with excessive power.
        Community cooperation and sharing is common for many tasks. As is well
known, humans were able to hunt (sometimes to extinction) big and dangerous game
through group cooperation (Diamond 1997). There are sharing norms for the produce of
hunting through customs and reciprocity rather than markets. The rationale for such
norms is that this avoids distributional conflicts. Distribution among the full community
is common and also makes sense in a setting with limited storage. In contrast, gathering
is an individual task and is typically only shared within the family not the community
(Thurnwald, 1932, p. 266). Therefore, there is generally norm-based sharing for
cooperative work but not for individual work.
        Humans' life cycle means that the young, the old, and the sick cannot support
themselves and hence need support from others. In hunter-gatherer societies, they are
taken care of through a mix of family and community support. Presence of the elderly has
been documented in the fossil record among ancestors of homo sapiens and exploded
over the last 30,000 years (Caspari and Lee 2004). This implies that the old were cared
for in prehistorical human societies. They also helped with childrearing (the grandmother
hypothesis proposed by Williams 1957). Children are generally raised in village groups.
Children play and learn and do not start working until adolescence.4
        Therefore, the pooling of economic resources among hunter-gatherers is fairly
high and probably around 50 percent. This rough estimate can be obtained as follows.
Wealth in the form of land and its natural resources is communal and hence so is the
implicit capital income estimated to be 25 percent of output by analogy to pre-industrial
economies.5 Labor income, 75 percent of the remaining output, is generally pooled for
hunting but typically not gathering, firewood collection and cooking. Assuming that 1/3
of work is hunting where product is pooled, this adds 25 percent of output to the shared
pool.6 Similar to nations today, there is pooling of resources within the group but not
across groups. Instead of pooling ressources, different groups trade goods and sometimes
fight over the control of natural resources (Thurnwald, 1932).
        How are hunters motivated to hunt if the produce is communally shared? From an
evolutionary perspective, if cooperation gave hominids and then humans an edge, it

4
  For example, Biesele and Howell (1981) analyze the contemporaneous !Kung hunter-gatherers
from South West Africa and discuss aging and child rearing aspects.
5
  Piketty and Zucman (2013) and Piketty (2014) show that capital income and wealth were mostly
derived from land but were quantitatively as important as in our advanced economies in 18 th
century France and United Kingdom (relative to the size of the economy).
6
  This is naturally a very rough approximation in such a vast anthropological context. Besides
food production, there are other labor tasks some of which are communal like warfare, some of
which are private such as making household artifacts.


                                              5
makes sense that motivation cannot be solely self-interested and that individuals value
working for the group (Gintis et al. 2003, Henrich et al. 2004).7 Laziness is indeed seen
as an anti-social behavior (Thurnwald 1932). As Polanyi (1944, p. 270) summarized the
anthropological work of Malinowski, Thurnwald, and Firth on primitive societies: "the
usual incentives to labor are not [individual] gain but reciprocity, competition, joy of
work, and social approbation." Again, these motivations for work are familiar to the
modern academic researcher. Monetary gain is the not our immediate motivation while
reciprocity when working in a team with co-authors often is. Competition with other
teams to produce the most influential research is clearly a motivator. Joy of work is
needed to be able to sustain long hours of work for many years. Social approbation in the
form of reputation among peers clearly matters to us as well.

    B. History. The Coercive State

About 12,000 years ago, agriculture transformed human societies into sedentary
communities that sometimes became socially stratified as a ruling class could take control
(Thurnwald 1932). In the most fertile areas--Mesopotamia, the Nile valley, the Yangtze
river in China--formal city states arose about 6,000 years ago. They were organized as
despotic kingdoms, they invented taxes and writing as administrative tools for the new
formal state. Writing defines the beginning of history and was initially invented for the
administration and in particular the tax administration of the state. They also used forced
labor, with various gradations from serfdom to slavery. The goal was to serve and
enhance the power of the state--often identified with the ruler or ruling family--rather
than the welfare of the community. Taxes and forced labor funded the construction of
monumental cities and infrastructure, defense and warfare, law and order, and the other
functions of the administrative state, i.e., the regalian public goods. Health decreased due
to risk of relying on a single crop and infectious diseases in dense populations. This made
the early city states fragile (Scott 2017).
        These despotic communities are much more unequal both politically and
economically than earlier hunter-gatherer communities (Boehm 1999). Indeed, wealth
and political power are closely correlated as chiefs or kings rule and have control of the
land and infrastructure.8
        Coercive states slowly overtake the hunter-gatherer and sedentary agricultural
communities in the western world as well as in many parts of Asia and South America,
and become the most common form of social organization up until modern democracies
start emerging a few centuries ago such as the United States and France in the late 18th
century. Democratization itself is a slow process as many groups are initially excluded.
Women could not vote until 1920 in the US and 1945 in France. Many countries
excluded the poor from voting with poll taxes, literacy or property ownership
requirements. Emerging democracies could also be extremely coercive against specific

7
  Social species have evolved to cooperate in production. In the most extreme cases, such as ants
or bees, each individual works for the group implying an almost 100 percent tax rate. Humans are
in between purely social species and purely individualistic species (Wilson 2012).
8
  To this day in autocratic states, wealth and political power are often closely aligned as the
autocrat has the power to redistribute wealth toward himself and his family (Acemoglu and
Robinson 2012).


                                               6
groups either internally--such as Native Americans as the frontier expanded or enslaved
African-Americans until 1865, or externally through colonies--the French and British
empires undemocratically ruled over about 30 percent of the world population in the
early 20th century (see Piketty 2020 for an extended analysis).
        In coercive states, social support for the young, the elderly, and the sick shrinks
down to the family rather than the community although some institutions, most notably
the church, do provide some education, health care, and indigent support for those with
no family support. For the vast majority of the population, education is minimal. For the
wealthy few, education is generally paid for by parents. Child labor becomes very
common. People usually keep working in old age even when their productivity--and
hence their earnings--fall (Minois 1989). When they can no longer support themselves,
they are generally supported by their children as savings and accumulation of wealth is
limited to a small elite. For the few countries for which we have data, the bottom 90
percent of the population owns very little (Piketty 2020). Health care is rudimentary and
the sick generally rely on their families to support them while they cannot work.
        Forced labor slowly decreases and is abolished in most Western countries a few
centuries ago although slavery lasts into the 19th century in their colonies, and in the
newly independent United States of America.
        The level of taxes--even when including local taxes--is typically low, less than
10 percent of output in all western countries for which we have data all the way until the
beginning of the 20th century (Piketty 2020, Chapter 9). Such a low level of taxes can
only fund regalian public goods (administration, law and order, defense, infrastructure)
but not the social state. Furthermore, the tax system is typically regressive as taxes are
either taxes on consumption, rudimentary poll taxes and property taxes on real estate, or
flat taxes on agricultural output (Ardant 1971).
        Throughout this long history, the challenge of despotic states is to extract revenue
to enhance the power of the state without generating tax revolts (Weber and Wildavsky
1986). As Colbert, the finance minister of Louis the XIV of France, put it: "The art of
taxation consists in so plucking the goose as to procure the largest quantity of feathers
with the least possible amount of hissing." Taxes are low because enforcement is difficult
in a mostly informal economy and tough enforcement can backfire in the form of tax
revolts. This view of taxes funding a coercive state still has resonance today among
libertarians particularly in America which they view as a democracy founded through a
tax revolt against the British crown "No taxation without representation". 9

    C. The Rise of the Social State in the 20th century

An extraordinary transformation of our societies takes place during the 20th century. In
advanced economies, the size of the government measured by tax revenue to national
income increases from less than 10 percent to levels between 30 and 50 percent. 10 Panel
A in Figure 2 (taken from Piketty 2020) illustrates this for a few countries: the United

9
  As we mentioned above, America was at first an incomplete democracy. Before then, American
colonies had a lot of autonomy in setting their tax systems with regressive taxes in the South but
incredibly progressive taxes--for the time--in the North (Einhorn 2006).
10
   Flora (1983) gathers the most extensive historical statistics and OECD 2020a covers the
contemporary period since 1965.


                                                7
States, the United Kingdom, France, and Sweden. In all these countries, the tax ratio is
low (below 10 percent) and flat until World War I, increases until around the late 1970s,
and then is roughly stable thereafter. The exact timing of the tax increases and the final
level of the ratio differ across countries with France and Sweden stabilizing around 50
percent and the United States around 30 percent (and the United Kindgom around 40
percent).
        Panel B in Figure 2 (also created in Piketty 2020) depicts the evolution of the
composition of government spending (relative to national income) in Europe (average of
France, Germany, Sweden, and the United Kingdom) since 1880. Up to the early 20th
century, the bulk of government spending is devoted to regalian public goods as we
discussed above. The growth of government over the 20th century is almost entirely due
to the growth in the social state that provides education and childcare support for the
young, health care for the sick, retirement benefits for the old, as well as an array of
income support programs for groups in need such as the disabled, unemployed, or the
poor. Essentially, the social state provides support for those who cannot provide for
themselves because they are young, old, sick, or otherwise unable to earn a living. Let us
review the historical development of each pillar in turn.

Education. Government tax funded and compulsory education is the pillar of the social
state that develops first. The motivation is in part nation building and hence fits within
the framework of the coercive state building its power. But the social aspect of universal
human development and opportunity is also part of the motivation.
         Prussia and Austria were the first to adopt compulsory schooling in the mid-18th
century (Van Horn Melton 1988). America was also a precursor in mass education but
following a decentralized process (instead of nation building). Massachusetts was the first
US state to enact compulsory education in 1852 (and had already achieved a high level of
schooling when it was still a British colony). Mississippi was the last state to adopt
compulsory schooling in 1917.
         Historically, mass education is always government driven through a combination
of government funding (at all levels including higher education) and compulsory
schooling (for primary and then secondary education). Meyer, Ramirez, Soysal (1992)
provide an empirical analysis of the development of mass education through nation
states.
         Let us illustrate this on Figure 3. Panel A in Figure 3 shows that in the early 19th
century, Prussia and the United States already had school enrollment rates at age 5-14
around 2/3 substantially higher than other countries. France catches up slowly over the
19th century. Slavery in America also imposed school prohibitions on the enslaved so that
the school enrollment rate of black children was minuscule before the civil war. After the
civil war ends, black children enrollment rates shoot up to over 50 percent by 1880, one
of the fastest increases ever seen and showing the enormous power of the state in
restricting or promoting education. Black children enrollment increased more slowly in
the Jim Crow period of discrimination after 1880 and would not catch up to whites until
after World War II.
         Panel B depicts various 20th century experiences showing that compulsory
schooling can have dramatic impacts quickly. The most extreme case is soviet Russia that
achieved quasi-universal enrollment by 1940 from a level around 40 percent in 1920.



                                             8
Education was a way to both indoctrinate young minds and develop the economy. The
communist experiences mix the coercive state--perhaps in its most extreme form under
Stalin in the Soviet Union and in North Korea still today--and the social state. Asian
countries which experienced fast economic growth over the 20 th century also had very
proactive education policies (with mass education likely fueling economic growth,
Easterlin 1981). Panel B shows a sharp increase for Korea in the late 1940s and Indonesia
in the 1970s after they finally adopt universal compulsory schooling (but starting from
pre-existing high bases of 60 percent). Mass education requires mobilization to build
schools and train new teachers, a process that takes years if not decades after enactment
(see Duflo 2001 for an analysis of the Indonesian experience).

Retirement. Retirement support is the pillar of the social state that generally develops
second. Retirement programs first developed privately through negotiations between
large employers and unions, an indication that workers need institutional help to provide
for their retirement. 11 Public retirement programs sometimes grew out of such private
retirement programs through a general mandate. Germany was the first country to
introduce such a general mandatory public retirement system in 1889 under Bismarck.
Public retirement programs sometimes developed as a retirement benefit aside from or on
top of private retirement programs as Social Security in 1935 in the United States (Costa
1998).
        Before public retirement programs existed, a large fraction of the elderly was
working (80 percent of men aged 65 or more were gainfully employed in the United
States in the late 19th century, see Figure 5 below). The elderly who could no longer work
enough to support themselves had to rely on family support. Public retirement systems
were a way to provide social insurance through the state instead of relying on self-
insurance or family insurance.

Health care. Like retirement benefits, health care benefits start with private
arrangements between employers and employees that then get mandated by the state. The
earliest program started again in Germany in 1883 under Bismarck to cover workers.
Such employer related systems developed in most Western countries in the early 20th
century. Universal health insurance expanding coverage to non-workers started after
World War II with the United Kingdom launching first its National Health Service in
1948, and spreading quickly among almost all advanced economies, the United States
being the notable exception. In the early 20th century, health care was a small fraction of
the economy. But today, health care is about 10 percent of the economy in OECD
countries and about 18 percent in the United States (OECD 2020c). Therefore, health
care is now a very large component of the social state (Figure 2, Panel B).

Income support. Income support programs have a long history with tension between
offering support to those in need and concerns about discouraging work. As a result,
many programs start as narrow programs targeting groups deemed unable to support
themselves such as widows with children (at a time when mothers were not expected to
work outside the household), the elderly or the disabled (before retirement programs

11
  Laibson (2018) AEA distinguished lecture was devoted to this phenomenon of private
paternalism of employers on behalf of their employees from a behavioral economics perspective.


                                              9
existed), or the unemployed. Programs supporting those out-of-work often had a
"workfare" component requiring recipients to do some work for the government to
receive support such as in the Poor laws in England (Lindert 2004).

    A large literature has discussed why the social state emerges in the 20 th century. It is
likely that democratization replacing earlier coercive authoritarian states led the
population to demand help through the social state (see e.g., Acemoglu and Robinson,
2000; Lindert 2004). Looking at history (since the beginning of writing), the modern
social state appears as a unique and very recent historical development (150 years old)
while the coercive state is the norm throughout history (the preceding 3000-5000 years)
with still a number of autocratic states existing to this day. However, extending the time
frame back into our long pre-history and its social communities, the modern social state
starts to look more like a homecoming--adapted to the modern world and economy to be
sure--rather than a radically new, and hence perhaps fragile, development.

   II.     The Four Pillars of the Social State today

The social state raises a puzzle for the standard economic model. Rational individuals in
a market economy with functioning credit markets should be able to largely manage on
their own. The young (or their parents) can borrow to pay for their education if this is a
worthy investment. Health care is largely a private good for which people can buy
insurance. Workers can save for their retirement anticipating that their work ability will
decline with age. Finally, people can also dip into their savings whenever they face a
temporary income loss such as unemployment.
        Economists traditionally justify social insurance by focusing on market failures
such as asymmetric information leading to credit failure or insurance failure. However,
the resulting solutions: guaranteed student loans for education so that anybody can
borrow for education, or mandates for health insurance to deal with adverse selection
death spirals, or mandatory annuitization of retirement savings to make sure retirees
never run out of savings, are much lighter interventions than what actual social states do.
More radically, the field of behavioral economics has shown that individuals fail to
behave as in the standard model particularly in circumstances that involve the time
dimension that are crucial for education investment, health insurance, or old age or buffer
stock savings (see Thaler 2015 for description of the emergence of this young field).
        Looking back at the deep history we have sketched in the previous section, it is
easy to see the common theme between community support of hunter-gatherer societies,
family support in coercive state societies, and the social state of modern social
democracies. It is worth reviewing briefly the current structure of the four pillars of the
social state to understand its logic and why the standard economic model solution does
not work well in practice.

   A. Education.

As discussed above, mass education of modern times is always government driven
through a combination of compulsory schooling (for primary and then secondary
education) and government funding (at all levels including higher education) generally



                                             10
taking the form of direct government provision of schools and teachers. In OECD
countries, education is always primarily government funded and often overwhelmingly so
(OECD 2020b).
         If education is compulsory, government funding must follow as low-income
families would not be able to afford to pay for it at full cost. This is because education
requires highly qualified labor--teachers. This remains the case today as it was in the 19th
century as teachers are always skilled workers and the technology of education has not
changed much. If a teacher is paid three times the average working-class earnings and
can teach 20 students, the cost per school age kid is 300/20=15 percent of working-class
earnings prohibitive for many families especially large ones. Therefore, mass education is
highly redistributive on a direct basis: every child gets education while tax funding is
approximately proportional to income. Education also has enormous indirect
redistributive effects by giving opportunities to succeed economically to children from
disadvantaged backgrounds.
         Higher education is not (yet) compulsory but its capacity is built through public
universities as private universities serve only a small fraction of students in advanced
economies (OECD 2020b). Even in the United States where private higher education is
large, three quarters of students attend public institutions (National Center for Education
Statistics, 2020). Therefore, the government essentially controls the supply side. Higher
education is also highly subsidized as tuition costs paid by students are only a fraction of
the real costs of higher education (and in many countries in Europe such as France,
tuition costs are almost zero). Even though higher education is an individual choice, at
the aggregate level, it looks like a government choice. One striking example comes from
the United States GI bill after World War II that paid for the higher education of veterans
and dramatically boosted college education of men (using women as a control group)
(Stanley 2003).
         Why not have students or their families pay directly for education or borrow with
student loans as a standard economic model would recommend? The experience of
student loans in the United States shows that they become an unbearable burden for a
significant fraction of borrowers. There are several reasons for this. Attending college is
not a guarantee to get a degree, let alone get a good paying job afterwards. Furthermore,
handling debt is challenging for many as behavioral economics has shown. This forced
the government to provide relief ex-post (Baum 2016).
         Aside from funding, why not have for-profit education instead of having public
institutions provide education? The United States has indeed experienced a surge in for-
profit higher education institutions as state funding for public institutions has retreated.
The evidence suggests that students can be lured into high cost, low quality for-profit
schools (Deming, Goldin, and Katz 2012). This problem is exacerbated when for-profit
schools put more weight on profits than service after take-up by private equity (Eaton,
Howell, and Yannelis 2020). This is a striking failure of the market that arises because
students are not able to assess perfectly the value and cost of education offers (Akerlof
and Shiller 2015 develop this aspect of "consumer failures" more generally).
         In sum, education is largely decided at the social level, not the individual level.

   B. Retirement Benefits.




                                            11
The elderly lose their ability to work and hence support themselves with their earnings.
The standard economic solution is that workers should save for retirement (the famous
life cycle model of Modigliani). A large body of work in behavioral economics shows
that, in contrast to what the standard model posits, individuals are not able to save on
their own and invest wisely (see e.g., Thaler and Sunstein 2009 for an overview). Indeed,
before retirement programs existed, family (or community) support, not saving, was the
main source of support as we discussed above.
        Public retirement programs are mandatory and funded by taxes. They are typically
introduced as pay-as-you-go systems where taxes on workers immediately pay for the
pensions of retirees, replacing the former pay-as-you-go family-based system where
children take care of their elderly parents. Instead of having to support their elderly
parents, adult children pay taxes to fund retirement benefits. Social insurance also allows
to pool risks much more effectively than family insurance.
        Benefits are generally related to lifetime earnings so that the public retirement
system is generally not highly redistributive from a life-time perspective (see e.g. Brown,
Coronado, and Fullerton 2009 for a US analysis) but it is highly redistributive from a
cross-sectional perspective: elderly retirees with no earnings get support from workers
with earnings.
        Even the most radical privatization reforms--as in Chile--maintain mandatory
contributions. Even private employer pension plans are either mandatory (such as the
traditional defined benefit employer pension plans in the US) or highly encouraged
through enormous price incentives (such as the 401(k) employer matches in the US) or
defaults (being enrolled automatically in 401(k) plans upon hiring which have enormous
impact on participation even in the medium term, Madrian and Shea 2001). Therefore,
retirement programs, even when they come closest to mimicking the standard lifecycle
savings model, need a heavy institutional hand to steer individuals in the right direction.
        Therefore, the problem of retirement is also resolved at the social level, not the
individual level.

     C. Health Care

All advanced economies provide universal health care insurance with the United States
being the unique exception in leaving about 10 percent of its population uninsured.
Health care costs have become large (10 percent of national income on average in the
richest countries) due to enormous progress in medicine (OECD 2020c). Hence, tax
funding is the norm as lower income families would not be able to afford the full cost.
Therefore, universal health insurance creates significant redistribution by income and
also of course by health and health risk status.
        One important question is why health care quality is the same for all in such
universal health care systems (at least as a principle not always realized in practice). Why
isn't health insurance offered in grades with cheap insurance covering only the most cost-
effective treatments? Probably because humans are willing to spend a lot of resources to
save a specific live, i.e., an actual person with a condition that can be treated. 12 This is

12
   Economists have noted that societies are willing to spend a lot more resources to save an actual
life than to save a statistical life (such as reducing accident risk through better safety). See e.g.
Gruber (2016, Chapter 12).


                                                12
likely a consequence of our social nature shaped by evolution: taking care of the sick or
the injured was helpful for group survival. This makes withholding treatment to the
poorly insured socially unbearable. In the US, hospitals are obliged to offer emergency
care to all patients, even those without insurance and unable to pay. 13 Of course, on top
of this, adverse selection provides a strong standard rational for mandating health
insurance.
        Even in the US where private insurance covers slight more than half of the
population, it is primarily offered through employers which are now mandated to offer it
(if they have 50 or more fulltime employees). This mandate is economically equivalent to
forcing each insured worker to pay the full cost of the insurance regardless of earnings.
This is a crushing and unbearable burden for low paid and insured workers (Saez and
Zucman 2019 describe it as a privatized poll tax and Case and Deaton 2020 discuss the
labor market impacts).
        A recent literature has also shown strong evidence of behavioral effects in health
care choices particularly in the US context where choice is most extensive (see Chandra,
Handel, and Schwartzstein 2019 for a recent survey). People make mistakes in health-
care utilization and treatment choices. Copayments and deductibles lead consumers to
reduce demand for high-value care. This may explain why universal health care systems
have low copays and deductibles and why health care decisions for patients are made
primarily by health care professionals. Like for education, the difficulty for users to
understand and navigate health care choices implies that the market does not necessarily
deliver efficiency. In sum, the problem of health care is also primarily resolved at the
social level rather than the individual level.

     D. Income Support

    Income support programs are obviously a social level form of help for people in need.
They are targeted to specific groups such as the unemployed with unemployment
benefits, the disabled with disability benefits, the elderly poor with minimum old-age
benefits, and children in poor families (with family benefits such the refundable tax
credits and traditional welfare for single parents in the US). Unconditional means-tested
support is generally modest and most often in-kind (such as housing or nutrition support)
and combined with job training help. For example, even in France, with its generous
social state, a single adult with no resources would receive 560 Euros/month in cash as of
2020 (Revenu de solidarité active). 14 This cash amount is only about 17 percent of
average income per adult in France. But it is still over three times as high as the meager
$200/month in SNAP (formerly food stamps) benefits a single adult with no dependent in
the US can get (the only form of quasi-cash means-tested transfer available to this group).
        Therefore, there is a widespread social view that people who are expected to work
and support themselves should be not be supported by the community. Everywhere, there
is strong social reprobation against "free loaders" who could work and support
themselves but decide to live off government support (Lindert 2004 provides historical

13
   In practice, health insurance cost in US private insurance varies primarily based on deductibles
and copay and not quality of care.
14
   This can be combined with various in-kind support for housing, utility costs, or public
transportation.


                                               13
context; Saez and Stantcheva 2016 present survey evidence). This is why income support
is concentrated among groups unable or not expected to work such as the unemployed,
the disabled, the elderly.
        This feels very different from a utilitarian optimal tax and transfer system that
explicitly trades off equity (redistribution to the poor) with efficiency (some loss of
output due to reduced incentives to earn) (see Piketty and Saez 2013 for a survey).
Instead income support tags recipients who are not expected to work to avoid the equity-
efficiency tradeoff (Akerlof 1978).
    But our innate aversion to free-loaders can be interpreted as a way to detect the
presence of behavioral responses and adjust redistribution with better targeting or with a
better design (more incentives to work, help finding work, or less generous benefits). In
other words, the public processes efficiency costs through a fairness lens ("free-loaders
take advantage of the system", "beneficiaries would be destitute without help").
Stantcheva (2020) shows indeed that distributional and fairness considerations are more
important than efficiency considerations when the public reasons about taxes and
transfers.

   E. Social Group Scope

While we have seen that pooling of resources through taxes and transfers is very large at
the level of the nation (and sub-national governments in decentralized countries), it is
striking how small transfers are across countries. Direct foreign aid from rich countries
toward developing countries is modest (around .2 percent GDP in the United States and
always below 1 percent anywhere else). It is targeted to crises (such as disaster relief),
security (defense spending in the context of alliances), and development aid (a substantial
portion of which runs through international organizations such as the World Bank or the
International Monetary Fund). In US public opinion polls, foreign aid is often the least
popular item of government spending (e.g. Pew Research Center 2019). Even in the
European Union (EU), an old and deep community of independent nations, the common
budget is only 1 percent of the EU economy (and hence minuscule relative to the
government budgets of each nation member). Direct transfers across EU countries, even
in the context of severe crisis such as the financial crisis of 2009 when Germany directly
bought Greek public debt, quickly become controversial.
        It has also been noted that the social state is smaller in countries fractionalized
along ethnic or religious lines (see Alesina and La Ferrara 2005 for a survey on the
economic effects of fractionalization). For example, Alesina and Glaeser (2004) argue
that this is the main reason why the US has a smaller social state than European
countries. Alesina, Miano, and Stantcheva (2018) show through surveys that the public
dislikes redistribution toward immigrants and that emphasizing the presence of
immigrants reduces support for redistribution.
        All this evidence shows that the scope of the social group matters greatly.
Humans are willing to pool resources with the social group they identify with but
typically not others, another striking piece of evidence demonstrating our social nature
(as opposed to universal utilitarian principles). The nature of the group can vary
depending on situations and is also malleable. For example, the rise of the social state
was in large part replacing family support by nation state support in specific domains.



                                            14
     III.   The Social State and Labor Supply

The main critique leveled at the large modern social state is that it might discourage work
and hence depress economic activity. Indeed, in the standard economics model, labor
supply reduces utility and the sole motivation for work is individual gain. Therefore,
taxes and transfers can reduce labor supply. An enormous empirical literature has shown
that this model has indeed some relevance (see Pencavel 1986 and Blundell and
MaCurdy 1999 for classic surveys). Estimated labor supply responses are generally--but
not uniformly--fairly modest for groups strongly attached to the labor force (such a
prime age males) but can be large for groups less attached such as the elderly (Gruber and
Wise 1999), secondary earners especially when women were less attached to the labor
force (Blau and Kahn 2007), or single parents (Meyer and Rosenbaum 2001).
         Taking a broader view though, social determinants of labor supply become readily
visible. First, the social state has indeed reduced labor supply along various dimensions
(youth labor, old age labor, and long hours) but it has done so intentionally by design and
regulation and not as an unintended consequence. Second, social norms also affect labor
supply (e.g., whether mothers should work outside the household).
         To give a broad level view, Figure 4 depicts the employment rate (people working
divided by population) by 5-year age bins in the United States and France in 2019 using
OECD statistics for men in Panel A and women in Panel B. 15 Employment rates are
similarly high in both countries in prime age (25-59) and actually slightly higher in
France for women. But employment rates are substantially smaller among the young and
the old in France. This strongly suggests that differences in labor supply along the
extensive margin in France vs. the US are driven by education and labor regulations or
social norms regarding work among the young, retirement decisions for the old, and
perhaps differences in family norms or policies regarding female market work, and not by
the overall of taxes needed to fund the larger social state in France. Let us examine each
in turn.

Youth labor. Child labor was prevalent before the rise of the social state and mass
education (Basu 1999 provides a survey from a developing country perspective). It was
common in most US states up until the Great Depression (Moehling 1999). US census
data show that almost 20 percent of children aged 10 to 15 worked for pay at the end of
the 19th century and this declined in the early part of the 20th century (US Census 1975,
series D80). Compulsory education mechanically reduces children labor supply. But
labor regulations were also enacted to further reduce and eventually eradicate child labor
(culminating in the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 for the US at the Federal level).
Therefore, discouraging child labor has a strong social choice component over and above
individual choices that families make for their children.

Old age labor. As we mentioned, work in old age was prevalent before the development
of public retirement systems and dramatically decreases during the 20th century when
they are introduced. Panel A of Figure 5 depicts the fraction of elderly men aged 65 and

15
  This follows Blundell, Bozio, and Laroque (2013) who present such highly insightful graphs
for the US, UK, and France at the annual level (instead of 5-year age bins).


                                            15
above working for pay in the US and France since the late 19th century. In 1850-1880,
almost 80 percent of US elderly men were still working, at a time when life expectancy at
age 65 was only about half of what it is today (Blundell, French, and Tetlow 2017). The
fraction working decreases starting in 1890 after civil war pensions are expanded (made
available to any veteran no longer able to work due to old age or disability) and further
shrinks after US social security payments start in the late 1930s. By 1930 the fraction of
elderly working is only 25 percent. France follows a similar trend but starting from a
lower level (54 percent working in 1895) and ending at an even lower level (5 percent
working in 1980) after the retirement age falls dramatically in the post-World War II
decades.
        Trends in recent decades for the "young" elderly men aged 60 to 64 show the
most dramatic shifts and are depicted on panel B using OECD data for France and the
US, and also Germany which is a striking case study. Employment dramatic decreases in
countries such as France and Germany up to 2000 followed up by an increase since then
with US having a much flatter pattern. As documented by a large body of work (see
Gruber and Wise 1999), these dramatic shifts are driven by changes in the pension
systems and in particular retirement ages. Germany lowered the retirement age from 65 to
60 in 1973 and the fraction of men working at age 60-64 falls dramatically from 65
percent in 1973 down to 40 percent in the late 1970s. In the early 2000s, Germany
increased the retirement age back to 65 and the fraction working reverts from 30 percent
in 2002 to 67 percent in 2019 (as high as in the early 1970s). France considerably
increased the generosity of public pensions through the 1980s when age 60 was the
retirement age norm. In the 1990s, only 10 to 15 percent of the young elderly were
working in France (down from over 50 percent in 1975). Since 2000, France has also
reduced the generosity of pensions for the young elderly and the fraction working has
increased (up to 34 percent in 2019) although not as dramatically as in Germany. The US
much flatter pattern can be explained by the stability of retirement ages in the social
security system.
        Intriguingly, retirement programs also affect retirement age through social effects
over and above traditional economic incentives: Seibold (2020) shows that German
retirees are heavily influenced by statutory retirement ages even absent financial
incentives.16
        In sum, how much the elderly work is decided primarily through the social state
by modulating the retirement programs.

Female market work. There has been a dramatic increase in female market work since
mid-20th century in advanced economies. Panel A in Figure 6 illustrates trends for the
US, France, and the Netherlands (an interesting case study) since 1970 for males vs.
females aged 25-54 (prime age). While prime age males have always worked at very high
rates of around 90 percent, female market work used to be much lower than males but is
only slightly lower than males today in these three countries. The timing and pace vary
widely across countries. The US and France had relatively high female labor force
participation in the 1970s (around 55 percent) but it was very low in the Netherlands (less

16
  The large effect created by the early retirement age (62 in the US) also shows that many people
are unable to save to retire earlier but retire as soon as benefits become available, contradicting
the standard rational life cycle model.


                                               16
than 25 percent in the early 1970s). Today, female employment rates are actually slightly
higher in the Netherlands than in France or the US. Therefore, female labor force
participation is greatly affected by social norms particularly around whether mothers
should work outside the household, which end up codified in part through the social state
in terms of family policies (such as publicly provided childcare and preschool, maternity
labor regulations).
        A striking and well-known historical example is illustrated on Panel B of Figure 6
that depicts the labor force participation of women (aged 16-64) in the United States from
1940 to 1965. There was a temporary surge of almost 25 percent (or 10 points) exactly
during World War II when additional labor was needed to support the war effort and fill
in for men serving in the military. This was achieved through social mobilization
coordinated by the government. The panel displays the most iconic poster of the era
("Rosie the Riveter") motivating women to work. The government was also able to
organize childcare extremely fast so that young mothers could join the labor force as
well. Mulligan (1998) notes that this extra labor supply was achieved in spite of much
higher taxes needed to fund the war effort. As he concludes: "Is the wartime experience a
success story for central planning?" It is certainly evidence of social labor supply choices.
        Another striking example is given by single mothers in the US in the 1990s. Panel
C of Figure 6 (reproduced from Kleven 2019) shows that the labor force participation rate
of single mothers (aged 20-50) caught up with single women with no children in the
1990s during welfare reform that cut welfare support to non-working single parents and
expanded the earned income tax credit (EITC) for working single parents. Therefore, a
reform of the social state ended up having a dramatic labor supply effect. Economists
have generally interpreted this as a labor supply response to the new incentives (see
Grogger and Lynn 2005) but it can also be interpreted as a social choice: US society
decided in the 1990s that single mothers should work and encoded this view through tax
and transfer reforms.17

Intensive hours of work. The standard concern among economists is that the social state
might discourage labor supply because of taxes and transfers. However, the social state
also plays a direct active role in reducing hours of work by regulating overtime and
imposing vacation mandates. Therefore, the concern of the social state seems instead to
be that people might end up working too long hours with too little vacation time.
        Historically, at the beginning of industrialization, there is indeed a concern that
workers are working too many hours per week damaging their health, family life, and
overall well-being. In the early 20th century, organized labor fought for workday hourly
limits and eventually the social state passed regulations. Fighting for hourly limits was
considered as important as fighting for better wages (Roediger and Foner 1989).
        To illustrate the role of work regulations, Figure 7 depicts average hours of work
in the US and France among employees (pooling all employees regardless of age, gender,
or part-time vs. full-time) from the OECD database since 1950. While hours of work in
France were only slightly lower (7 percent) than the in the US in 1950, they are now
substantially lower (21 percent lower in 2019). Interestingly, expanded paid vacation

17
  As Kleven (2019) points out, other reforms such as EITC expansions took place at other times
and had no visible effect in the time series depicted on the figure, suggesting that pure monetary
incentives might not be the full explanation.


                                               17
time and hours of work regulations are associated with drops in hours of work in the
French series. Mandated paid vacation time increased in 1968 (from 3 to 4 weeks) and in
1982 (to 5 weeks). Regular hours of work decreased from 40 to 39 in 1982 and down to
35 in 2000-2002 (Askenazy 2013). The drop in hours in 1968 and 1982 are especially
visible. The US has always had a 40-hour week (since the New Deal) and no mandated
paid vacation. Therefore, it is quite plausible that hours of work in France are lower
because of more paid vacation time and more stringent hours of work regulations (see
Alesina, Glaeser, and Sacerdote 2005 for a longer discussion along these lines).
        Such regulations show that intensive labor supply choices are also partly a social
choice. It is possible that vacation and hours regulation is a policy the French have
chosen to reduce their hours of work because taxes are high, but this would still be a
"social" labor supply response (engineered through government policy) as opposed to
standard individual labor supply responses.

       In sum, it appears that society has disutility of work for children, the elderly, and
for very long hours or no vacation breaks, and regulates labor supply at the social level
accordingly.

     IV.    Social Situations and Concerns for Inequality

         Although government is the most obvious social institution, many private
institutions have social aspects where people take a group perspective instead of a purely
individualistic perspective.
         The household is the most basic example. It is modeled as a single unit that
effectively acts as a super individual in most economic models.18 There are obviously
individuals with different views within each household and hence potential conflicts but
the "single unit" modeling is seen as a reasonable benchmark. 19
         A number of social institutions outside the family and aside from formal
government also arise in various contexts and either pre-exist or supplement the social
state. Villages in developing countries provide informal insurance (see e.g. Townsend
1994) not unlike the earlier hunter-gatherer societies we discussed above. Individuals are
able to create common-pool resources to manage public goods outside of government as
famously shown by Ostrom (1990) in many contexts across the world. People also form
voluntary communes with strong egalitarian norms, the most famous and successful
being the Israeli Kibbutz (Abramitzky 2018). These institutions manage to overcome the
tragedy of the commons or the free-rider problem outside of the formal government.
         The modern large employer is another example of a setting where cooperation
takes place outside of market mechanisms as Coase (1937) famously theorized.
Economists typically model firms as a hierarchical structure where employees work on
behalf of owners. In some countries such as Germany or Finland, workers are represented
on the board of large employers so that cooperation between workers and owners

18
  The unitary household is even extended to extremes such as the infinitely long living dynasty.
19
  The unitary household model has been challenged recognizing that power is not distributed
equally among householders and matters for within household allocations (e.g. see Duflo 2003
for an empirical illustration in South Africa showing that pensions going to grandmothers benefit
grandkids wellbeing more than pensions going to grandfathers).


                                              18
becomes less hierarchical. In practice, large and established employers absorb risk and
offer steady work and compensation. They also fill gaps in the social state for example
with retirement and health benefits in the United States.20 An extreme example of a social
employer would be the modern university and its faculty workforce that receives tenure
insurance and has a strong advisory voice on administrative matters.
        Finally, nonprofit organizations are another type of social institutions. Individuals
contribute voluntarily and the institutions serve an array of causes, and even create
products that sometimes compete successfully with for-profit products with many modern
examples (such as open source software).21
        Therefore, social organization does seem to come naturally to us. We can easily
take a group perspective and act accordingly.

     A. Cooperation and Surplus Distribution

A group perspective requires cooperation, and this can naturally conflict with the
individual perspective. How can then cooperation be sustained?
         Cooperation benefits the group but faces two challenges: (1) how to overcome the
classic social dilemma to achieve efficiency, (2) how to distribute the gains from
cooperation which is an equity issue. Cooperation can be sustained in various ways. 22
First, through altruism and reciprocity, individuals can take the group perspective as their
own, e.g. individuals care about their family members in their household (see Sobel 2005
for a review). Second, cooperation can be achieved through authority where authority can
arise from a hierarchy (e.g., an employer directing workers), social norms or rules. Third
and related, there is resentment and punishment of non-cooperating individuals in settings
where cooperation is expected. Resentment happens when altruism is not paid back with
reciprocity (Fehr and Gachter 2000). Punishment can follow and particularly so when
authority has been violated. Fourth, sustaining cooperation also requires a distribution of
surplus that is acceptable to all parties. This last aspect is the key reason why we are so
attuned to inequality.

Lab experiment evidence. The simplest evidence of cooperation in production and
fairness in its subsequent distribution comes from a large body of lab experiment
evidence.


20
   Indeed, there is a striking parallel between the rise of the coercive state and its latter
transformation into a social state and the rise of industrial firms --initially harmful for the health
of workers (Komlos 1998)--and their transformation into the modern large employer that offers
"good jobs" with health and pension benefits. This transformation is still incomplete and possibly
at risk of getting reversed as the power of organized labor wanes.
21
    Charitable giving is progressive on the contribution side with the rich contributing
disproportionally (Fack and Landais 2016 compile US historical statistics) but cannot replace the
state. For example, US aggregate charitable contributions (1.5 percent of national income) is less
than 10 percent that tax revenue gap between France and US documented above.
22
   Game theory generally assumes individualistic preferences and tries to understand how
cooperation can nonetheless be sustained in some context. But behavioral economics work has
introduced preferences for fairness (e.g., Rabin 1993, Fehr and Schmidt 1999, Charness and
Rabin 2002) or cooperation (e.g., Roemer 2019).


                                                 19
Cooperation in production. The public good game is the most basic set-up of the social
dilemma (see Leydard 1995 and Chauduri 2011 for surveys). Within a small group, each
individual is given an endowment that she can divide between a public good or herself.
The public good benefits all in the group so that the efficient solution is full public good
contribution. But it is not a Nash equilibrium as playing selfish is always a dominant
strategy. However, in practice, participants contribute significantly to the public good.
Cooperation breaks down overtime in repeated games because cooperators get upset at
free-riders, and actually are willing to spend resources to punish them (in variants of the
game). Communication also helps sustain cooperation. This demonstrates the inclination
of humans to cooperate and punish the selfish. There is also experimental work showing
reciprocity in production. For example, Fehr, Kirchsteiger, Riedl (1993) show that
recipients work harder for more generous employers even when hard work no longer
affects compensation.
Distribution of surplus. The dictator game, where one player (the dictator) gets to split an
endowment between herself and another player (the recipient), offers insights in the issue
of distribution and the tension between social vs. individual motives (see Engel 2011 for
a meta study of this large literature). The individualistic solution is to give away nothing
yet about 2/3 of dictators share with the recipient with equal splitting being the most
common form of sharing. There is more sharing if the recipient helped create the
endowment (and less if the dictator created it through her work) showing that how
surplus is jointly produced matters a lot. There is also more sharing when the recipient is
needy (consistent with social income support) and when the dictator is identified (social
pressure). Non-student subjects give a lot more and so do people from small scale
societies (closest to ancient hunter gatherer societies).
        The ultimatum game is a refinement of the dictator game that allows the recipient
to refuse offers they do not like in which case neither the dictator nor the recipient gets
anything (see Thaler 1988 for an introduction and Roth 1995 and Guth and Kocher 2014
for surveys). Recipients reject offers that are too stingy and in turn proposers tend to
share more with equal split being the most common sharing proposal. This shows that
selfish dictators get punished even if punishment is costly to the recipient. And this in
turn make dictators behave more socially with 50/50 splits being the safest choice that
prevents any distribution conflict.
    In summary, humans are willing to cooperate to achieve efficient outcomes and care
about how surplus is distributed. This was shaped by our long evolution as a cooperative
species but with individualistic tendencies that make the distribution of surplus a
sensitive issue. Let us examine next why this is relevant to understand the modern
economy.

     B. Joint Production and Pre-tax Distribution

The standard economic model posits that wages are set competitively and hence equal to
marginal product in equilibrium, which leaves no scope for a distributional conflict of
pre-tax market incomes between workers and their employers. 23 Yet, the distributional
conflict between workers and owners has been very prominent historically and still is

23
   Economists have also studied non-competitive labor market models such as the monopsony
(starting with Robinson 1969) but typically have focused on efficiency issues rather than equity.


                                               20
today. Production takes place within the firm through cooperation of workers and owners,
where individual contributions are often hard to measure and where replacing workers or
owners is costly. Contract theory has relaxed the assumption of perfect cooperation by
introducing imperfect monitoring. Search and matching theory has introduced matching
costs which creates a bilateral monopoly situation once a match has been made and there
is surplus to be shared between the employer and the employee. Hence, a range of
acceptable wages is possible, leaving room for distributional conflicts. Behavioral
economics has introduced fairness and social preferences in the labor market (Akerlof
1982, Fehr, Goette, and Zehnder 2009) and contract theory (Fehr, Klein, and Schmidt
2007).

Rigid compensation rules. Using pay setting norms can help alleviate the distributional
conflicts. Indeed, many employers and especially large ones use rigid compensation rules
such as pay scales, across the board pay raises --such as cost-of-living adjustments or
union bargained raises.24 There is evidence that workers are sensitive to their relative pay
and dislike being paid less than their peers (see e.g., Card et al. 2012). As a result, there is
often wage secrecy (Lawler 1965) and wage compression within firms (Akerlof and
Yellen 1990).
        Another consequence of the distributional conflict is that wages are downward
rigid because pay cuts hurt morale and cooperation of workers (Bewley 1999). Recent
empirical work has shown that wages are sticky to payroll taxes. With flexible wages,
employee vs. employer side payroll taxes are economically equivalent theoretically but
not so in practice because wages are rigid. If wages are rigid, employee side payroll tax
changes fall on the employee while employer side changes fall on the employer (see e.g.,
Saez, Matsaganis, Tsakloglou 2012).25
        There is also growing empirical evidence that better firms pay identically skilled
workers better (see e.g., Card, Heining, and Kline 2013, Card, Cardoso, and Kline 2016)
and that windfall to employers are shared with workers (see e.g., Kline et al. 2019, Saez,
Seim, and Schoefer 2019).
        Such rigid compensation rules extend beyond employers. For example, hedge
fund managers get compensated with the 2/20 rule (2 percent of the wealth managed plus
20 percent of the gains they make on behalf of client investors). Closer to home,
academic authors generally split equally the credit for publications by listing authors in
alphabetical order. To understand why splitting production is a delicate thing, just
imagine yourself going through your publications and having to agree with co-authors on


24
   Pay increases are sometimes uniform in percent (and hence inequality neutral) but have been
sometimes uniform in level (e.g. $1 hourly wage increase for all) in which case they are strongly
inequality reducing (see Pencavel 2020 for a US analysis in mid-20th century when union power
was at its peak and Manacorda 2004 for the scala-mobile analysis in Italy).
25
   This rigidity due to distributional concerns is also visible in public policy and market pricing. It
is well known that public policy reform is difficult because losers complain and mobilize against
reform more intensely than winners, so that policies tend to be rigid. There is also upward rigidity
in prices due to the distributional conflict between consumers and producers because unjustified
price increases anger consumers (see Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler 1986 for a conceptual
presentation and Blinder et al. 1998 for a detailed empirical analysis).


                                                 21
the true split. This would of course be ripe for conflict generation. The nominal equal
splitting norm saves us a lot of trouble.
         In all these cases, the actual contribution does matter. Highly performing workers
are more likely to get retained and promoted. Non-contributing co-authors may not be
asked again to join a research project, etc. However, this quantity margin is not fast
enough to systematically equate contribution and compensation, especially as economic
conditions are constantly evolving.

Pre-tax redistribution. In contrast to public economists', the view of the US public is
that inequality should be solved by private sector rather than government (see e.g.,
McCall 2013). The firm seems indeed a more directly obvious place of joint production
than the nation as a whole, so pre-tax redistribution appears more natural than
redistribution through taxes and transfers. Government remains a crucial but indirect
player as it sets the rules of this distributional conflict: rules for organizing labor through
unions, minimum wages, overtime pay, employment protection, safety in the workplace,
etc.
         To illustrate this, Figure 8 contrasts the popularity of pre-tax vs. tax redistribution
by looking at US state level ballot initiatives for increasing the minimum wage vs. ballot
initiatives to increase income taxes on upper incomes. The minimum wage is a form of
pre-tax redistribution as it forces employers to increase pay of their lowest paid workers
which must come at the expense of other workers, owners, or customers. Increasing the
income tax on upper earners is naturally tax redistribution.
         Voting behavior in state level ballot initiatives show overwhelming support for
minimum wage increases. Since 1996, 25 out of 27 minimum wage initiatives were
approved by voters. Support for minimum wage increases is equally strong in republican
leaning vs. democratic leaning states. In contrast, initiatives to increase income taxes on
upper earners have been much less successful with only 6 out of 23 passing since 1972.
Most well-known is the case of Massachusetts, a strongly Democratic leaning state,
which tried and repeatedly failed to introduce progressivity in its state income tax.
         Therefore, the ballot evidence is consistent with the view that pre-tax
redistribution is more popular than tax redistribution. The extremely high tax rates that
had existed in the United States from the 1930s up to 1980 were justified not as a form of
revenue raising (tax redistribution) but instead as a form of check on very high pretax
incomes. The extremely high top tax rates of the 1950s and 1960s never raised much
revenue but effectively prevented excessive pay or the accumulation of great fortunes
(Saez and Zucman 2019). 26


     V.    Conclusion

    This paper has argued that our social nature, absent from the standard economic
model, is crucial to understand our large modern social states and why concerns about
inequality are so pervasive. Taking care of the young, the sick, and the elderly has always

26
  Piketty, Saez, and Stantcheva (2014) show that, if higher top tax rates discourage top earners
from bargaining for higher compensation, top tax rates in excess of the conventional revenue
maximizing tax rate can be optimal.


                                              22
been done through families and communities and likely explains best why education,
health care, and retirement benefits are carried out through the social state in today's
advanced economies. Behavioral economics shows that we are not very good at solving
these issues individually, but descriptive public economics shows that we are pretty good
at solving them socially. What are the consequences of this discussion for positive and
normative public economics?

Positive public economics. Social effects imply that standard preferences are only an
incomplete description of individuals' economic behavior, and understanding social
effects is important particularly on the labor supply dimension where such effects might
be particularly large and relevant for public economics.
        In particular, social effects can vary widely depending on situations and can also
be shaped through policies. For example, female labor supply depends on society's view
on the role of women but this can be changed quickly (such as during World War II in the
US). This also implies that behavioral responses to taxes and transfers are not laws of
nature but respond to the social context. For example, it is conceivable that the US
welfare reform of the 1990s magnified the labor supply response of single mothers
through social effects.
        This makes empirical analysis more challenging as existing estimates might not
have as much external validity as we thought. Economists have noted that "frictions"--
such as imperfect information or adjustment costs --can affect behavioral responses (see
e.g. Chetty 2012 in the case of labor supply). But "frictions" is perhaps too narrow a
concept as it does not capture the variety of social effects that can affect our economic
behavior, and that future research might be able to map out.

Normative public economics. Because individuals are not always good at solving
economic problems, revealed individual preferences may not be informative of social
preferences. For example, if workers fail to save adequately for retirement on their own,
this does not imply that society should let the elderly be in poverty. If people are
impatient and heavily discount the future, this does not necessarily imply that society
should as well and for example ignore the long-term costs of climate change.
    Consequently, replacing social institutions by markets with individual choice might
not always work well. Individual choice and markets work only when individuals'
preferences (revealed through their behavior) line up with society's preferences.
    Finally, a social system functions best when individuals internalize the social
objective. For example, means-tested support for those in need works best if recipients do
not try to game the system; a tax system works best if taxpayers do not systematically try
to avoid and evade their tax obligations. Behavioral responses are not only costly in terms
of public funds, but they can also undermine trust in the social program which is perhaps
an even greater harm. Therefore, it is better to design the social system to try and
eliminate behavioral elasticities rather than take existing behavioral elasticities as a given
as public economists generally do. This opens up more possibilities for the design of
public policies than economists generally recognize.




                                             23
References:

Abramitzky, Ran. 2018. The Mystery of the Kibbutz: Egalitarian Principles in a
Capitalist World. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Acemoglu, Daron, and James A. Robinson. 2012. Why Nations Fail: The Origins of
Power, Prosperity, and Poverty. New York City, NY: Crown Publishing Group.

Akerlof, George. 1978. "The Economics of "Tagging" as Applied to the Optimal Income
Tax, Welfare Programs, and Manpower Planning." American Economic Review 68(1): 8-
19.

Akerlof, George. 1982. "Labor Contracts as Partial Gift Exchange." Quarterly Journal of
Economics 97, 543­569.

Akerlof, George A., and Robert J. Shiller. 2015. Phishing for Phools: The Economics of
Manipulation and Deception. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Akerlof, George A., and Janet L. Yellen. 1990. "The Fair Wage-Effort Hypothesis and
Unemployment." Quarterly Journal of Economics 105(2): 255-283.

Alesina, Alberto and Edward Glaeser. 2004. Fighting Poverty in the US and Europe: A
World of Difference. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Alesina, Alberto, Edward Glaeser, and Bruce Sacerdote. 2005. "Work and Leisure in the
United States and Europe: Why so Different?" NBER Macroeconomics Annual 20: 1-64.

Alesina, Alberto, and Eliana La Ferrara. 2005. "Ethnic Diversity and Economic
Performance." Journal of Economic Literature 43(3): 762-800.

Alesina, Alberto, Armando Miano, and Stefanie Stantcheva. 2018. "Immigration and
Redistribution." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 24733.

Alvaredo, Facundo, Lucas Chancel, Thomas Piketty, Emmanuel Saez, and Gabriel
Zucman. 2018. World Inequality Report 2018. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Ardant, Gabriel. 1971. Histoire de l'Impot (Volumes 1 and 2), Paris: Fayard.

Askenazy, Philippe. 2013. "Working Time Regulation in France from 1996 to 2012."
Cambridge Journal of Economics 37(2): 323-347.

Basu, Kaushik. 1999. "Child Labor: Cause, Consequence, and Cure, with Remarks on
International Labor Standards." Journal of Economic Literature 37(3): 1083-1119.




                                           24
Baum, Sandy. 2016. Student debt: Rhetoric and Realities of Higher Education Financing.
New York City, NY: Springer.

Bewley, Truman F. 2009. Why Wages Don't Fall During a Recession. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

Biesele, Megan, and Nancy Howell. 1981. ""The Old People Give You Life": Aging
among !Kung Hunter-Gatherers." In Pamela T. Amoss and Stevan Harrell, editors, Other
Ways of Growing Old: Anthropological Perspectives. Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press.

Blau, Francine and Lawrence Kahn. 2007. "Changes in the Labor Supply Behavior of
Married Women: 1980­2000." Journal of Labor Economics 25(3): 393-438.

Blinder, Alan S., Elie R.D. Canetti, David E. Lebow, and Jeremy B. Rudd. 1998. Asking
about Prices. New York City, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.

Blundell, Richard, Antoine Bozio, and Guy Laroque. 2013. "Extensive and Intensive
Margins of Labour Supply: Work and Working Hours in the US, the UK and France. "
Fiscal Studies 34(1): 1-29.

Blundell, Richard, Eric French, and Gemma Tetlow. 2017 "Retirement Incentives and
Labor Supply." In John Piggott and Alan Woodland eds., Handbook of Population Aging,
Amsterdam: North Holland.

Blundell, Richard and Thomas MaCurdy. 1999. "Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative
Approaches." In O. Ashenfelter, D. Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics,
Amsterdam: North-Holland, volume 3.

Boehm, Christopher. 1999. Hierarchy in the Forest: The Evolution of Egalitarian
Behavior. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Bozio, Antoine, Bertrand Garbinti, Jonathan Goupille-Lebret, Malka Guillot, and Thomas
Piketty. 2020. "Predistribution vs. Redistribution: Evidence from France and the U.S.",
CEPR Discussion Paper 15415.

Brown, Jeffrey, Julia Lynn Coronado, and Don Fullerton. 2009. "Is Social Security Part
of the Social Safety Net?" Tax policy and the Economy 23: 37-72.

Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso, and Patrick Kline. 2016 "Bargaining, Sorting, and the
Gender Wage Gap: Quantifying the Impact of Firms on the Relative Pay of Women."
Quarterly Journal of Economics 131, 633­686.

Card, David, Jorg Heining, and Patrick Kline. 2013 "Workplace Heterogeneity and the
Rise of West German Wage Inequality," Quarterly Journal of Economics 128, 967­1015.




                                          25
Card, David, Alexandre Mas, Enrico Moretti, and Emmanuel Saez. 2012. "Inequality at
Work: The Effect of Peer Salaries on Job Satisfaction." American Economic Review
102(6): 2981-3003.

Case, Anne, and Angus Deaton. 2020. Deaths of Despair and the Future of Capitalism.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Caspari, Rachel, and Sang-Hee Lee. 2004. "Older Age Becomes Common Late in Human
Evolution." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101(30): 10895-10900.

Chandra, Amitabh, Benjamin Handel, and Joshua Schwartzstein. 2019. "Behavioral
Economics and Health-Care Markets." In Handbook of Behavioral Economics:
Applications and Foundations 1, vol. 2, 459-502. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Charness, Gary and Matthew Rabin. 2002. "Understanding Social Preferences with
Simple Tests." Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 817­869.

Chaudhuri, Ananish. 2011. "Sustaining Cooperation in Laboratory Public Goods
Experiments: A Selective Survey of the Literature." Experimental economics 14(1): 47-
83.

Chetty, Raj. 2012. "Bounds on Elasticities with Optimization Frictions: A Synthesis of
Micro and Macro Evidence on Labor Supply." Econometrica 80(3): 969-1018.

Coase, Ronald H. 1937. "The Nature of the Firm." Economica 4(16): 386-405.

Costa, Dora L., 1998. "The Evolution of Retirement." In: Costa, D. L. (Ed.), The
Evolution of Retirement: An American Economic History, 1880-1990. University of
Chicago Press.

Deming, David J., Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2012. "The For-profit
Postsecondary School Sector: Nimble Critters or Agile Predators?" Journal of Economic
Perspectives 26(1): 139-64.

Diamond, Jared. 1997. Guns, Germs and Steel: A Short History of Everybody for the Last
13,000 Years. New York City, NY: W.W. Norton.

Duflo, Esther. 2001. "Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of School Construction
in Indonesia: Evidence from an Unusual Policy Experiment." American Economic
Review 91(4): 795-813.

Duflo, Esther. 2003. "Grandmothers and Granddaughters: Old-Age Pensions and
Intrahousehold Allocation in South Africa." World Bank Economic Review 17(1): 1­25.

Easterlin, Richard A. 1981. "Why Isn't the Whole World Developed?" Journal of
Economic History 41(1): 1-17.



                                         26
Eaton, Charlie, Sabrina T. Howell, and Constantine Yannelis. 2020. "When Investor
Incentives and Consumer Interests Diverge: Private Equity in Higher Education. " Review
of Financial Studies 33(9): 4024-4060.

Edgeworth, Francis Y. 1897. "The Pure Theory of Taxation." Economic Journal 7(25):
46-70.

Einhorn, Robin L. 2008. American Taxation, American Slavery. Chicago, IL: University
of Chicago Press.

Engel, Christoph. 2011. "Dictator Games: A Meta Study." Experimental Economics
14(4): 583-610.

Fack, Gabrielle, and Camille Landais, eds. 2016. Charitable Giving and Tax Policy: A
Historical and Comparative Perspective. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Fehr, Ernst and Simon Gachter. 2000. "Fairness and Retaliation: The Economics of
Reciprocity." Journal of Economic Perspectives 14(3), 159­181.

Fehr, Ernst, Lorenz Goette, and Christian Zehnder. 2009. "A Behavioral Account of the
Labor Market: The Role of Fairness Concerns." Annual Review of Economics 1, 355­
384.

Fehr, Ernst, Georg Kirchsteiger, and Arno Riedl. 1993. "Does Fairness Prevent Market
Clearing? An Experimental Investigation." Quarterly Journal of Economics 108(2): 437-
459.

Fehr, Ernst and Klaus M. Schmidt. 1999. "A Theory of Fairness, Competition, and
Cooperation." Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 817­868.

Firth, Raymond. 1939. Primitive Polynesian Economy. London: George Routledge and
Sons.

Flora, Peter. 1983. State, Economy, and Society in Western Europe, 1815­1975, Vol. 1.
London: Macmillan Press.

Gintis, Herbert, Samuel Bowles, Robert Boyd, and Ernst Fehr. 2003. "Explaining
Altruistic Behavior in Humans." Evolution and Human Behavior 24(3): 153-172.

Grogger, Jeffrey and Lynn Karoly. 2005. Welfare Reform: Effects of a Decade of
Change. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Gruber, Jonathan. 2016. Public Finance and Public Policy. Fourth edition. Macmillan.




                                          27
Gruber, Jonathan, and David A. Wise, eds. 1999. Social Security and Retirement around
the World. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Güth, Werner, and Martin G. Kocher. 2014. "More than Thirty Years of Ultimatum
Bargaining Experiments: Motives, Variations, and a Survey of the Recent Literature."
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 108: 396-409.

Harari, Yuval Noah. 2014. Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind. New York City, NY:
Random House.

Henrich, Joseph Patrick, Robert Boyd, Samuel Bowles, Ernst Fehr, Colin Camerer, and
Herbert Gintis, eds. 2004. Foundations of Human Sociality: Economic Experiments and
Ethnographic Evidence from Fifteen Small-Scale Societies. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

Hvidberg, Kristoffer B., Claus Kreiner, and Stefanie Stantcheva. 2020. "Social Position
and Fairness Views." National Bureau of Economic Research Working No. 28099.

Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L. Knetsch, and Richard Thaler. 1986. "Fairness as a Constraint
on Profit Seeking: Entitlements in the Market." American Economic Review 76(4), 728­
41.

Kleven, Henrik. 2019. "The EITC and the Extensive Margin: A Reappraisal." NBER
Working Paper No. 26405.

Kline, Patrick, Neviana Petkova, Heidi Williams, and Owen Zidar. 2019. "Who Profits
from Patents? Rent-Sharing at Innovative Firms." Quarterly Journal of Economics
134(3): 1343-1404.

Komlos, John. 1998. "Shrinking in a Growing Economy? The Mystery of Physical
Stature during the Industrial Revolution." Journal of Economic History 58(3): 779-802.

Laibson, David. 2018. "Private Paternalism, the Commitment Puzzle, and Model-Free
Equilibrium." AEA Papers and Proceedings 108: 1-21.

Lawler, Edward E. 1965. "Managers' Perceptions of Their Subordinates' Pay and of
Their Superiors' Pay." Personnel Psychology 18 (4): 413­22.

Lee, Jong-Wha, and Hanol Lee. 2016. "Human Capital in the Long Run." Journal of
Development Economics 122: 147-169.

Ledyard, O. 1995. "Public Goods: Some Experimental Results." In J. Kagel & A. Roth
(Eds.), Handbook of Experimental Economics. Princeton: Princeton University Press
(Chap. 2).




                                          28
Lindert, Peter H. 2004. Growing Public. Volumes 1 and 2. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Lucas, Robert E. 2004. "The Industrial Revolution: Past and Future." 2003 Annual
Report Essay, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Luttmer, Erzo FP. 2005. "Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-Being."
Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(3): 963-1002.

Maddison, Angus. 2007. The World Economy. Volume 1: A Millennial Perspective.
Volume 2: Historical statistics. Academic Foundation.

Madrian, Brigitte and Dennis Shea. 2001. "The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401 (k)
Participation and Savings Behavior." Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(4): 1149-
1187.

Malinowski, Bronislaw, 1922. Argonauts of the Western Pacific: An account of Native
Enterprise and Adventure in the Archipelagoes of Melanesian New Guinea. New York
City, NY: Routledge.

Manacorda, Marco. 2004. "Can the Scala Mobile Explain the Fall and Rise of Earnings
Inequality in Italy? A Semiparametric Analysis, 1977­1993." Journal of Labor
Economics 22(3): 585-613.

Marchand, Olivier and Claude Thélot. 1991. Deux Siècles de Travail en France. Paris:
INSEE.

Mauss, Marcel. 1954. The Gift: The Form and Reason for Exchange in Archaic Societies.
New York: Routledge (first published in French in 1925).

McCall, Leslie. 2013. The Undeserving Rich: American Beliefs about Inequality,
Opportunity, and Redistribution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Meyer, Bruce and Dan Rosenbaum. 2001. "Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and
the Labor Supply of Single Mothers." Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(3): 1063-
1114.

Meyer, John W., Francisco O. Ramirez, and Yasemin Nuholu Soysal. 1992. "World
Expansion of Mass Education, 1870-1980." Sociology of Education 65(2): 128-149.

Minois, Georges. 1989. History of Old Age: From Antiquity to the Renaissance. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press (first published in 1954).

Moehling, Carolyn. 1999. "State Child Labor Laws and the Decline of Child Labor."
Explorations in Economic History 36(1): 72-106.




                                         29
Mirrlees, James A. 1971. "An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income Taxation."
Review of Economic Studies 38(2): 175-208.

Mulligan, Casey B. 1998. "Pecuniary Incentives to Work in the United States during
World War II." Journal of Political Economy 106(5): 1033-1077.

National Center for Education Statistics. 2020. Digest of Education Statistics. Online at
https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/

Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). 2020a. Revenue
Statistics, 1965-2019. Paris: OECD Press.

Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). 2020b. Education
Spending. Paris: OECD Press. Online at https://data.oecd.org/eduresource/education-
spending.htm

Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). 2020c. Health
Statistics. Paris: OECD Press. Online at http://www.oecd.org/els/health-systems/health-
data.htm

Ostrom, Elinor. 1990. Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for
Collective Action. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Pencavel, John. 1986. "Labor Supply of Men: A Survey." In O. Ashenfelter and R.
Layard (eds.) Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 1. Amsterdam: Elsevier-North
Holland.

Pencavel, John. 2020. "Wage Differentials, Bargaining Protocols, and Trade Unionism in
Mid-Twentieth-Century American Labor Markets." Forthcoming ILR Review.

Pew Research Center. 2019. "Little Public Support for Reductions in Federal Spending."
April 11.

Piketty, Thomas. 2014. Capital in the 21st Century. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

Piketty, Thomas. 2020. Capital and Ideology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Piketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez. 2013. "Optimal Labor Income Taxation." Chapter
7, in A. Auerbach, R. Chetty, M. Feldstein, and E. Saez (eds.) Handbook of Public
Economics, Volume 5. Amsterdam: Elsevier-North Holland.

Piketty, Thomas, Emmanuel Saez, and Stefanie Stantcheva. 2014. "Optimal Taxation of
Top Labor Incomes: A Tale of Three Elasticities." American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy 6(1): 230-71.




                                           30
Piketty, Thomas, Emmanuel Saez, and Gabriel Zucman. 2018. "Distributional National
Accounts: Methods and Estimates for the United States." Quarterly Journal of
Economics 133(2): 553­609.

Piketty, Thomas, and Gabriel Zucman. 2014. "Capital is Back: Wealth-Income Ratios in
Rich Countries 1700­2010." Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(3), 1255-1310.

Polanyi, Karl. 1944. The Great Transformation. Boston, MA: Beacon press.

Rabin, Matthew. 1993. "Incorporating Fairness into Game Theory and Economics."
American Economic Review 83(5), 1281­1302.

Rawls, John. 1971. A Theory of Justice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Robinson, Joan. 1969. The Economics of Imperfect Competition. New York City, NY:
Springer.

Roediger, David R., and Philip Sheldon Foner. 1989. Our Own Time: A History of
American Labor and the Working Day. New York City, NY: Verso.

Roemer, John. 2019. How We Cooperate: A Theory of Kantian Optimization. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Saez, Emmanuel, Manos Matsaganis, and Panos Tsakloglou. 2012. "Earnings
Determination and Taxes: Evidence from a Cohort-Based Payroll Tax Reform in
Greece." Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (1): 493­533.

Saez, Emmanuel, Benjamin Schoefer, and David Seim. 2019. "Payroll Taxes, Firm
Behavior, and Rent Sharing: Evidence from a Young Workers' Tax Cut in Sweden."
American Economic Review 109(5): 1717-1763.

Saez, Emmanuel, and Stefanie Stantcheva. "Generalized Social Marginal Welfare
Weights for Optimal Tax Theory." American Economic Review 106(1): 24-45.

Saez, Emmanuel, and Gabriel Zucman. 2019. The Triumph of Injustice: How the Rich
Dodge Taxes and How to Make Them Pay. New York City, NY: WW Norton &
Company.

Sahlins, Marshall. 1972. Stone Age Economics. New York City, NY: Taylor & Francis.

Scott, James C. 2017. Against the Grain: A Deep History of the Earliest States. New
Heaven, CT: Yale University Press.

Seibold, Arthur. 2020. "Reference Points for Retirement Behavior: Evidence from
German Pension Discontinuities." Forthcoming American Economic Review.




                                         31
Sobel, Joel. 2005. "Interdependent Preferences and Reciprocity." Journal of Economic
Literature 43, 392­436.

Stantcheva, Stefanie. 2020. "Understanding Tax Policy: How do People Reason?" NBER
Working Paper 27699.

Stanley, Marcus. 2003. "College Education and the Midcentury GI Bills." Quarterly
Journal of Economics 118(2): 671-708.

Tattersall, Ian. 2012. Masters of the Planet: The Search for our Human Origins. New
York City, NY: St. Martin's Press.

Thaler, Richard H. 1988. "Anomalies: The Ultimatum Game." Journal of Economic
Perspectives 2(4): 195-206.

Thaler, Richard H. 2015. Misbehaving: The Making of Behavioral Economics. New
York: W. W. Norton.

Thaler, Richard H., and Cass R. Sunstein. 2009. Nudge: Improving Decisions about
Health, Wealth, and Happiness. Londong: Penguin Books.

Thatcher, Margaret. 1987. `Interview for "Woman's Own" ("No Such Thing as
Society").' in Margaret Thatcher Foundation: Speeches, Interviews and Other
Statements. London.

Thurnwald, Richard. 2018. Economics in Primitive Communities. New York: Routledge
(first published in 1932).

Townsend, Robert M. 1994. "Risk and Insurance in Village India." Econometrica 62(3):
539-591.

US Department of Commerce, Bureau of Census. 1975. Historical Statistics of the United
States: Colonial Times to 1970. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Press.

Van Horn Melton, James. 1988. Absolutism and the Eighteenth-century Origins of
Compulsory Schooling in Prussia and Austria. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Webber, Carolyn, and Aaron B. Wildavsky. 1986. A History of Taxation and Expenditure
in the Western World. New York City, NY: Simon and Schuster.

Wilk, Richard R., and Lisa Cliggett. 2007. Economies and Cultures: Foundations of
Economic Anthropology. Second Edition. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

Williams, George C. 1957. "Pleiotropy, Natural Selection, and the Evolution of
Senescence." Evolution 11(4): 398-411.




                                         32
Wilson, Edward O. 2012. The Social Conquest of Earth. New York City, NY: WW
Norton.

Woodburn, James. 1982. "Egalitarian Societies." Man, New Series 17(3): 431-451.

World Inequality Lab. 2020. "Distributional National Accounts Guidelines Methods and
Concepts Used in the World Inequality Database ". Online at wid.world.




                                         33
              Panel A. Top 10% income shares in the US and France, 1910-2018

50%


45%
                                                              US pre-tax

40%


35%
                                                                             US post-tax

30%                                                                        France, pre-tax

25%

                                                        France, post-tax
20%
   1910    1920    1930     1940   1950   1960   1970    1980    1990      2000   2010   2020



             Panel B. Average tax rates by income group in 2018: US vs. France
60%
                    France
50%


40%


30%


20%
                          United States
10%


 0%
          0    0    0    0    0     0    0    0    0    5    9       9       9       9    0
       0-1 0-2 0-3 0-4 0-5 0-6 0-7 0-8 0-9 0-9 5-9 99. 9.9 .99 -10
      P      1    2    3    4     5    6    7    8    9    9   9-      -9        9      9
            P    P    P    P    P     P    P    P    P    P                    9       9
                                                             P9 9.9 99- 9.9
                                                                 P 9      9.       9
                                                                                 P
                                                                       P9

Figure 1: Inequality and Government
This figure illustrates the evolution of inequality and the direct impact of government through taxes and
transfers in the United States and France. Panel A depicts the share of total national income earned by the
top 10 percent of adults (aged 20 and above) from 1910 to 2018 on a pre-tax basis and post-tax basis.
Income within married couples is equally split. Pre-tax income is before taxes and excluding government
transfers. Post-tax income is after subtracting all taxes and including all government transfers and spending.
Panel B depicts the average tax rate (as a percent of pre-tax income) in 2018 by decile (P0-10 is the bottom
decile, etc.) with smaller breakdown within the top decile. It includes taxes at all levels of government.
Series for both countries follow the same distributional national account methodology (World Inequality
Lab 2020).
Source: Piketty, Saez, and Zucman (2018), September 2020 update for the United States. Bozio et al.
(2020) for France.




                                                         34
                                                               Panel A. The rise of the fiscal state
                                60%
                                               Sweden
Tax revenue / national income



                                50%            France
                                               Germany
                                40%            Britain
                                               United States
                                30%


                                20%


                                10%


                                0%
                                  1870 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2018




                                                          Panel B. The rise of the social state in Europe
                                 50%
                                            Other social spending
                                                                                                            6%
                                            Cash social transfers
                                 40%        Health care                                                     5%
 Percent of national income




                                            Retirement+disability benefits
                                            Education                                                        9%
                                 30%
                                            Regalian public goods
                                                                                                            11%
                                 20%

                                                                                                             6%
                                 10%
                                                               2%
                                       1%
                                                               8%                                           10%
                                       6%
                                 0%
                                      1870 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010




Figure 2: The Rise of Government in the 20th Century
Panel A depicts total tax revenue as a percent of national income by decade in five countries. Taxes at all
levels of government are included. This is reproduced from Piketty (2020, Figure 10.14) and updating the
last point to 2018. Panel B depicts the composition of government spending by decade in Europe (average
for Germany, France, Britain and Sweden). This is reproduced from Piketty (2020, Figure 10.15). Regalian
public goods includes defense, law and order, administration, infrastructure. Cash social transfers include
unemployment benefits, family benefits, and means-tested benefits. Other social spending includes in-kind
spending such as public housing.
Source: Piketty (2020, Figures 10.14 and 10.15) created from OECD statistics and earlier historical
statistics.




                                                                                         35
                      Panel A. School enrollment at ages 5-14, 1830-1930
 100%


  80%


  60%

                                                                             US
  40%
                                                                             US blacks
            Slavery and school prohibition
  20%                    end                                                 Prussia

                                                                             France

   0%
     1830      1840      1850   1860    1870   1880    1890    1900   1910        1920   1930




              Panel B. Primary school enrollment in Russia, Korea and Indonesia
 100%


  80%                                                    Korea compulsory
                                                         primary education
              Russia compulsory
  60%         primary education
                                                               Indonesia compulsory
  40%                                                            primary education


  20%


   0%
     1890      1900      1910   1920    1930   1940    1950    1960   1970        1980   1990




Figure 3: The Rise of Mass Education
Panel A depicts the fraction of children aged 5-14 enrolled in school (public or private) in the United
States, among Blacks in the US, in Prussia, and France from 1830 to 1930. Enslaved children in America
were prohibited from attending schools. Panel B depicts the fraction of children enrolled in primary school
(public or private) in Russia, Korea, and Indonesia from 1890 to 1990 and flags when compulsory primary
education was introduced in each country. In each of these three countries, compulsory schooling leads to a
large increase in primary school enrollment in the following years.
Source: Panel A: Lindert (2004) and US Census Bureau (1975, series H435). Panel B: Lee and Lee (2016).




                                                          36
                         Panel A. Employment rates of men by age, 2019
 100%


  80%                                                                                           US


  60%                                                                                           France


  40%


  20%


   0%
        15-19


                20-24


                        25-29


                                30-34


                                        35-39


                                                40-44


                                                        45-49


                                                                50-54


                                                                        55-59


                                                                                60-64


                                                                                        65-69


                                                                                                 70-74


                                                                                                         75-79


                                                                                                                 80+
                          Panel B. Employment rates of women by age, 2019
 100%


  80%                                                                                             US


  60%                                                                                             France


  40%


  20%


   0%
        15-19


                20-24


                        25-29


                                30-34


                                        35-39


                                                40-44


                                                        45-49


                                                                50-54


                                                                        55-59


                                                                                60-64


                                                                                        65-69


                                                                                                 70-74


                                                                                                         75-79


                                                                                                                 80+




Figure 4: Employment Rates by Age in France vs. the US
This figure depicts the employment rate (people working divided by population) by 5-year age bins in the
United States and France in 2019. Employment rates are similar in both countries in prime age (25-59) but
smaller among the young and especially the old in France.
Source: OECD statistics online at stats.oecd.org




                                                                        37
                              Panel A. Employment rates of men aged 65+, 1850-1980
 80%
                                              Civil war vets pensions


                                                                    US social security starts
 60%



 40%


                     US
 20%

                     France

  0%
     1850     1860     1880    1890    1900   1910   1920    1930   1940    1950   1960   1970   1980




                       Panel B. Employment rates of men aged 60-64, 1970-2019
  80%
               US lowers early retirement age from
                       65 to 62 in 1961


  60%


                                Germany lowers retirement age from
                                         65 to 60 in 1973,
  40%
                                    increases it to 65 in 2000s

                United States

  20%
                France

                Germany
   0%
       1970     1975      1980        1985    1990    1995      2000       2005    2010   2015




Figure 5: Old Age Employment and Retirement Systems
This figure depicts the employment rate (people working divided by population) among those aged 65 and
above in the US and France from 1850 to 1980 (Panel A) and among those aged 60-64 in the US, France,
and Germany since 1970 (Panel B). The employment rate of the elderly is tightly connected to the
development of public retirement systems.
Source: Panel A, United States from Census data presented by Costa (1998, Table 2.A.2), France from
Marchand and Thélot (1991). Panel B, OECD statistics online at stats.oecd.org




                                                             38
                  Panel A. Employment rates of men and women, aged 25-54
100%



 80%



 60%



 40%
                                                Netherlands men          Netherlands women

                                                France men               France women
 20%
                                                US men                   US women

  0%
    1970   1975      1980     1985      1990   1995      2000     2005     2010     2015



                  Panel B. US female labor force participation, age 16-64
 45%

 40%

 35%

 30%

 25%
            25% increase in
 20%       1943-1945 during
             WW2 planned
 15%          economy

 10%

  5%

  0%
    1940             1945               1950          1955               1960              1965



             Panel C. Labor force participation of US single women, aged 20-50

 80%



 60%

                                                Welfare reform and
                                                 EITC expansion
 40%
                  Women without children


 20%              Women with children




  0%
    1968   1973      1978    1983       1988   1993   1998      2003     2008     2013     2018




Figure 6: Social Effects in Female Market Employment
Panel A depicts the employment rates of prime age (age 25-54) men and women in the United States,
France, and the Netherlands since 1970. While male market employment has been high and stable, female
market employment rate has steadily increased due to changing norms regarding female employment (the
Netherlands being an extreme case). Panel B depicts the labor force participation of women (aged 16-64) in
the United States from 1940 to 1965. There was a temporary surge during World War II achieved through
social mobilization (the most iconic poster is reproduced on the graph). Panel C compares the labor force
participation of single women aged 20-50 with children and without children from 1968 to 2018. Both
series are very parallel but catch up permanently in just 5 years from 1994 to 1999 during welfare reform
and the EITC expansion.
Source: Panel A, OECD statistics online at stats.oecd.org. Panel B, US Census Bureau (1975, series D36-
41 estimated using Current Population Report survey data). Panel C reproduces Figure 3 from Kleven
(2019) estimated using Current Population Survey data.



                                                                                  39
 2,000                             US has 40 hour/week and no
                                    mandatory paid vacation

 1,800

                                                                            United States
 1,600             1968: 4th week
                                                                            France
                   of paid vacation
 1,400                               1982: 5th week
                                    + 39 hours/week
 1,200                                                    2000-2: 35 hours/week


 1,000
      1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015




Figure 7: Average Annual Hours of Work of Employees
The figure depicts the average annual hours of work of employees in the United States and France since
1950. The sample includes all employed workers (any age or gender, part-time and full-time). Hours of
work are actual hours (including any overtime). Hours of work in France have trended down relative to the
US with visible steps when paid vacation is expanded (4th week in 1968, 5th week in 1982) and normal
weekly hours of work are reduced (from 40 to 39 in 1982, from 39 to 35 in 2000-2). The US has 40
hours/week and no mandatory paid vacation over the full period.
Source: OECD database online (series annual hours of work of dependent workers).




                                                  40
Figure 8: Pre-tax vs. Tax Redistribution Popularity in US States Ballot Initiatives
This figure contrasts the popularity of pre-tax vs. tax redistribution by looking at US state level ballot
initiatives for increasing the minimum wage in Panel A (a form of pre-tax redistribution) vs. ballot
initiatives to increase income taxes on upper incomes in Panel B (tax redistribution). Each ballot initiative
is depicted with a dot and labelled by state and year (CA'16 = California in 2016). The y-axis is the vote
share (values above .5 imply a majority of voters approved and the initiative passed). The x-axis is the
republican lean of the state in the closest presidential election (measured as percentage point difference in
republican share voting in the state vs. US wide).
Panel A shows that 25 out 27 minimum wage ballot initiatives passed since 1996 including many in
republican leaning states. Panel B shows that only 6 out of 23 tax the rich initiatives passed since 1972 with
many initiatives defeated even in democratic leaning states.
Source: Ballots measures on minimum wage and tax increases from Ballotpedia at http://ballotpedia.org




                                                     41
