                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 CONSTRAINED-EFFICIENT CAPITAL REALLOCATION

                                        Andrea Lanteri
                                      Adriano A. Rampini

                                      Working Paper 28384
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28384


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            January 2021, Revised June 2021




We thank David Berger, Eduardo D´avila, Anton Korinek, Pablo Kurlat, Jennifer La'O, S. "Vish"
Viswanathan, Daniel Xu, and seminar participants at Duke (economics), the Econometric Society
World Congress, Duke (finance), Oxford, Virtual Australian Macro Seminar, Georgia Tech,
UVA-Richmond Fed Workshop, the PHBS Workshop in Macroeconomics and Finance, Collegio
Carlo Alberto, the Search and Matching in Macro and Finance Seminar, and the Barcelona GSE
Summer Forum on Economic Fluctuations and Growth for helpful comments. Parts of this paper
were written while Lanteri was on leave at NYU and Rampini was on sabbatical leave at
Princeton University and NYU; their hospitality is gratefully acknowledged. First draft: August
2020. Lanteri is a CEPR Research Affiliate. Rampini is an NBER Research Associate and a
CEPR Research Fellow. Alessandro Villa provided excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Andrea Lanteri and Adriano A. Rampini. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Constrained-Efficient Capital Reallocation
Andrea Lanteri and Adriano A. Rampini
NBER Working Paper No. 28384
January 2021, Revised June 2021
JEL No. D51,E22,E44,G31,H21

                                           ABSTRACT

We characterize efficiency in an equilibrium model of investment and capital reallocation with
heterogeneous firms facing collateral constraints. The model features two types of pecuniary
externalities: collateral externalities, because the resale price of capital affects collateral
constraints, and distributive externalities, because buyers of old capital are more financially
constrained than sellers, consistent with empirical evidence. We prove that the stationary-
equilibrium price of old capital is inefficiently high, because the distributive pecuniary externality
exceeds the collateral externality, by a factor of two in our calibrated model. New investment
reduces the future price of old capital, providing a rationale for new-investment subsidies.


Andrea Lanteri
Duke University
Department of Economics
233 Social Sciences Building
Durham, NC 27708
andrea.lanteri@duke.edu

Adriano A. Rampini
Duke University
Fuqua School of Business
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
rampini@duke.edu
1     Introduction
Financial frictions, such as collateral constraints, distort the level of aggregate investment
and the allocation of capital across firms. What is the allocation of capital that maximizes
welfare given financial frictions? To address this question, we develop an equilibrium model
of investment and capital reallocation with collateral constraints. We then characterize the
constrained-efficient allocation, that is, the allocation that would arise if a benevolent plan-
ner made investment decisions on behalf of firms, using the same markets and subject to the
same frictions firms face in the competitive equilibrium. By characterizing this benchmark
and comparing it with the decentralized equilibrium, we find that the constrained-efficient
allocation features a higher level of investment, a larger volume of capital reallocation, and,
crucially, a lower resale price of capital.
    In our framework, heterogeneous firms face collateral constraints on borrowing as well as
costs of issuing equity. Over time, they accumulate net worth and respond to productivity
shocks by investing in new capital, or by acquiring old capital from other firms. Old capital
is reallocated in a competitive secondary market. Importantly, the model is consistent with
the key facts about capital reallocation: On average, older assets flow to more financially
constrained and more productive firms. These firms have a high marginal value of current
net worth. Thus, they take advantage of the fact that old capital is cheaper and has hence
a lower financing need than new capital, because it has a lower future residual value. On
the other hand, larger, less financially constrained firms tend to acquire newer investment
goods, as they effectively discount the future resale value of capital at a lower rate. These
firms account for most of the formation of new capital in the economy, and typically resell
their capital on the secondary market as it ages.
    Because of financial frictions, the competitive-equilibrium price of old capital does not
coincide with its social value: Financial frictions manifest themselves as pecuniary exter-
nalities. Specifically, our economy encompasses both collateral externalities, because the
resale value of capital affects firms' ability to borrow, and distributive externalities, be-
cause buyers and sellers of old capital have different valuations of internal funds. We show
that the price of old capital, which serves as collateral, affects the aggregate value of these
externalities with opposite sign. On the one hand, a higher resale price of capital relaxes
collateral constraints. On the other hand, because buyers of old capital tend to be more fi-
nancially constrained than sellers, a lower price of old capital redistributes resources toward
firms with a higher marginal product of capital.
    Our main result is that this distributive externality is larger than the collateral exter-
nality in stationary equilibrium. As a consequence, the equilibrium price of old capital is
higher than the constrained-efficient price. An additional unit of new investment today

                                               1
increases the supply of old capital in the future, thereby reducing its price and creating a
positive externality on future constrained firms, who are net buyers of old capital. In the
decentralized equilibrium, investing firms do not take this effect into account. A subsidy
on new investment may thus lead to a more efficient allocation.
    Importantly, a low price of old capital is optimal, despite its negative effect on the
value of collateral. The economic intuition is that the buyers of old capital are the most
constrained firms, whereas the firms that purchase new capital and borrow against its
collateral value are less constrained or unconstrained. Thus, the marginal value of net
worth of firms that benefit from the distributive externality of a lower price of old capital
is higher than the marginal value of net worth of the firms that are negatively affected by
the collateral externality of a lower price of old capital.
    To formalize this result, we consider a planner who faces the same constraints and
has access to the same markets as private firms, but, crucially, internalizes all pecuniary
externalities. The planner needs to respect all individual budget constraints and cannot re-
distribute net worth across firms, that is, cannot "remove" financial frictions. We solve for
the constrained-efficient allocation and compare it with the stationary competitive equi-
librium. We show, both analytically and quantitatively, that the price of old capital is
inefficiently high in competitive equilibrium. The constrained-efficient allocation induces
a lower price of old capital, allowing financially constrained firms to produce at a higher
scale and to grow their net worth faster.
    Our analysis is organized in two parts. First, we consider a stylized infinite-horizon
model of capital reallocation and pecuniary externalities with over-lapping generations of
firms and capital that lasts for two periods. In this model, we characterize the stationary
equilibrium analytically and obtain a formal result on the sign of the inefficiency in equi-
librium: The distributive externality is larger than the collateral externality. Importantly,
this result holds independently of specific assumptions about the distribution of net worth.
We then provide a closed-form solution for the constrained-efficient allocation, as well as a
Ramsey implementation of this allocation with proportional subsidies on purchases of new
capital, and taxes on purchases of old capital. We also show that our key analytical results
obtain under several relevant generalizations of our assumptions, namely entrepreneurial
risk aversion, heterogeneity in productivity, and when both firms and capital goods are
long-lived. Further, we discuss the essential role of heterogeneity and equilibrium realloca-
tion for our results and show how to extend our results to an environment with productive
assets in fixed supply.
    Second, we consider a richer quantitative model with persistent idiosyncratic produc-
tivity shocks and long-lived firms and capital, which nests our stylized model. We calibrate


                                             2
the model to match empirical moments related to US firm dynamics and financing costs,
and use it to perform a quantitative efficiency analysis, with a main focus on the stationary
equilibrium. We find that the distributive externality is over twice as large as the collateral
externality in competitive equilibrium. Moreover, output and consumption are respectively
10% and 7% lower than in the first-best allocation. The constrained-efficient allocation re-
covers approximately 70% of these losses (7 percentage points of output and 5 percentage
points of consumption), by substantially decreasing the price of old capital. This outcome
can be implemented in competitive equilibrium, with a mix of subsidies on new invest-
ment and taxes on purchases of old capital. We also consider the case of a single policy
instrument, namely a new-investment subsidy, and find that it should be positive, again
to induce a lower price of old capital. However, this restriction on the policy instrument
set may have a significant welfare cost, as it only allows the planner to recover a smaller
fraction of the welfare losses induced by financial frictions.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the related literature. Section 3
presents our main theoretical results in a stylized model of capital reallocation. Sec-
tion 4 introduces the model with idiosyncratic productivity shocks and characterizes the
constrained-efficient allocation. Section 5 presents our quantitative results. Section 6 dis-
cusses additional analyses, including transition dynamics. Section 7 concludes.


2       Related Literature
This paper contributes to several strands of literature, specifically on capital reallocation
and the role of secondary markets, on pecuniary externalities with collateral constraints,
on constrained efficiency in dynamic heterogeneous-agent economies, and on the effect of
financial frictions on capital misallocation.1
    Capital reallocation and secondary markets. Several papers study the reallocation of
durable assets across heterogeneous producers, starting with Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006).
A robust empirical finding of this literature is that financially constrained agents tend to
buy assets in the secondary market. In particular, Eisfeldt and Rampini (2007) analyze
investment in new and used capital in the presence of financial frictions, and present em-
pirical evidence that more financially constrained firms tend to acquire older investment
goods, using both the Annual Capital Expenditure Survey and micro data on commercial
    1
     To focus on the effects of collateral constraints on the efficiency of investment and capital reallocation,
we abstract from adverse selection (as in the seminal paper of Akerlof, 1970, and more recently Kurlat, 2013,
for example), illiquidity due to search frictions (as in, for example, Gavazza, 2011, 2016, Ottonello, 2018,
and Wright, Xiao, and Zhu, 2020), and heterogeneity not due to differences in net worth or productivity
(as in, for example, Bond, 1983).



                                                       3
trucks. More recently, Ma, Murfin, and Pratt (2020) leverage a large dataset on equipment
transactions to document a negative correlation between firm age and capital age. We relate
our quantitative results to their estimates. Gavazza, Lizzeri, and Roketskiy (2014) provide
a quantitative analysis of the welfare gains due to secondary markets for durable goods in
the presence of consumer heterogeneity. Gavazza and Lanteri (forthcoming) emphasize the
role of secondary markets in reallocating used consumer durable goods from wealthier to
poorer households and argue that this mechanism contributes to the transmission of credit
shocks. Lanteri (2018) analyzes the market for used investment goods in a quantitative
business-cycle model with heterogeneous firms subject to idiosyncratic productivity shocks.
Rampini (2019) analyzes the effects of asset durability on the financing of investment with
collateral constraints.2 We build on his model and develop a quantitative framework with
idiosyncratic productivity shocks and a general depreciation schedule for capital. Different
from the existing literature on capital reallocation, our focus is on efficiency.3
    Pecuniary externalities and constrained efficiency. Several papers study pecuniary ex-
ternalities related to asset prices in economies with collateral constraints--as introduced
by Kiyotaki and Moore (1997)--or other financial frictions. In a seminal contribution,
Lorenzoni (2008) develops a finite-horizon model with production heterogeneity between
borrowers and lenders and aggregate shocks, and emphasizes how financial frictions may
induce an inefficient level of borrowing and investment. D´  avila and Korinek (2018) show
that, in general, financial frictions may give rise to both distributive externalities, that
is, externalities between sellers and buyers of assets, and collateral externalities, that is,
externalities deriving from the dependence of financial constraints on asset prices, and that
prices could be too high or too low.4 In quantitative analyses of models with pecuniary
externalities stemming from asset prices, the literature typically focuses on collateral exter-
nalities, abstracting from distributive externalities by assuming a representative producer:
Bianchi and Mendoza (2018) and Jeanne and Korinek (2019) analyze infinite-horizon small
open economy models with a representative firm and an asset in fixed supply. In these
models, the price of collateral is too low in states of the world in which collateral con-
   2
      Rampini and Viswanathan (2010, 2013) study a dynamic model of firm financing with tangible assets
serving as collateral, deriving the collateral constraints from limited enforcement without exclusion.
    3
      Cooper and Schott (2020) analyze capital reallocation and aggregate fluctuations by formulating a
planning problem, but abstract from financial frictions and the related inefficiency. Cui (2017) studies the
effects of financing constraints and partial irreversibility on the cyclicality of capital liquidation. Ai, Li,
and Yang (2020) study the link between financial intermediation and capital reallocation. See Eisfeldt and
Shi (2018) for a survey of the literature on capital reallocation.
    4
      See Diamond (1967), Stiglitz (1982), and Geanakoplos and Polemarchakis (1986) for early contributions
on efficiency in the presence of market incompleteness. He and Kondor (2016) study the role of pecuniary
externalities in liquidity management for the efficiency of investment over the cycle. Kurlat (forthcoming)
considers the role of asymmetric information about capital quality for pecuniary externalities and the
efficiency of investment.


                                                      4
straints bind, and optimal policy can improve efficiency by increasing collateral values.5
We contribute to this literature by analyzing an infinite-horizon model of investment with
heterogeneous firms, consistent with the key facts about capital reallocation. We build on
the analysis of externalities of D´  avila and Korinek (2018) and show that, in the station-
ary equilibrium of our economy, the distributive externality is larger than the collateral
externality. The price of collateral is too high from the perspective of a planner, because
the most financially constrained firms are net buyers of old capital, that is, collateral. A
related literature analyzes constrained efficiency in dynamic general-equilibrium models
with incomplete markets, with a focus on distributive externalities through wages and in-
terest rates: D´ avila, Hong, Krusell, and R´ ios-Rull (2012) analyze constrained efficiency in
the Aiyagari (1994) model; Park (2018) extends their framework to characterize the effi-
cient allocation of human capital; Itskhoki and Moll (2019) analyze optimal development
policies that redistribute between workers and entrepreneurs in an economy with financial
constraints.6 Relative to this literature, we apply the same notion of constrained efficiency,
but the focus of our paper is on efficiency in investment and capital reallocation. To our
knowledge, we provide the first analysis of optimal investment subsidies in the presence of
financial frictions.7
    Financial frictions and capital misallocation. A large literature studies the role of
financial frictions for the allocation of capital across heterogeneous firms. See, for instance,
Buera, Kaboski, and Shin (2011), Midrigan and Xu (2014), and Moll (2014).8 These papers
provide theoretical and quantitative insights on the efficiency gains that could be achieved
by removing financial frictions. We focus on what gains could be achieved if a benevolent
   5
      Michelacci and Pozzi (2017) characterize the efficient price of land in a small-open-economy model
with collateral constraints and measure the collateral externality using data on land prices and economic
activity in Italy. Villalvazo (2020) explores the role of household heterogeneity for sudden stops in a small
open economy with collateral constraints. A related literature in international macroeconomics analyzes
endowment economies in which the relative price of non-tradable goods affects the value of collateral, which
is assumed to be income, instead of the value of capital. See, for instance, Bianchi (2011), Benigno, Chen,
Otrok, Rebucci, and Young (2013), and Ottonello, Perez, and Varraso (2019). Bianchi and Mendoza (2020)
survey both strands of this literature, with capital or income as collateral, and connect them in a model
with endogenous investment, in which the price of capital is tied to the price of non-tradable goods.
    6
      Nu~
        no and Moll (2018) develop tools to study constrained efficiency in economies with heterogeneous
agents in continuous time.
    7
      While we focus on a Ramsey implementation of the constrained-efficient allocation, Kilenthong and
Townsend (2021) propose a market-based approach to implementing efficient allocations in the presence of
pecuniary externalities. Related to our analysis of investment taxes and subsidies, D´  avila and H´ebert (2020)
study the optimal design of corporate taxation in the presence of financial frictions. Parodi (2020) provides
a quantitative analysis of optimal subsidies on consumer durable goods in presence of partial irreversibility.
Samaniego and Sun (2019) analyze the long-run effects of vintage-specific investment subsidies in a vintage
capital model.
    8
      Restuccia and Rogerson (2008) and Hsieh and Klenow (2009) provide early contributions on the ag-
gregate effects of capital misallocation across heterogeneous producers. David and Venkateswaran (2019)
quantify the roles of different types of frictions, including financial ones, for capital misallocation.


                                                       5
planner were to face the same set of financial constraints as private agents.9 In so doing,
we build a bridge between the quantitative literature on capital misallocation and the
theoretical literature on efficiency in presence of pecuniary externalities. Thus, our results
provide guidance for the design of second-best policies, such as investment subsidies.10


3       Capital Reallocation and Pecuniary Externalities
In this section, we describe a stylized model of capital reallocation with new and old
capital building on Rampini (2019). We analytically characterize the constrained efficiency
of the allocation of capital in the presence of financial frictions that induce distributive and
collateral externalities. We show that the distributive externality dominates the collateral
externality; the price of old capital in stationary competitive equilibrium is too high from
the perspective of efficiency. The economic intuition is as follows. The most financially
constrained firms buy old capital due to its lower financing need; firms that buy new
capital are less constrained or unconstrained, and while some of these firms benefit from a
higher price of old capital, since they borrow against the resale value of their investment in
terms of old capital, the severely constrained firms benefit from a lower price of old capital
considerably more.


3.1     Environment
Time is discrete and the horizon infinite, that is, t = 0, 1, 2, . . . . There is an infinitely-lived,
risk-neutral representative household with preferences
                                                
                                                       t Ct ,                                         (1)
                                                t=0


where   (0, 1) is the discount factor and Ct is consumption.
    There are over-lapping generations of firms and the representative household owns all
firms. At each date, a continuum of firms with measure one is born. Firms live at two dates,
make an investment decision when young and produce when old. Each firm has access to a
production function f with f (0) = 0, fk > 0, and fkk < 0; investing capital kt > 0 at date t
yields output f (kt ) at date t + 1. Output can be used to make new capital goods and it
    9
      Ai, Bhandari, Chen, and Ying (2019) develop an optimal contracting model subject to agency fric-
tions. The optimal allocation features dispersion in marginal products of capital across firms and can be
implemented with state-contingent securities and collateral constraints.
   10
      Relatedly, Gourio and Miao (2010) and Jo and Senga (2019) use quantitative models with heterogeneous
firms to study the effects of dividend taxes and credit subsidies respectively.



                                                      6
takes one unit of output to make a unit of new capital goods. Capital goods are productive
for two periods and then fully depreciate. We refer to capital goods with two periods of
                                        N
useful life as "new" capital (denoted kt  ) and to capital goods with a single residual period
                                      O
of productive life as "old" (denoted kt ). New and old capital goods are perfect substitutes
                                                                   N     O
in production and we define the total capital of a firm as kt  kt    + kt  .


3.2       Frictionless Economy and First Best
We start by considering a frictionless economy in which the representative household can
choose investment in each firm without facing any financial frictions. We index firms of
each generation by w  W = [wmin , wmax ] with distribution  (w ).11 The aggregate resource
constraint for the frictionless economy is

                             N           O                                N
                          f kt-1 (w ) + kt-1 (w ) d (w ) = Ct +          kt (w )d (w );      (2)

aggregate output equals consumption of the representative household plus aggregate invest-
ment in new capital goods. Aggregate investment in new capital at date t - 1 determines
the aggregate stock of old capital at date t

                                       N                       O
                                      kt-1 (w )d (w ) =       kt (w )d (w ).                 (3)

    The first best (FB) allocation maximizes the utility of the representative household (1)
                                                                                   N
by choosing aggregate consumption Ct and an allocation of new and old capital kt     (w ) and
 O                                                                                     N
kt (w ), w  W , subject to the resource constraints (2) and (3), and taking as given k-  1 (w )
      O
and k-1 (w ), w  W . The first-order conditions with respect to new and old capital satisfy

                                                    FB      FB
                                          1 =  fk (kt  ) + qt+1                              (4)
                                        FB        FB
                                       qt  = fk (kt  ),                                      (5)

                 FB                                              O
where we use qt      to denote the shadow value of old capital kt  in terms of date t consump-
              FB
tion. Thus, qt     can be interpreted as the first-best valuation (or price) of old capital. The
economy is in steady state from date 1 onwards. Notice that the allocation of total capital
is the same for all firms. By combining equations (4) and (5), we get that in a steady
                1                                                                   -1      1
state q F B = 1+  
                   , and the optimal scale of production for all firms is k F B = fk      (1+ )
                                                                                                .
In the spirit of Jorgenson (1963), we can define the frictionless user cost of new and old
capital as uF B
             N  1 - q
                          FB
                             and uF B
                                   O  q
                                          FB
                                             , and note that uF B     FB
                                                               N = uO  u
                                                                              FB
                                                                                 . The user cost
 11
      We will later interpret w as the initial net worth of each firm.


                                                       7
would be the rental rate in a frictionless rental market and we define it as of the beginning
of the period. The allocation of new and old capital across firms is indeterminate, but must
                                               FB
satisfy kt O
            +1 (w )d (w ) = ktN
                                (w )d (w ) = k 2 .


3.3     Financial Frictions and Competitive Equilibrium
We now consider a competitive equilibrium with financial frictions. Firms are subject to
the following financial frictions. Firms are born with exogenous net worth w distributed
over the interval [wmin , wmax ] according to an exogenous non-degenerate distribution  (w ),
with 0 < wmin < q F B k F B and k F B < wmax , with positive mass in a neighborhood of wmin
and wmax . We index firms by their net worth, but suppress the dependence on net worth
wherever appropriate.
    Firms can borrow from the representative household at rate R   -1 , but borrowing is
subject to a collateral constraint. The collateral constraint requires that debt repayments
do not exceed a fraction   [0, 1) of the future resale value of new capital purchases.
That is, the collateral value of new capital goods is the future price at which these can
be sold as old capital next period. Old capital purchases have no future resale value, as
old capital fully depreciates at the end of the period.12 Rampini and Viswanathan (2010,
2013) show how to derive such collateral constraints in an economy with limited enforcement
without exclusion, in which firms can default on their promises and retain their output, a
fraction 1 -  of their capital, and access to the markets for capital goods and financing.
    Firms can also raise additional internal funds from the representative household, that is,
issue equity by paying negative dividends d < 0, at a cost (-d) incurred by the household,
such that (-d) = 0 if d  0, (-d) > 0 if d < 0. We denote the marginal cost of equity
                           (-d)
issuance by d (-d)        (-d)
                                and assume it is positive, increasing, and convex. Specifically,
                                    2
                                  (-d)
d  0, d (0) = 0 and dd   (       -d)2
                                        0 (see, for example, Gomes, 2001). This assumption
is made for tractability, but the main economic insight obtains with a simple non-negativity
constraint on dividends as well.
    Given their initial net worth w and the price of old capital qt , firms maximize the
present discounted value of their dividends net of equity issuance costs, that is, their value
                                                                               N        O
to the household, by choosing dividends d0t and d1,t+1 , new and old capital kt   and kt  ,and
borrowing bt , to solve

                                        max                  d0t - (-d0t ) + d1,t+1               (6)
                                            N ,k O }R3 ×R2
                         {d0t ,d1,t+1 ,bt ,kt   t        +

  12
    In Section 3.8 we consider a model with standard geometric depreciation, in which both new and old
capital serve as collateral.



                                                         8
subject to the budget constraints for current and next period,

                                                           N       O
                                         w0t + bt = d0t + kt + qt kt                            (7)
                               N
                          f (k t    O
                                 + kt           N
                                      ) + qt+1 kt = d1,t+1 +  -1 bt ,                           (8)

and the collateral constraint
                                              N
                                        qt+1 kt   -1 bt .                                       (9)

    Denote the multipliers on the budget constraints by µ0t and µ1,t+1 , on the collateral
constraint by t , and on non-negativity constraint for new and old capital by  N        O
                                                                                t and  t ,
respectively. The optimal demand for new capital, old capital, and borrowing, as functions
of initial net worth w , satisfy the following first-order conditions

                          1 + d,t =  [fk (kt ) + qt+1 ] + t qt+1 +  N
                                                                    t                          (10)
                      qt (1 + d,t ) = fk (kt ) +     O
                                                     t                                         (11)
                          1 + d,t = 1 + t ,                                                    (12)

              N     O
where kt = kt    + kt . Moreover, the firm's marginal value of net worth at date t is µ0,t =
1 + d,t  1, that is, equals one plus the marginal cost of raising additional equity. In
contrast, the firm's marginal value of net worth at date t + 1 is µ1,t+1 = 1, as the firm
pays out all its remaining net worth as dividends to the representative household when it
exits. Finally, the premium on internal funds d,t = t , that is, equals the multiplier on
the collateral constraint.
    A stationary competitive equilibrium is a set of policy functions mapping initial net
worth to an allocation {d0 (w ), d1(w ), k N (w ), k O (w ), b(w )}, that is, dividends, investment,
and debt choices, and a price of old capital q , such that firms maximize the present dis-
counted value of dividends net of equity issuance cost, w  W , and the market for old
capital clears, that is, k N (w )d (w ) = k O (w )d (w ).
    In a stationary equilibrium, using  = d from (12), the first-order conditions for new
and old capital (10) and (11) can be written as investment Euler equations

                                       1 fk (k ) + (1 - )q
                                1                                                              (13)
                                    1 + d          N
                                       1 fk (k )
                                1                ,                                             (14)
                                    1 + d q

with equality if kN > 0 and kO > 0, respectively, where k = kN + kO , and we define the
down payment per unit on new capital N  1 - q , that is, the price per unit of new


                                                 9
capital minus the maximal amount the firm can borrow against the residual value next
period, which is determined by the collateral constraint. Analogously, we can define the
down payment on old capital as O  q , as the firm cannot borrow against old capital. In
the spirit of Jorgenson (1963) we can rewrite (13) and (14) as

                 uN (w )  uN + d N = 1 - q + d (1 - q )  fk (k )                          (15)
                                uO (w )  uO + d O = q + d q  fk (k ),                     (16)

where uN (w ) (uO (w )) is the user cost of new (old) capital to a firm with net worth w . The
choice between investment in new and old capital is determined by the trade-off between
their user costs if the firm were unconstrained and their down payments.
   Combining (13) and (14) we moreover have

                                 1    (1 - )q  ( -  O )/(1 + d )
                      1=                      + N                .                        (17)
                             (1 + d ) N - O       N - O

If N  O , then (17) implies  O > 0, so no firm would buy old capital, which cannot
be true in equilibrium. Therefore, in a stationary equilibrium, N > O , which means
the down payment for new capital exceeds the down payment for old capital; equivalently,
  1
1+
      > q.
    But then (15) and (16) imply that uN  uO , as otherwise there would be no investment
in new capital, which is not an equilibrium; equivalently, q  q F B , that is, the price of old
capital in competitive equilibrium weakly exceeds the price in a frictionless economy.
                                      (1- )q
    To interpret (17), define RO       N - O
                                             ; this can be interpreted as the shadow interest
rate on the additional amount the firm can implicitly borrow by buying old capital instead
of new capital. Since q  q F B , RO   -1 , that is, borrowing more by buying old capital is
costly in equilibrium, and strictly so if q > q F B .
    Note that in the problem in (6) to (9) the objective is (weakly) concave and the con-
straint set (with constraints stated as inequality constraints) convex. Hence, the induced
value function is weakly concave and, using the envelope condition, the marginal value 1+ d
weakly decreasing in w . Since uO (w ) - uN (w ) = uO - uN - d (N - O ), the difference
in user costs between old and new capital is increasing in w . Old capital is relatively less
costly for more financially constrained firms. This implies that in equilibrium, firms that
are sufficiently constrained invest in only old capital, and firms shift to investing in new
capital as their net worth increases. We stress that this equilibrium property of our model
is consistent with the empirical evidence on capital reallocation (for example, Eisfeldt and
Rampini, 2007, and Ma, Murfin, and Pratt, 2020).
    In particular, dividend-paying firms have d = 0, so uN (w )  uO (w ), that is, prefer

                                              10
new capital at least weakly. Such firms invest k which solves 1 =  (fk (k ) + q ), where
k  k F B with equality iff q = q F B . Firms pay dividends if w  w = N k . Firms that
                                                              1       -1
are indifferent between new and old capital must have  1+      d
                                                                 = RO    (from (17)) and invest
                         f
                       -1 k (k )+(1-  )q
k , which solves 1 = RO         N
                                         , where k  k F B with equality iff q = q F B . Firms are
indifferent between new and old capital at the margin if w  (wN , wO ), where w N = d0 + qk
and wO = d0 + N k , d0 = 0 if q = q F B , and d0 solves 1 + d = RO if q > q F B .
    We summarize these results in the following proposition:
Proposition 1 (Stationary Competitive Equilibrium Characterization) A station-
ary competitive equilibrium is characterized as follows:
(i) New capital has a higher down payment than old capital (N > O ), but a (weakly)
lower user cost from the perspective of an unconstrained firm (uN  uO ).
(ii) The price of old capital (weakly) exceeds the price in a frictionless economy (q  q F B ).
(iii) If q > q F B , there exist thresholds w N < wO < w such that: firms with w  w N
invest only in old capital; firms with w  (wN , wO ) invest k and invest in both new and old
capital; firms with w  w O invest only in new capital; and firms with net worth w  w pay
dividends and invest k > k F B > k . If q = q F B , there exists thresholds wN < w O = w such
that: firms with w  w N invest only in old capital; firms with w  w O invest k F B and are
indifferent between new and old capital at the margin; firms with w  (wN , wO ) invest a
strictly positive minimum amount in old capital.
    We now compute a numerical example and use it to illustrate the main properties of
the stationary competitive equilibrium. We assume the production function is f (k ) = k 
with   (0, 1). Net worth is uniformly distributed on [wmin , wmax ]. The cost of equity
issuance is a power function, (-d) = 0 (-d)1 for d < 0 and (-d) = 0 otherwise. The
caption of Figure 1 reports all parameter values used in the example.
    The stationary-equilibrium price of old capital associated with this parameterization is
q = 0.511 > q F B = 0.51. Figure 1 displays the policy functions for new capital (top left), old
capital (top right), total capital, that is, the sum of new and old capital (bottom left), and
the marginal cost of equity issuance (bottom right), in stationary equilibrium. Consistent
with the characterization in Proposition 1, there are three thresholds wN < wO < w , which
we highlight with vertical lines in the figure. Firms with w < wN invest only in old capital.
Their total investment increases in net worth, and their marginal cost of equity issuance
decreases in net worth. Firms with w N < w < w O invest in both new and old capital,
keeping the total investment k constant, and issue a common level of equity, resulting in
a constant marginal cost of equity issuance. Firms with wO < w < w invest only in new
capital, while still issuing equity. Firms with w > w invest only in new capital and are
unconstrained in their investment k ; these firms pay dividends.

                                               11
         1.5                                                1.5


           1                                                 1


         0.5                                                0.5


           0                                                 0
                      0.5             1         1.5                 0.5         1         1.5


         1.4                                                0.1

                                                           0.08
         1.3
                                                           0.06
         1.2
                                                           0.04
         1.1
                                                           0.02

           1                                                 0
                      0.5             1         1.5                 0.5         1         1.5


Figure 1: Stationary competitive equilibrium ­ example. Top left: new capital kN ; top right:
old capital k O ; bottom left: total capital k ; bottom right: marginal cost of equity issuance d .
The x-axes report net worth w. The parameter values are: discount rate  = 0.96; support of
net worth distribution wmin = 0.05 and wmax = 1.5; curvature of production function  = 0.6;
collateralizability  = 0.5; and cost of raising equity parameters 0 = 0.1 and 1 = 2.


3.4    Constrained (In-)Efficiency
We now characterize the constrained-efficient allocation in this economy, that is, the allo-
cation that arises if a benevolent planner with full commitment makes investment decisions
on behalf of firms, subject to the same constraints that are present in the competitive equi-
librium. We then use this characterization to analyze the nature of constrained inefficiency
in competitive equilibrium.
                                                              N             O
    Given an initial distribution of new and old capital, k-    1 (w ) and k-1 (w ), a planner
maximizes the present discounted value of aggregate dividends net of costs of equity issuance
(or, equivalently, aggregate consumption)

                                
                   d10 (w ) +          t (d0t (w ) - (-d0t (w )) + d1,t+1 (w )) d (w ),         (18)
                                t=0


                                                      12
subject to the budget constraints (7) and (8) with multipliers  t µ0,t and  t+1 µ1,t+1 , the
collateral constraint (9) with multiplier  t+1 t , the non-negativity constraints on new and
old capital with multipliers  t  N      t O
                                 t and   t , and the market clearing condition for old capital
(3) with multiplier  t t .13
    The first-order conditions with respect new and old capital are

                              1 + d,t =  [fk (kt ) + qt+1 ] + t qt+1 +  N
                                                                        t + t+1                             (19)
                    qt (1 + d,t ) + t = fk (kt ) +  O
                                                    t ,                                                     (20)

and with respect to debt (12). The first-order condition with respect to the price of old
capital qt for t = 1, 2, .. is

                       O                                      N
                      kt (w ) (1 + d,t (w )) d (w ) =        kt-1 (w ) (1 + t-1 (w )) d (w ).               (21)

The left-hand side of equation (21) reports the marginal effect of an increase in qt on
dividends of young firms at t, net of equity issuance costs. The right-hand side reports its
marginal effect on the dividends of old firms at t, as well as its effect on collateral constraints
at t - 1. In the absence of financial frictions, we would have d,t (w ) = t-1 (w ) = 0; thus,
equation (21) would coincide with the market-clearing condition for old capital (3), and the
aggregate welfare effect of a marginal change in qt would be zero. Thus, using the market
clearing condition (3), we can simplify equation (21) to isolate the pecuniary externalities
induced by the presence of financial frictions:

                               O                               N
                              kt (w )d,t(w )d (w ) =          kt-1 (w )t-1 (w )d (w ).                      (22)

   The left-hand side of equation (22) represents the aggregate distributive externality
induced by a marginal increase in the price of old capital qt : Firms that purchase old
capital at t value the additional expenditure they need to incur as the product of the
                      O
quantity purchased kt   and their marginal cost of equity issuance d,t .
   The right-hand side of equation (22) represents the aggregate collateral externality
induced by the same marginal increase in qt : Firms that purchase new capital at t - 1
and face a binding collateral constraint are able to borrow against a fraction  of the
additional collateral value, and thus increase their investment; they value this benefit as
                                          N
the product of the additional collateral kt-1 and the Lagrange multiplier on their collateral
                 14
constraint t-1 .
  13
       We explicitly formulate the Lagrangian of this problem in Appendix A.1.
  14
       The effect of the current price of old capital on past collateral constraints implies that the constrained-


                                                        13
    Thus, a marginal increase in qt induces a negative externality on the value of firms that
issue equity to purchase old capital at t, and a positive externality on firms that purchase
new capital at t - 1 and are constrained in their borrowing. Equation (22) highlights that
these two opposite externalities must offset each other in the constrained-efficient allocation.
    Before proceeding to characterize the planning solution, we show that in the stationary
competitive equilibrium, the aggregate distributive externality is larger than the aggregate
collateral externality, resulting in an equilibrium price of old capital that is higher than the
constrained-efficient one. Specifically, we prove that in stationary competitive equilibrium,
we have
                           k O (w )d(w )d (w ) >  k N (w )(w )d (w ).                       (23)

   Let us start by considering the case q > q F B . Using the characterization in Proposition
1, we know that kN = 0 for w < wN , kO = 0 for w > wO , and d = 0 for w > w , with
wN < wO < w . Firms that are indifferent between new and old capital, that is, firms with
w  (w N , wO ), have the same (positive) marginal cost of equity, which we denote by d .
   As d is weakly decreasing in w , no firm purchasing old capital has a marginal value of
net worth less than 1 + d , and no firm purchasing new capital has a marginal value of net
worth larger than 1 + d . Formally, we have d  d for w  wO , and d  d for w  w N .
   Furthermore, using the optimality condition for debt (12), (w ) = d (w ) and we can
rewrite the right-hand-side of (23) as  k N d d . We can then bound the two integrals in
(23) as follows:
                                         wO                                    wO
              k O (w )d (w )d (w ) =          k O (w )d (w )d (w )  d               k O (w )d (w ),   (24)

and
                                          w                                    w
              k N (w )d(w )d (w ) =           k N (w )d(w )d (w )  d               k N (w )d (w ).    (25)
                                         wN                                wN

Furthermore, the market-clearing condition for old capital (3), together with the charac-
terization in Proposition 1, implies
                                w                       wO
                                    k N (w )d (w ) <         k O (w )d (w ),                          (26)
                               wN


because the left-hand side of (26) is less than the aggregate supply of old capital in station-
efficient plan is time inconsistent. A planner without commitment, such as the one considered by Bianchi
and Mendoza (2018), would disregard this effect. However, as we show below, even under our assumption
of full commitment, the collateral externality is dominated by the distributive externality.




                                                   14
ary equilibrium, whereas the right-hand side represents aggregate demand for old capital.15
Combining (24), (25), and (26), we have

                              k O (w )d (w )d (w ) >      k N (w )d(w )d (w ),                         (27)

which implies (23) since  < 1.16
    Let us now consider the case q = q F B . All firms investing in new capital, that is, with
w > wN , are unconstrained. Thus their marginal cost of equity issuance is zero and we
have k O (w )d(w )d (w ) > 0 = k N (w )d(w )d (w ).
    Hence, in stationary equilibrium, the aggregate distributive externality is larger than the
aggregate collateral externality. By comparing this result with the constrained-efficiency
condition for the price of old capital (22), we find that a marginal reduction in the price
of old capital has a positive effect on aggregate welfare, implying that the competitive-
equilibrium price is too high from the perspective of constrained efficiency.
    We summarize this result in the following proposition:

Proposition 2 (Sign of Constrained Inefficiency) In stationary competitive equilib-
rium, the aggregate distributive externality is larger than the aggregate collateral externality,
that is, k O (w )d (w )d (w ) >  k N (w )(w )d (w ). A marginal decrease in the price of
old capital induces a positive welfare gain.

The economic intuition is as follows: In stationary equilibrium, the buyers of old capital
are the more constrained firms whereas the sellers of old capital are old firms which are un-
constrained and thus the distributive externality is sizable; the sellers also benefit from the
collateral externality to the extent that they were constrained in the previous period, but
since these firms invested in new capital last period, they must have been less constrained,
and thus the collateral externality is more moderate. Stationarity is used in two ways here:
First, aggregate investment in new capital equals aggregate investment in old capital and,
second, the distribution of the marginal value of net worth is the same across periods.
  15
     Inequality (26) is strict since we assume a positive mass of firms with w > w.
  16
     Notice that even if we were to assume a degenerate distribution of initial net worth, so that all young
firms would be equally financially constrained, we would still conclude that the distributive externality
between young and old firms dominates the collateral externality; in this case, inequality (27) would be
an equality, and (23) would still be a strict inequality because  < 1. Importantly, this alternative model
would still be a model with heterogeneity in the marginal value of net worth, specifically between young
and old firms. However, this model would not generate the equilibrium sorting of firms into new and old
investment observed in the empirical evidence on capital reallocation, because all firms would have the
same composition of investment. As we discuss in Section 3.9 in more detail, in the case of common net
worth for young firms in a model with assets in fixed supply, the distributive externality dominates the
collateral externality, too. In contrast, a model with an infinitely-lived representative firm would feature
no reallocation and hence no distributive externality in stationary equilibrium.

                                                    15
3.5      Constrained-Efficient Allocation and Implementation
We now characterize the stationary constrained-efficient allocation, and show that it achieves
the first-best level of welfare in the stylized model. In stationary equilibrium, the optimality
condition for the price of old capital (22) reads

                              k O (w )d(w )d (w ) =         k N (w )(w )d (w ).

Clearly, an allocation such that all firms pay non-negative dividends, that is, d =  = 0
for all w , satisfies this condition. We now show that the planner induces an allocation that
achieves the first-best level of welfare and satisfies all budget and financial constraints,
allowing all firms to be unconstrained and produce at the efficient scale k F B . Imposing
d = 0 for all w , we can rewrite the optimality conditions (19) and (20) in stationary-
equilibrium as follows:

                                      1 =  fk (k F B ) + q  +                                    (28)
                                 q  +  = fk (k F B ),                                            (29)

where q  is the stationary-equilibrium price of old capital in the constrained-efficient plan,
and we have restricted attention to an allocation such that  N =  O = 0 for all w .
     Let q  = w min
               kF B
                    . At this price, firms with the lowest level of initial net worth produce at
the efficient scale, by investing entirely in old capital, without issuing equity: k O (wmin ) =
k F B . We need to ensure that the market for old capital clears at this price. To this end,
consider the following allocation of new and old capital.
                                    
                                     w-q kF B if w  k F B (1 - q  )
                          k (w ) = 1-
                           N
                                        N
                                         q  (1+ )
                                                                                            (30)
                                    k             if w > k F B (1 - q  )

                                         N
and k O (w ) = k F B - k N (w ), with k to be determined.
    Given this allocation, we can write the market-clearing condition for old capital as
follows:

      k F B (1-q  )
                                                                                    N
                      k F B - k N (w ) d (w ) + 1 -  k F B (1 - q  )       (k F B - k ) =
                                   k F B (1-q  )
                                                                                             N
                                                   k N (w )d (w ) + 1 -  k F B (1 - q  )    k , (31)

where the left-hand side represents aggregate demand for old capital and the right-hand


                                                      16
side represents aggregate demand for new capital, which in stationary equilibrium coincides
with the aggregate supply of old capital. Equation (31) can be solved to find the value for
  N
k that guarantees market clearing.17
    We now present an implementation of the constrained efficient allocation. The plan-
ner's allocation can be decentralized as a competitive equilibrium with proportional taxes
at rates  N and  O on new and old capital, respectively. These taxes are offset by lump-
sum transfers to each firm, in order not to redistribute resources across firms. Tax rates
and transfers can be firm specific, that is, are functions of net worth w . With this im-
plementation, the budget constraint of a newborn firm with initial net worth w becomes

                                              N
                         w + bt + Tt = d0t + kt (1 + tN ) + qt kt
                                                                O
                                                                  (1 + tO )

with a lump-sum transfer Tt = tN kt  N
                                       + tO qt kt
                                                O
                                                  .
    By inspection of equations (28) and (29), we see that the tax rates that implement the
first-best stationary equilibrium are

                                      N = - = - (q F B - q  )

and
                                                    qF B
                                         O =      =      - 1.
                                                q    q
As  = f  (k F B ) - q  > 0, that is, old capital is scarce from the perspective of the planner,
we have  N < 0 and  O > 0. The planner internalizes the distributive externalities in the
market for old capital and induces a price of old capital sufficiently low that all firms can
afford the optimal production scale without incurring equity issuance costs. The optimal
policy that supports this allocation is a subsidy on new capital, which increases the future
supply of old capital, combined with a tax on old capital, which ensures the first-best
production scale is optimal given the low price of old capital required to undo the effects
of financial frictions. It might seem counterintuitive that the planner taxes old capital,
given the objective to make it cheaper. However, recall that these taxes are rebated in a
lump-sum fashion to each agent. Thus, a tax on old capital has only a positive effect on
buyers of old capital, that is, constrained firms, because it allows the planner to reduce the
price they face. Indeed, the larger the reduction in price required relative to the first-best
price q F B , the larger is the optimal tax  O . Notice that both tax rates  N and  O are
constant and independent of firms' net worth, whereas they are offset by lump-sum taxes
  17
    A sufficient condition for the solution to be in the interval 0, k F B is that there is a sufficiently
large mass of firms with initial net worth larger than k F B . If  is uniform, as in our numerical example,
wmax  k F B is sufficient.


                                                    17
          1.5                                              1.5


            1                                               1


          0.5                                              0.5


            0                                               0
                       0.5          1          1.5                   0.5          1          1.5


          1.4                                              0.1

                                                          0.08
          1.3
                                                          0.06
          1.2
                                                          0.04
          1.1
                                                          0.02

            1                                               0
                       0.5          1          1.5                   0.5          1          1.5


Figure 2: Stationary competitive equilibrium and constrained-efficient allocation ­ example. Top
left: new capital k N ; top right: old capital k O ; bottom left: total capital k ; bottom right: marginal
cost of equity issuance d . The x-axes report net worth w. Solid lines denote the competitive-
equilibrium allocation, dashed lines the constrained-efficient allocation. See the caption of Figure 1
for the parameter values.


or transfers that vary with firms' net worth, because of heterogeneity in the composition
of investment between new and old capital.
    We consider again our numerical example and solve for the constrained-efficient allo-
cation. In Figure 2, we illustrate the stationary competitive equilibrium (solid lines) as
before, and contrast it with the constrained-efficient allocation rule that supports the first-
best outcome described in equation (30) (dashed lines). While total capital (bottom left)
is weakly increasing in net worth in competitive equilibrium, inducing inefficient dispersion
in marginal products, the constrained-efficient allocation equalizes the scale of produc-
tion across all firms, increasing aggregate investment and reallocating old capital towards
the most constrained firms, without incurring any equity issuance costs (bottom right).
The constrained-efficient allocation induces the first-best outcome with equilibrium price
q  = 0.037. The tax rates that decentralize this outcome are  N = -0.454 and  O = 12.819.

                                                     18
    In Online Appendix OA.1, we consider the case in which the planner faces the additional
constraint that purchases of old capital cannot be distorted. The planner makes investment
decisions on behalf of firms, taking each firm's Euler equation for old capital as a constraint.
Equivalently, the planner chooses proportional taxes on new capital, rebated lump-sum to
each firm, but cannot tax old capital. In this case, the planner cannot implement the
first-best allocation. However, the optimal policy is still a subsidy on new capital. We also
solve for the constrained-efficient allocation in this case in our numerical example.


3.6    Risk-Averse Entrepreneurs
In our stylized model, firms maximize the present discounted value of dividends net of
equity issuance cost, and the planner maximizes consumption of an infinitely-lived repre-
sentative household who consumes aggregate dividends. We now consider the case in which
firms are owned by over-lapping generations of risk-averse entrepreneurs, whose individual
consumption coincides with dividends from their own firm.
    Specifically, entrepreneurs maximize u (c0t ) + u (c1,t+1 ), where u is a utility function,
with uc > 0, ucc < 0, limc0 uc (c) = +, and entrepreneurial consumption coincides with
dividends, which satisfy the budget constraints (7) and (8). We discuss this version of the
model in detail in Online Appendix OA.2.
    A utilitarian planner maximizes the present discounted value of utilities of all (present
and future) entrepreneurs. The (stationary) constrained-efficient price of old capital satis-
fies the following optimality condition:

                k O (w )uc (c0 (w )) d (w ) =   k N (w ) [uc (c1 (w )) + (w )] d (w ),

where the left-hand side and the first term in the sum on the right-hand side represent
the distributive externalities on buyers and sellers of old capital, respectively, whereas the
second term on the right-hand side represents the collateral externality.
    In this model, the marginal value of entrepreneurial net worth equals the marginal utility
of consumption, which is strictly decreasing in net worth, in contrast to the marginal equity
issuance cost in the baseline model, which is equal to a positive constant in the indifference
region between new and old capital, and equal to zero for unconstrained firms. Despite this
difference, the fact that the marginal utility of consumption is decreasing implies that the
planner still wants to induce a lower price of old capital than in competitive equilibrium,
in order to redistribute resources toward more financially constrained entrepreneurs, who
are net buyers of old capital in equilibrium. Hence, our result on the sign of constrained
inefficiency obtains also with risk-averse entrepreneurs. We now state this result formally


                                                19
and prove it in Online Appendix OA.2.18

Proposition 3 (Sign of Constrained Inefficiency ­ Risk-Averse Entrepreneurs)
Assume that in stationary equilibrium q > q F B . Then, the aggregate distributive externality
exceeds the aggregate collateral externality, that is

                 k O (w )uc (c0 (w )) d (w ) >   k N (w ) [uc (c1 (w )) + (w )] d (w ).

A marginal decrease in the price of old capital induces a positive welfare gain.


3.7     Heterogeneity in Productivity
In our baseline model, firms are heterogeneous only in their initial net worth. We now
extend this framework to allow for heterogeneity in productivity and show that our main
efficiency result obtains in this richer model. At their initial date, firms draw initial net
worth w and a level of productivity s  S  {s1 , ..., sN } from a joint distribution  (w, s).
At the production date, firms produce output with production function yt = sf (kt ). We
discuss this model in detail in Online Appendix OA.3.
     Allocations in stationary equilibrium are functions of (w, s), and the preference for new
vs. old capital is thus tied to both net worth and productivity. Crucially, we show the
                                                                                 (w,s)
marginal equity issuance cost is (weakly) increasing in productivity: ds                0. Thus,
firms with lower net worth and higher productivity tend to prefer old capital, whereas less
financially constrained firms, that is, firms with higher net worth and lower productivity
tend to purchase new capital. The market for old capital reallocates capital from less
productive and less constrained to more productive and more constrained firms.
     The (stationary) constrained-efficient price of old capital satisfies the following optimal-
ity condition:

                     k O (w, s)d(w, s)d (w, s) =         k N (w, s)(w, s)d (w, s),

where the left-hand side represents the aggregate distributive externality from a marginal
change in the price of old capital, and the right-hand side represents the aggregate collateral
externality.
    In competitive equilibrium, we show that all firms that are indifferent between new and
old capital have the same marginal value of net worth, independent of their productiv-
ity. This feature allows us to generalize our main efficiency result also to the case with
   While the proposition focuses on the case q > q F B , Online Appendix OA.2 provides a weak condition
  18

under which the same result obtains when q = q F B .

                                                  20
heterogeneous productivity. We now state this result formally and prove it in Online Ap-
pendix OA.3.

Proposition 4 (Sign of Constrained Inefficiency ­ Heterogeneity in Productivity)
In the stationary competitive equilibrium, the aggregate distributive externality exceeds the
aggregate collateral externality, that is,

                    k O (w, s)d(w, s)d (w, s) >        k N (w, s)(w, s)d (w, s).

A marginal decrease in the price of old capital induces a positive welfare gain.


3.8    Firm Life Cycle and Long-Lived Capital
In our stylized model, firms live for two dates and capital is productive for two periods. The
assumption that firms live for only one period rules out endogenous net worth dynamics.
The assumption that capital is unproductive after two dates rules out the possibility of
using old capital as collateral. We now show that our main result on the sign of inefficiency
in competitive equilibrium obtains in a more general version of the model in which firms
have a stochastic life cycle and capital is long lived.
    To this end, we generalize the model in two ways. First, firms follow a stochastic life
cycle. Specifically, at each date, with exogenous probability   (0, 1], firms learn that
they will die after producing and paying their remaining net worth as a dividend. With
probability 1 - , firms continue their activity. Thus, as long as  < 1, firm net worth
evolves endogenously. At each date, a measure  of new firms is born with initial net worth
drawn from an exogenous distribution 0 (w0 ). The stationary distribution of net worth
 (w ), however, is an equilibrium object.
    Second, capital goods depreciate as follows. For each unit of new capital, a fraction
  (0, 1] becomes old after production. Old capital depreciates at geometric rate  O 
 N

(0, 1] each period. With these assumptions, firms can pledge a fraction  of the resale value
of capital next period (1 -  N (1 - qt+1 ))kt
                                            N
                                              + qt+1 (1 -  O )kt
                                                               O
                                                                 as collateral. Hence, both new
and old capital serve as collateral. This environment nests the baseline model, which can
be recovered by setting  =  N =  O = 1.19
    We analyze this model in Appendix A.2. Here, we state our main result on constrained
inefficiency. We introduce the following notation. We denote firm age by a = 0, 1, . . . and
the mass of age a firms that survive into the next period by a  (1 - )a . The (stationary)
  19
    The environment also nests a model in which all new investment is transformed into a homogenous
type of capital after one period; this model can be recovered by setting  N = 1 and  O    (0, 1).



                                                21
constrained-efficient price of old capital satisfies the following optimality condition:

      
                O
             a ka d,a -  N ka
                            N
                              + (1 -  O )ka
                                          O
                                            (1 - )d,a+1 d0 (w0 ) =
      a=0
                                                 
                                                       a a  N k a
                                                                N
                                                                  + (1 -  O )ka
                                                                              O
                                                                                d0 (w0 ), (32)
                                                a=0


where the left-hand side represents the aggregate distributive externality from a marginal
change in the price of old capital and the right-hand side the aggregate collateral externality.
    Different from the stylized model without firm life cycle, the marginal value of net worth
is no longer necessarily constant in the indifference region between new and old capital.
Moreover, old capital also serves as collateral, thus inducing a richer set of externalities
from the price of old capital. Despite these differences with our baseline case, we can
show that our result on the sign of the constrained inefficiency generalizes also to this
environment. The economic intuition is that the more constrained firms are net buyers of
old capital; although reducing the price of old capital decreases its collateral value, this
effect is dominated by the distributive effect of making old capital cheaper for these firms.
We now state this result, which we prove in Appendix A.2, formally.

Proposition 5 (Sign of Constrained Inefficiency ­ Long-Lived Firms and Capital)
In the stationary competitive equilibrium, the aggregate distributive externality exceeds the
aggregate collateral externality, that is, the left-hand side of (32) is strictly larger than the
right-hand side. A marginal decrease in the price of old capital induces a positive welfare
gain.


3.9    Essential Role of Heterogeneity and Reallocation
Our results show that the distributive externality exceeds the collateral externality in sta-
tionary competitive equilibrium under quite general conditions. We now discuss the es-
sential role of heterogeneity and equilibrium reallocation for this result, and compare our
insights with the related literature on collateral constraints that depend on asset prices.
    As D´ avila and Korinek (2018) show in a two-period model, distributive externalities
arise because of two features: (i) heterogeneity in the marginal valuation of resources, due
to market incompleteness; and (ii) non-zero net asset trading, that is, in our context, a
positive volume of capital reallocation in stationary equilibrium. Our assumption that
there are over-lapping generations of firms subject to financial constraints induces both
(i) heterogeneity in the marginal value of net worth ­ among firms of different age, as well
as among firms of the same age, but with different levels of net worth or productivity ­

                                              22
and (ii) positive capital reallocation, that is, trade in old capital, in stationary equilibrium,
because younger and more productive firms purchase old capital from older firms. In the
quantitative model of Section 4, we also obtain heterogeneity in the marginal value of net
worth and reallocation of old capital due to idiosyncratic productivity shocks.
    When there are both collateral and distributive externalities, it is in general not pos-
sible to sign the net effects of asset prices on welfare (D´   avila and Korinek, 2018). Nev-
ertheless, in the class of infinite-horizon models we consider, we obtain an unambiguous
result. Given our formulation of the collateral constraint that depends linearly on the resale
value of capital (Kiyotaki and Moore, 1997; Rampini and Viswanathan, 2010, 2013), the
firm optimality condition with respect to debt imposes a tight link between the collateral
externality and the distributive externality in stationary equilibrium. For instance, in the
model of Section 3.4 we can express the collateral externality for a firm with net worth w
as (w )k N (w ) = d (w )k N (w ) using equation (12) and exploiting stationarity. Thus, the
comparison of aggregate distributive and collateral externalities reduces to a comparison
of the covariance between the marginal value of net worth and purchases of old capital
and the covariance between the marginal value of net worth and purchases of new capital.
Furthermore, in stationary equilibrium, aggregate purchases of new capital coincide with
aggregate sales of old capital, by market clearing. Because of equilibrium sorting of more
constrained firms into old capital, the former covariance is larger than the latter, delivering
our result on the sign of the inefficiency.
    This insight generalizes to the case in which the marginal value of net worth is the
marginal utility of consumption, the case in which the marginal value of net worth depends
on productivity, as well as the case in which both new and old capital serve as collateral,
and the distribution of net worth is endogenous.
    To further highlight the essential role of heterogeneity and reallocation, we can compare
our model with models that feature an infinitely-lived representative entrepreneur and ex-
ante heterogeneity between the impatient representative entrepreneur and a patient lender
as in Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) or a representative entrepreneur in a small open economy.
In these models, there are no distributive externalities in stationary equilibrium, because the
representative entrepreneur must keep a constant amount of capital (or land), by definition
of stationary equilibrium, implying that there is no equilibrium reallocation.20 There is
misallocation but no reallocation in these models, and thus they feature only collateral
externalities in stationary equilibrium.
    To show this formally, we analyze the connection between our results and the large
literature on models with a representative entrepreneur and assets in fixed supply further
  20
     Even if lender and entrepreneur have different marginal values of net worth, they do not trade capital
in stationary equilibrium.


                                                    23
in Online Appendix OA.4. Specifically, we first consider a model with a representative
entrepreneur and land and show that lack of reallocation in stationary equilibrium implies
that there is only a collateral externality, which is closely related to the effects of asset-
price changes analyzed by Kiyotaki and Moore (1997). Next, we consider a version of the
same model, but with over-lapping generations of entrepreneurs; this modification implies
heterogeneity among entrepreneurs and positive reallocation in stationary equilibrium and
thus distributive externalities. We show that the distributive externality dominates the
collateral externality in this model, when the discount factor equals the inverse of the equi-
librium interest rate. We also analyze the role of entrepreneurial impatience for pecuniary
externalities.


4      Quantitative Model
We now consider a quantitative model of investment and capital reallocation with a stochas-
tic firm life cycle, long-lived capital, and persistent idiosyncratic productivity shocks. In
this model, both financial frictions and stochastic productivity are drivers of capital real-
location. We calibrate this model to analyze efficiency quantitatively in Section 5.


4.1     Environment
Time is discrete and the horizon is infinite. As in the model of Section 3, a representative
household with linear utility and discount factor  owns all firms in the economy. In every
period, a continuum of measure  of firms are born and receive a common initial endowment
of output w0 from the household.21 Firm i at time t produces output yit combining new
                       N          O
and old capital goods ki,t-1 and ki,t-1 , subject to idiosyncratic productivity shocks sit with
the following technology
                                       yit = sit f (ki,t-1 ),                              (33)
                                   N       O
with fk > 0, fkk < 0, ki,t-1  g (ki,t-1 , ki,t-1 ), where g is a constant returns to scale bundle of
new and old capital, with gN , gO > 0, gN N , gOO  0, and subscripts denote first and second
partial derivatives with respect to new (N) and old (O) capital, respectively. We assume
that new and old capital are imperfect substitutes in the quantitative model, because this
is empirically plausible and facilitates the computation by avoiding corner solutions.
    As in the model of Section 3.8, firms die with probability  at the end of each period.
Dying firms produce output and then distribute their new worth as a dividend. We denote
  21
     Heterogeneity in net worth arises endogenously because of productivity shocks and net worth accumu-
lation. Thus, for simplicity, we abstract from initial heterogeneity.



                                                  24
age by a and let sa be a history of realizations of idiosyncratic shocks up to firm age a,
with associated exogenous probability p(sa ). The measure of firms of age a that survive
and invest to produce in the following period is a = (1 - )a .
   Output can be consumed by the household or transformed into new capital with constant
unit marginal cost. Investment requires one period of time to build. A fraction  N of each
unit of new capital becomes old in the following period. A fraction  O of each unit of
old capital becomes useless in the following period. Firms can also scrap old capital and
recover q  0 units of output. This assumption is empirically plausible and imposes a lower
bound on the price of old capital that the planner can induce. We assume q is sufficiently
low that no capital is scrapped either in the first-best allocation or in equilibrium.


4.2        Frictionless Economy and First Best
The aggregate resource constraint of the frictionless economy is
                                                                                                           
      a          p(sa+1 ) sa+1 f (g (kt
                                      N     a    O     a           N  N     a
                                       -1 (s ), kt-1 (s ))) + (1 -  )kt-1 (s ) = Ct +                           a                  N a
                                                                                                                         p( sa ) k t (s ),
a=0       sa+1                                                                                            a=0       sa
                                                                                      (34)
where the left-hand side is aggregate output and undepreciated new capital, and the right-
hand side is consumption of the representative household and aggregate new capital. The
evolution of the stock of old capital satisfies
                                                                                      
                                 a
                    a         p( s )    N kt
                                           N     a
                                            -1 (s )   + (1 -    O      O
                                                                    )k t     a
                                                                        -1 (s )   =         a                  O a
                                                                                                     p( sa ) k t (s ),       (35)
             a=0         sa                                                           a=0       sa


where the left-hand side is the sum of depreciated new capital and undepreciated old capital
from the previous period, that is, the aggregate supply of old capital, and the right-hand
side is the aggregate demand for old capital.
    The first-best allocation maximizes the utility of the representative household (1) sub-
ject to the resource constraints (34) and (35). The optimality conditions for new and old
capital are

                                            FB a
                          1 =  Et sa+1 fk (kt (s ))gN,t(sa ) + (1 -  N (1 - qt
                                                                             FB
                                                                              +1 ))                                          (36)
                         FB                 FB a
                        qt  =  Et sa+1 fk (kt (s ))gO,t(sa ) + (1 -  O )qt
                                                                         FB
                                                                          +1 ,                                               (37)

                                                                         FB
where Et denotes the expectation conditional on information at date t, qt    denotes the first-
best valuation of old capital, and we use shorthand notation gN,t (s )and gO,t (sa ) to denote
                                                                    a

the marginal effect of investment in new and old capital on total capital in production, that


                                                            25
         N a       O a              N a       O a
is, gN (kt (s ), k t (s )) and gO (kt (s ), k t (s )), respectively.
    In the stationary First-Best allocation, the efficient value of old capital is

                                                    1 -  (1 -  N )
                                      qF B =                         ,                                    (38)
                                                 1 +  N -  (1 -  O )

and the allocation of capital satisfies

                                            -1     1 -  (1 -  N (1 - q F B ))
                             k F B (sa ) = fk                                    .                        (39)
                                                        E [sa+1 | sa ]

Unlike in the stylized model, when new and old capital are imperfect substitutes, equations
(36) and (37) determine a unique allocation of new and old capital for all firms.


4.3      Financial Frictions and Competitive Equilibrium
We now consider the competitive equilibrium in the presence of financial frictions. As in
the stylized model, firms can raise external funds in two ways. First, they can issue equity,
subject to a twice differentiable, convex equity issuance cost . This cost is zero if firms pay
a non-negative dividend. Second, they can issue non-contingent debt, subject to a collateral
constraint, which specifies that the promised repayment cannot exceed a fraction  of the
total resale value of new and old capital in the following period.
    The expected present discounted value of dividends, net of equity issuance costs, of a
firm born at time t is
                                                                 
            a            a           a                 a
             a        p(s ) [(dt+a (s ) - (-dt+a (s )))] +             a a-1          p(sa )wt+a (sa ),   (40)
      a=0        sa                                             a=1             sa


where dt (sa ) are dividends of continuing firms and wt (sa ) is net worth, which is paid out
as a liquidating dividend by dying firms. The dividend of a continuing firm satisfies the
following budget constraint:

                             dt (sa ) = wt (sa ) + bt (sa ) - kt
                                                               N a          O a
                                                                 (s ) - qt kt (s ),                       (41)

where qt is the price of old capital and bt (sa ) is non-contingent debt, with gross interest
rate  -1 . Firm net worth evolves as follows. All firms are born with wt (s0 ) = w0 . For
a = 1, 2, ..., we have

wt (sa ) = sa f (kt-1 (sa-1 )) + (1 -  N (1 - qt ))kt
                                                    N
                                                     -1 (s
                                                           a-1
                                                               ) + qt (1 -  O )kt
                                                                                O
                                                                                 -1 (s
                                                                                       a-1
                                                                                           ) -  -1 bt-1 (sa-1 )
                                                                                                          (42)


                                                       26
and total capital in production is given by a bundle of new and old capital,

                            kt-1 (sa-1 ) = g (kt
                                               N
                                                -1 (s
                                                      a-1      O
                                                          ), k t-1 (s
                                                                      a-1
                                                                          )).                (43)

Firms face a collateral constraint, which states that debt cannot exceed a fraction  of the
resale value of new and old capital:

                (1 -  N (1 - qt+1 ))kt
                                     N a
                                       (s ) + qt+1 (1 -  O )kt (s )   -1 bt (sa ).
                                                             O a
                                                                                             (44)

The square bracket on the left-hand side of equation (44) reports the value of collateral,
which consists of undepreciated new capital, depreciated new capital that is transformed
into old capital, and undepreciated old capital.
    We denote by  t+1 t (sa ) the multiplier on the collateral constraint and d,t (sa ) the
marginal equity issuance cost. The firm optimality conditions for new capital, old capital,
and debt, are

   1 + d,t (sa ) =  Et sa+1 fk (kt (sa ))gN,t (sa ) + (1 -  N (1 - qt+1 )) (1 + (1 - )d,t+1 (sa+1 ))
                      +t (sa )(1 -  N (1 - qt+1 ))                                                (45)
qt (1 + d,t (sa )) =  Et sa+1 fk (kt (sa ))gO,t (sa ) + (1 -  O )qt+1 (1 + (1 - )d,t+1 (sa+1 ))
                      +t (sa )(1 -  O )qt+1                                                       (46)
        d,t (sa ) = (1 - )Et d,t+1 (sa+1 ) + t (sa ).                                             (47)

We highlight some important differences between these optimality conditions and their
counterparts in the stylized model, that is, equations (10), (11), (12). First, productivity
is stochastic, implying that both future marginal products and future marginal equity
issuance costs are also stochastic. Moreover, we assume that markets are incomplete and
firms issue noncontingent debt. Thus, all three optimality conditions (45), (46), and (47)
involve the conditional-expectation operator Et . Second, both new and old capital are
long lived, and both serve as collateral. Thus, equation (46) equates the marginal cost of
investing in old capital, on the left-hand side, with the marginal benefit, which depends on
the future marginal product, as well as the future resale value, and the effect of old capital
on the collateral constraint.
    In equilibrium, the price of old capital qt satisfies the market-clearing condition (35).




                                                  27
4.4       Constrained Efficiency
We now consider the problem of a planner who chooses investment in new and old capital,
as well as debt, on behalf of individual firms, under the same set of constraints and frictions,
but internalizing the effects of these choices on the price of old capital. This problem is
equivalent to the problem of a Ramsey planner who chooses firm-specific proportional taxes
on new and old capital and rebates them in a lump-sum fashion to each firm.
    The planner maximizes the present discounted value of aggregate dividends
                                                                      
                     t               a         a            a
                                  p(s )a [(dt (s ) - (-dt (s )))] +            p(sa )a-1 wt (sa )   (48)
            t=0          a=0 sa                                       a=1 sa


subject to firms' budget constraints, collateral constraints, with multiplier  t+1 t (sa ), and
the market-clearing condition (35), with multiplier  t t . Furthermore, the planner must
induce a price of old capital that is weakly larger than the scrap value. We denote the
multiplier on this constraint by  t t .
   The optimality conditions for new capital, old capital, and debt, are

   1 + d,t (sa ) =  Et sa+1 fk (kt (sa ))gN,t (sa ) + (1 -  N (1 - qt+1 )) (1 + (1 - )d,t+1 (sa+1 ))
                             +t (sa )(1 -  N (1 - qt+1 )) +  N t+1                                     (49)
qt (1 + d,t (sa )) =  Et sa+1 fk (kt (sa ))gO,t (sa ) + (1 -  O )qt+1 (1 + (1 - )d,t+1 (sa+1 ))
                             +(1 -  O )t (sa )qt+1 - t +  (1 -  O )t+1 ,                               (50)

and (47). When choosing new and old capital, the planner takes into account the effect of
these investment decisions on the resource constraint for old capital, and thus on its price.
In particular, an additional unit of new capital leads to  N additional units of supply of
old capital in the following period. In a similar fashion, demand for old capital draws from
the current stock, and adds (1 -  O ) units to the future stock. The terms involving the
multipliers t and t+1 in equations (49) and (50) internalize these effects.
    The optimality condition for the price of old capital is

   
       a          p( sa ) k t
                            O a
                              (s )(1 + d,t (sa )) =
 a=0         sa
 
      a          p(sa+1 )  N kt
                              N     a         O O      a
                               -1 (s ) + (1 -  )kt-1 (s ) (1 + (1 - )d,t (s
                                                                            a+1
                                                                                ) + t-1 (sa )) + t .
a=0       sa+1
                                                                                                    (51)



                                                      28
The sum on the left-hand side of equation (51) represents the marginal cost of increasing
the price qt for firms that purchase old capital. The sum on the right-hand side represents
the marginal benefit of increasing net worth for firms that own old capital, as well as the
marginal effect of qt on the borrowing capacity of constrained firms at t - 1. Thus, as
long as the scrappage-value constraint is not binding, the planner sets the net effect of
distributive and collateral externalities equal to zero.
    We also consider the case in which the planner faces the additional constraint that
purchases of old capital cannot be distorted (analogous to the version of the stylized model
in Online Appendix OA.1). We assume that the planner can only choose the amount of new
capital used in production on behalf of firms, and takes as a constraint their demand for old
capital. In the interest of brevity, we relegate the derivation of the optimality conditions to
Online Appendix OA.5. Furthermore, in Online Appendix OA.6, we describe our solution
method for the stationary constrained-efficient allocation.


5      Calibration and Quantitative Analysis
In this section, we calibrate the quantitative model with idiosyncratic productivity shocks
from Section 4. We then provide a quantitative analysis of inefficiency in competitive equi-
librium and compare the stationary equilibrium with the constrained-efficient allocation.


5.1      Calibration
We now describe our choices of parameter values, which we report in Table 1. A period
in the model coincides with a year, and we thus set  = 0.96. We make the following
assumptions about functional forms. The production function is f (k ) = k  with  
(0, 1). We set  = 0.6 to reflect a typical value for the capital share in the literature on
firm dynamics, adjusted to account for the choice of labor input, which we abstract from
modelling.22
                                                                             1      -1
    Firms combine new and old capital in a CES bundle g (k N , k O ) = ( N )  (k N )  + (1 -
     1      -1 
 N )  (k O )  -1 . In our stylized model, we assumed perfect substitutability between new
and old capital. We use the quantitative model to show that the key insights are robust
to a plausible degree of imperfect substitutability. We thus set  = 5 following Lanteri
  22
     With a production function y = k k nn , where n is labor, assuming time to build in capital and
flexible labor choice, the effective elasticity of output with respect to capital that is relevant for investment
          k
is   1-    n . Common values in the investment literature are k  0.25 and n  0.6, which support our
choice of parameter value.




                                                       29
(2018) and  N = 0.5, thereby treating new and old capital symmetrically in production.23
We further set the depreciation parameters  N =  O = 0.2 so that the effective capital
depreciation rate, accounting for the transition probability from new to old capital, and
the equilibrium price of old capital, is approximately 10%. With these parameter values,
the average age of new (old) capital is approximately equal to 4 (9) years.
     The cost of equity issuance is a power function, (-d) = 0 (-d)1 for d < 0 and
(-d) = 0 otherwise. A high value of 1 facilitates the computation of the constrained-
efficient allocation, especially in the case in which the planner can only distort new invest-
ment; thus, we set 1 = 5. We then set 0 = 0.1, which implies marginal costs of equity in
the range of the relevant empirical estimates--for example, Hennessy and Whited (2007)
and Catherine, Chaney, Huang, Sraer, and Thesmar (2020). On average, firms in the model
face a marginal cost of equity approximately equal to 6% of the issuance (16% conditional
on firms that pay negative dividends in equilibrium). We set  = 0.5, implying that firms
can borrow up to half of the resale value of their capital. This baseline value is close to
the estimates by Li, Whited, and Wu (2016). Moreover, we report results associated with
 = 0 and  = 0.75 in Table A1 in the Appendix.24
     The idiosyncratic productivity shock follows an AR(1) process in logs with persistence
parameter s and standard deviation of innovations s . We set s = 0.7 and s = 0.12,
consistent with typical estimates in the literature on investment and reallocation with
firm-level productivity shocks (Khan and Thomas, 2013, and Lanteri, 2018). We then
discretize this process with a two-state Markov chain using the method of Rouwenhorst
(1995). Given this process for the shocks, the standard deviation of firm-level investment
rates in competitive equilibrium is equal to 0.29, close to empirical estimates (Cooper and
Haltiwanger, 2006). We set  = 0.1, which approximately matches the average entry (and
exit) rate for U.S. firms (Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda, 2014).
     Newborn firms receive an initial net worth w0 = 5, which corresponds to approximately
10% of the unconstrained-optimal capital level for high-productivity firms. Under this
calibration, our model is broadly consistent with the evidence on the empirical relationship
between firm age and capital age reported by Ma, Murfin, and Pratt (2020). They focus
on equipment and find that age-0 firms buy machines that are on average 5.5 years old,
whereas age-10 firms tend to buy capital that is on average 4 years old. In our model,
which encompasses a broader notion of capital (including structures), the corresponding
figures are 7.5 and 6.4 years.25 Also consistent with their empirical findings, the slope of
  23
      Edgerton (2011) estimates the elasticity of substitution between new and old capital for several indus-
tries and finds values in the range between 1 and 10.
   24
      When solving the model for  = 1, we find that the competitive equilibrium is quantitatively close to
the first-best allocation, as only newborn, high-productivity firms are financially constrained.
   25
      Our quantitative model features a clear distinction between new and old capital, but does not necessar-


                                                     30
                         Table 1: Parameter Values ­ Calibration

                                                                                 Parameter        Value
   Preferences                   Discount rate                                                    0.96
   Life cycle                    Initial net worth                               w0               5
                                 Death probability                                                0.1
   Technology                    Curvature of production function                                 0.6
                                 CES elasticity of substitution                                   5
                                 CES new capital share                           N                0.5
                                 Depreciation of new capital                     N                0.2
                                 Depreciation of old capital                     O                0.2
                                 Scrap value                                     q                0.1
                                 Productivity persistence                        s                0.7
                                 Productivity st. dev. of innovations            s                0.12
   Financial constraints         Collateralizability                                              0.5
                                 Cost of raising equity parameters               0                0.1
                                                                                 1                5



capital age with respect to firm age is steeper for younger firms, which are more financially
constrained and thus purchase a larger share of old capital goods in our model.


5.2     Quantitative Results
Given our calibration, the stationary competitive-equilibrium price of old capital equals
0.553, whereas the first-best price of old capital equals 0.547. Equilibrium down payments
and user costs (from the perspective of unconstrained firms) are

          N  1 - (1 -  N (1 - q )) = 0.563 > O  q 1 - (1 -  O ) = 0.340

and
            uN  1 -  (1 -  N (1 - q )) = 0.126 < uO  q 1 -  (1 -  O ) = 0.128,

respectively.
ily distinguish between capital goods of different ages, given the partial depreciation structure with rates
 N and  O . Thus, to compute firm-level capital age in the model, we first compute the average age of new
                                                          N         N
capital and the average age of old capital, which are 1- N   and 1-         1
                                                                    N +  O , respectively. Specifically, the
average age of new capital is 4 years and the average age of old capital is 9 years in our calibration. Next,
we use the optimal portfolio weights on new and old capital for each firm to compute the average capital
age for each firm, thereby assuming that the distribution of capital age within new capital and within old
capital is homogeneous across firms.


                                                     31
     Figure 3 illustrates the key firm decision rules in the stationary competitive equilibrium
(solid) and under the constrained efficient allocation (dashed). We start by discussing the
policy functions in competitive equilibrium. Old capital accounts for a larger fraction of the
capital operated by firms with lower net worth. As firms grow, they increase the share of
new investment goods in their capital bundle. Furthermore, for a given level of net worth,
firms with higher productivity (think lines) are more financially constrained, as indicated
by a higher marginal equity issuance cost, and thus choose a higher fraction of old capital
goods. Thus, on average, the market for old capital reallocates assets from firms with high
net worth and lower productivity to firms with low net worth and high productivity.
     We now discuss the constrained-efficient allocation, when the planner chooses both new
and old capital. We find that the planner optimally drives the price of old capital down to
the scrappage value, thereby fostering capital reallocation toward financially constrained
firms, which increase substantially their purchases of old capital and thus their overall
productive capacity. The marginal value of net worth of the most constrained firms induced
by this allocation is significantly lower than in the competitive equilibrium.
     We also compute the tax rates on new and old capital that implement the constrained-
efficient allocation as a competitive equilibrium with taxes, rebated to each firm in a lump-
sum fashion.26 On average, the subsidy on new capital equals 8.6% and the tax on old
capital equals 103.8%. Consistent with the intuition developed in our analytical results in
Section 3.5, a large tax on old capital reflects the fact that the planner achieves a significant
reduction of the price of old capital from its competitive-equilibrium value, which exceeds
the first-best value, to the lower bound, the scrappage value q.27
     The large distortion on old capital motivates us to study a case in which only new-
capital taxes--rebated with lump-sum transfers to each firm--are available. We find that
the restriction on the instrument set has a significant impact on the optimal allocation.
The planner still instructs firms to increase their new investment, thereby decreasing the
equilibrium price of old capital. The absence of taxes on old capital, however, implies that a
reduction in the price of old capital induces unconstrained firms to also demand old capital
and increase their size. Thus, this price reduction is significantly more muted than in the
case in which the planner can also tax old capital. For the same reason, the optimal subsidy
on new capital is smaller than in the previous case, and equals approximately 0.6%.
     Next, we use our quantitative model to measure the pecuniary externalities in the
stationary competitive equilibrium. Consistent with our analytical results, we find that the
  26
    We illustrate these tax rates in Online Appendix OA.7.
  27
    Accordingly, in Section 6.3 we analyze the sensitivity with respect to the scrappage value q and find
that optimal taxes on old capital are sensitive to this parameter. Specifically, a larger price reduction
requires higher taxes on old capital to offset the effect of a low price on firms' optimal production scale.



                                                    32
          40                                            40

          30                                            30

          20                                            20

          10                                            10

           0                                             0
               5   10    15     20     25     30              5   10   15   20     25     30


          60                                            0.4

          50
                                                        0.3
          40
                                                        0.2
          30
                                                        0.1
          20

          10                                             0
               5   10    15     20     25     30              5   10   15   20     25     30


Figure 3: Stationary equilibrium and constrained efficient allocation. Top left: new capital
k N ; top right: old capital k O ; bottom left: capital bundle k ; bottom right: marginal value of net
worth  . The x-axes report net worth w. Solid lines denote the competitive-equilibrium allocation,
dashed lines the constrained-efficient allocation. Thick lines denote the high productivity state,
thin lines the low state. See Table 1 for the parameter values.


distributive externality dominates the collateral externality. Specifically, in the aggregate,
we find that the distributive externality is approximately 2.3 times as large as the collateral
externality.
    In Figure 4, we explore the heterogeneous effects of the pecuniary externalities through
the price of old capital, by displaying the cross section of distributive externalities (left
panel) and collateral externalities (right panel) as functions of firms' state variables. The
distributive externality is defined as the marginal effect on firm value of decreasing the
price of old capital due to a change in the value of old capital traded. This externality is
largest for firms with low net worth and high productivity, because they are net buyers of
old capital. As firms' net worth increases, they eventually become net sellers of old capital,
and the distributive externality accordingly becomes negative. The collateral externality
is defined as the marginal effect on firm value of increasing the (future) price of collateral.

                                                   33
           5                                           5

           4                                           4

           3                                           3

           2                                           2

           1                                           1

           0                                           0

           -1                                         -1
                5   10   15     20     25                  5   10    15     20    25     30



Figure 4: Pecuniary externalities in stationary equilibrium. Left panel: distributive externality;
right panel: collateral externality. The x-axes report net worth w. Thick red lines denote the
high productivity state, thin blue lines the low state. The distributive (collateral) externality
is defined as the marginal effect on firm value of a decrease (increase) in the price of old capi-
tal. Using recursive notation, for a firm with state variables (w, s), the distributive externality
equals k O (w, s)(1 + d (w, s)) - N k N (w, s) + (1 - O )k O (w, s) (1 + (1 - )Ed (w , s )), whereas
the collateral externality equals (w, s) N k N (w, s) + (1 - O )k O (w, s) . See Table 1 for the
parameter values.


This externality is also highest for the most financially constrained firms and goes to zero
as firms become unconstrained. However, the figure confirms that overall the distributive
externality is significantly larger and thus a reduction in the price of old capital is desirable.
    In Table 2, we compare the key long-run aggregate outcomes under four alternative
allocations: first best; competitive equilibrium; constrained efficiency when the planner
chooses both types of capital; constrained efficiency when the planner chooses only new
capital. Competitive-equilibrium and constrained-efficient allocations and prices are ex-
pressed as fractions of the corresponding first-best value, which we report in parenthesis
in the first column. We find that financial frictions induce an aggregate output loss of
approximately 10%, and an aggregate consumption loss of approximately 7%, relative to
first best.28 Notice that aggregate consumption is the relevant measure of welfare, under
our assumption of linear utility. When the planner chooses both new and old capital, the
constrained-efficient allocation increases output by 8% and consumption by 5% relative
to the competitive equilibrium. However, when the planner can only choose new capital,
  28
    For comparison, Catherine, Chaney, Huang, Sraer, and Thesmar (2020) estimate the aggregate output
cost of collateral constraints (and costly equity issuance) for US firms to be approximately 7%.



                                                 34
                              Table 2: Quantitative Results
Output, investment, consumption, and the price of used capital for the competitive equilibrium,
the constrained efficient allocation, and the constrained efficient allocation without taxes on old
capital are expressed as fractions of the corresponding first-best value, reported in parenthesis in
the first column. See Table 1 for the parameter values.

         Variable             First Best    Comp. Eqm.        Constr. Eff.    Constr. Eff.
                                                                               ( O = 0)
         Output                (9.910)          0.899            0.973          0.921
         Investment            (4.497)          0.857            0.962          0.893
         Consumption           (5.413)          0.933            0.983          0.943
         Price q               (0.547)          1.010            0.183          0.987
         Average tax  N           0               0              -8.6%          -0.6%
         Average tax  O           0               0             103.8%           n.a.



the gains are significantly smaller. In this case, aggregate output increases by slightly
more than 2% and aggregate consumption by approximately 1% relative to competitive
equilibrium.


6     Additional Analyses and Robustness
This section provides additional analyses of our quantitative model, by considering the tran-
sition dynamics, assessing the gains from the reallocation of old capital to more constrained
firms, and evaluating the sensitivity of our quantitative results to key parameters.


6.1    Transition Dynamics
Our analysis has focused on stationary equilibria. We now perform an analysis of the
transition dynamics associated with the implementation of subsidies on new investment.
To make this analysis tractable, we consider the undistorted competitive equilibrium as the
initial condition and assume that, unexpectedly, all firms face a common, time-invariant tax
rate  N . We consider a grid of values for  N . For each value, we compute the associated final
stationary equilibrium, as well as the transition dynamics keeping track of the distribution
of firms and clearing the market for old capital in each period. We then find the level of
 N that maximizes household utility starting from the undistorted competitive equilibrium
(that is, the present discounted value of aggregate consumption). Consistent with the key
results of the paper, we find that the optimal tax rate on new capital is negative--that is,
it is a subsidy on new capital--and approximately equal to -0.3%. We display these results

                                                35
in Online Appendix OA.7.


6.2     Benchmarking the Gains From Reallocation
We have quantified the efficiency gains associated with optimal policy, and compared them
to the undistorted competitive equilibrium. In order to provide further perspective on the
size of these gains, we now compare our competitive equilibrium to a restricted allocation,
in which all firms need to purchase new and old capital goods in the same fixed proportion.
This analysis allows us to quantify the gains from reallocating old capital when firms
face financial frictions. Specifically, we solve the firm optimization problem adding the
             N a      O a
constraint kt  (s )/kt (s ) =  O / N , which is the aggregate ratio of new to old capital in
steady state.29 We find that removing the restriction induces aggregate welfare gains equal
to approximately 0.4 percentage points of permanent consumption. We also find that the
size of this gain is somewhat sensitive to the elasticity of substitution between new and
old capital. Intuitively, the higher this elasticity, the more efficient it is for financially
constrained firms to increase the share of old capital in their investment. For instance, the
welfare gain from removing the restriction of constant investment shares increases to 0.8
percentage points of permanent consumption when we set  = 10. Thus, overall, we find
that the gains from reallocating old capital in competitive equilibrium are comparable in
size to the gains of going from competitive equilibrium to the optimal investment subsidy
when the planner cannot distort purchases of old capital, but significantly smaller than the
gains we obtain when the planner can choose both new and old capital.


6.3     Sensitivity
We now briefly discuss the sensitivity of our quantitative results with respect to changes in
three parameters: the degree of collateralizability  (equal to 0.5 in the baseline calibration);
the elasticity of substitution between new and old capital  (equal to 5 in the baseline
calibration); and the scrap value q (equal to 0.1 in the baseline calibration). We report all
results related to this analysis in Table A1 in the Appendix.
    We solve the model for  = 0 (no borrowing) and  = 0.75. With  = 0, financial
frictions induce substantially larger losses than in our baseline calibration. For instance,
competitive-equilibrium output is approximately 20% lower than in the first-best allocation.
Moreover, the only pecuniary externality is the distributive externality, contributing to
larger gains from the optimal policy of subsidizing investment and reducing the price of
   29
      Given this constraint, the market-clearing price is indeterminate. For comparison, we select the equi-
librium associated with the same price of used capital as in the unrestricted competitive equilibrium.



                                                    36
old capital. With  = 0.75, the effects of financial frictions are smaller (competitive-
equilibrium output is approximately 5% smaller than under first best), and, accordingly,
so are the gains from optimal policy. The distributive externality is 27% larger than the
collateral externality in competitive equilibrium. We find, however, that optimal tax rates
on new and old capital are quite similar across all values of  we consider.
    Next, we consider different values for , namely  = 1 and  = 10. We find that
our results are quite robust with respect to these changes. The higher the elasticity of
substitution, however, the more effective the planner is in allowing constrained firms to
produce at a larger scale by using a larger share of old capital, consistent with our theoretical
result that first-best welfare can be achieved with perfect substitutability (Section 3.5).
    Finally, we consider a lower and a higher scrap value (q = 0.05 and q = 0.2) relative to
our baseline value (q = 0.1), to investigate whether this lower bound for the price of old
capital, which is a binding constraint for the planner, is important for our results. We find
that optimal allocations are similar, irrespective of this change, and, intuitively, welfare
gains are larger, the lower the scrap value. We also find that the optimal tax on old capital
that supports the constrained-efficient allocation is highly sensitive with respect to this
parameter, ranging from approximately 40% when q = 0.2 to approximately 230% when
q = 0.05.


7      Conclusion
We analyze the constrained-efficient allocation in an equilibrium model of investment and
capital reallocation both theoretically and quantitatively. Financial frictions induce pe-
cuniary externalities in the secondary market for capital. Because financially constrained
firms tend to be net buyers of old capital, and unconstrained firms tend to sell old capital
and replace it with new capital, the competitive-equilibrium price of old capital is ineffi-
ciently high. This distributive externality dominates the collateral externality, which would
call for increasing the resale price of capital instead, and which is the focus of much of the
existing quantitative literature using models with a representative firm. A planner can
induce a more efficient allocation by subsidizing new capital, thereby increasing the future
supply of old capital and thus alleviating the effects of financial constraints for constrained
firms in the future.
    Subsidies on new investment are a widely-used policy tool.30 Despite their popularity,
  30
     For instance, in the US, bonus depreciation is a federal budget provision that historically subsidized
investment in new equipment. Since 2018, this provision has been extended to include purchases of used
capital goods at least until 2023. According to the Joint Committee on Taxation, the estimated cost of
this scheme was approximately 63 billion dollars in 2019.


                                                    37
to the best of our knowledge there is scarce theoretical foundation for these policies. Our
analysis highlights that new investment induces a positive externality by fostering capital
reallocation, thus providing a rationale for investment subsidies. We also show the efficiency
gains associated with investment subsidies are tightly linked to equilibrium prices and policy
interventions in secondary markets, thus providing a new perspective and guidance on the
optimal design of investment incentives.




                                             38
References
Ai, H., A. Bhandari, Y. Chen, and C. Ying (2019): "Capital Misallocation and Risk
  Sharing," Working paper.
Ai, H., K. Li, and F. Yang (2020): "Financial Intermediation and Capital Reallocation,"
  Journal of Financial Economics, 138(3), 663­686.
Aiyagari, S. R. (1994): "Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving," Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 109(3), 659­684.
Akerlof, G. A. (1970): "The Market for `Lemons': Quality Uncertainty and the Market
 Mechanism," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3), 488­500.
Benigno, G., H. Chen, C. Otrok, A. Rebucci, and E. R. Young (2013): "Financial
 Crises and Macro-Prudential Policies," Journal of International Economics, 89(2), 453­
 470.
Bianchi, J. (2011): "Overborrowing and Systemic Externalities in the Business Cycle,"
  American Economic Review, 101(7), 3400­3426.
Bianchi, J., and E. G. Mendoza (2018): "Optimal Time-Consistent Macroprudential
  Policy," Journal of Political Economy, 126(2), 588­634.
         (2020): "A Fisherian Approach to Financial Crises: Lessons from the Sudden
  Stops Literature," Review of Economic Dynamics, 37(S1), S254­S283.
Bond, E. W. (1983): "Trade in Used Equipment with Heterogeneous Firms," Journal of
 Political Economy, 91(4), 688­705.
Buera, F. J., J. P. Kaboski, and Y. Shin (2011): "Finance and Development: A Tale
 of Two Sectors," American Economic Review, 101(5), 1964­2002.
Catherine, S., T. Chaney, Z. Huang, D. Sraer, and D. Thesmar (2020): "Quan-
 tifying Reduced-Form Evidence on Collateral Constraints," Working paper.
Cooper, R. W., and J. C. Haltiwanger (2006): "On the Nature of Capital Adjust-
 ment Costs," Review of Economic Studies, 73(3), 611­633.
Cooper, R. W., and I. Schott (2020): "Capital Reallocation and Aggregate Produc-
 tivity," Working paper.
Cui, W. (2017): "Macroeconomic Effects of Delayed Capital Liquidation," Working paper.
David, J. M., and V. Venkateswaran (2019): "The Sources of Capital Misallocation,"
 American Economic Review, 109(7), 2531­2567.
 ´ vila, E., and B. He
Da                     ´bert (2020): "Optimal Corporate Taxation Under Financial
 Frictions," Working paper.


                                          39
 ´ vila, E., and A. Korinek (2018): "Pecuniary Externalities in Economies with Fi-
Da
 nancial Frictions," Review of Economic Studies, 85(1), 352­395.
 ´ vila, J., J. H. Hong, P. Krusell, and J. V. R´
Da                                                  ios-Rull (2012): "Constrained
 Efficiency in the Neoclassical Growth Model with Uninsurable Idiosyncratic Shocks,"
 Econometrica, 80(6), 2431­2467.
Decker, R., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2014): "The Role of
 Entrepreneurship in US Job Creation and Economic Dynamism," Journal of Economic
 Perspectives, 28(3), 3­24.
Diamond, P. A. (1967): "The Role of a Stock Market in a General Equilibrium Model
  with Technological Uncertainty," American Economic Review, 57(4), 759­776.
Edgerton, J. (2011): "The Effects of Taxation on Business Investment: New Evidence
 from Used Equipment," Working paper.
Eisfeldt, A., and A. A. Rampini (2006): "Capital Reallocation and Liquidity," Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 53(3), 369­399.
       (2007): "New or Used? Investment with Credit Constraints," Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 54(8), 2656­2681.
Eisfeldt, A., and Y. Shi (2018): "Capital Reallocation," Annual Review of Financial
  Economics, 10, 361­386.
Gavazza, A. (2011): "The Role of Trading Frictions in Real Asset Markets," American
 Economic Review, 101(4), 1106­1143.
        (2016): "An Empirical Equilibrium Model of a Decentralized Asset Market,"
  Econometrica, 84(5), 1755­1798.
Gavazza, A., and A. Lanteri (forthcoming): "Credit Shocks and Equilibrium Dynamics
 in Consumer Durable Goods Markets," Review of Economic Studies.
Gavazza, A., A. Lizzeri, and N. Roketskiy (2014): "A Quantitative Analysis of the
 Used-Car Market," American Economic Review, 104(11), 3668­3700.
Geanakoplos, J. D., and H. M. Polemarchakis (1986): "Existence, regularity, and
 constrained suboptimality of competitive allocations when the asset market is incom-
 plete," Cowles Foundation Paper 652.
Gomes, J. F. (2001): "Financing Investment," American Economic Review, 91(5), 1263­
 1285.
Gourio, F., and J. Miao (2010): "Firm Heterogeneity and the Long-Run Effects of
 Dividend Tax Reform," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(1), 131­168.
He, Z., and P. Kondor (2016): "Inefficient Investment Waves," Econometrica, 84(2),


                                         40
  735­180.
Hennessy, C. A., and T. M. Whited (2007): "How Costly is External Financing?
 Evidence from a Structural Estimation," Journal of Finance, 62(4), 1705­1745.
Hsieh, C.-T., and P. J. Klenow (2009): "Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in
 China and India," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4), 1403­1448.
Itskhoki, O., and B. Moll (2019): "Optimal Development Policies with Financial
  Frictions," Econometrica, 87(1), 139­173.
Jeanne, O., and A. Korinek (2019): "Managing Credit Booms and Busts: A Pigouvian
  Taxation Approach," Journal of Monetary Economics, 107, 2­17.
Jo, I. H., and T. Senga (2019): "Aggregate Consequences of Credit Subsidy Policies:
  Firm Dynamics and Misallocation," Review of Economic Dynamics, 32, 68­93.
Jorgenson, D. W. (1963): "Capital Theory and Investment Behavior," American Eco-
  nomic Review (Papers and Proceedings), 53, 247­259.
Khan, A., and J. K. Thomas (2013): "Credit Shocks and Aggregate Fluctuations in an
 Economy with Production Heterogeneity," Journal of Political Economy, 121(6), 1055­
 1107.
Kilenthong, W. T., and R. M. Townsend (2021): "A Market-Based Solution for Fire
 Sales and Other Pecuniary Externalities," Journal of Political Economy, (4), 981­1010.
Kiyotaki, N., and J. Moore (1997): "Credit Cycles," Journal of Political Economy,
 105(2), 211­248.
Kurlat, P. (2013): "Lemons Markets and the Transmission of Aggregate Shocks," Amer-
 ican Economic Review, 103(4), 1463­1489.
        (forthcoming): "Investment Externalities in Models of Fire Sales," Journal of
  Monetary Economics.
Lanteri, A. (2018): "The Market for Used Capital: Endogenous Irreversibility and Re-
 allocation over the Business Cycle," American Economic Review, 108(9), 2383­2419.
Li, S., T. M. Whited, and Y. Wu (2016): "Collateral, Taxes, and Leverage," Review
  of Financial Studies, 29(6), 1453­1500.
Lorenzoni, G. (2008): "Inefficient Credit Booms," Review of Economic Studies, 75(3),
 809­833.
Ma, S., J. Murfin, and R. Pratt (2020): "Young Firms, Old Capital," Working paper.
Michelacci, C., and A. Pozzi (2017): "Pecuniary Externalities in Financial Frictions:
 Do they Matter for Welfare?," Working paper.
Midrigan, V., and D. Y. Xu (2014): "Finance and Misallocation: Evidence from Plant-

                                          41
  Level Data," American Economic Review, 104(2), 422­458.
Moll, B. (2014): "Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can Self-Financing Undo
 Capital Misallocation?," American Economic Review, 104(10), 3186­3221.
  ~ o, G., and B. Moll (2018): "Social Optima in Economies with Heterogeneous
Nun
 Agents," Review of Economic Dynamics, 28, 150­180.
Ottonello, P. (2018): "Capital Unemployment," Working paper.
Ottonello, P., D. J. Perez, and P. Varraso (2019): "Are Collateral-Constraint
 Models Ready for Macroprudential Policy Design?," Working paper.
Park, Y. (2018): "Constrained Efficiency in a Human Capital Model," American Eco-
  nomic Journal: Macroeconomics, 10(3), 179­214.
Parodi, F. (2020): "Taxation of Consumption and Labor Income: A Quantitative Ap-
  proach," Working paper.
Rampini, A. A. (2019): "Financing Durable Assets," American Economic Review, 109(2),
 664­701.
Rampini, A. A., and S. Viswanathan (2010): "Collateral, Risk Management, and the
 Distribution of Debt Capacity," Journal of Finance, 65(6), 2293­2322.
          (2013): "Collateral and Capital Structure," Journal of Financial Economics,
  109(2), 466­492.
Restuccia, D., and R. Rogerson (2008): "Policy distortions and aggregate productiv-
 ity with heterogeneous establishments," Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(4), 707­720.
Rouwenhorst, K. G. (1995): "Asset Pricing Implication of Equilibrium Business Cycle
 Models," in Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, ed. by T. J. Cooley, chap. 10, pp.
 294­330. Princeton University Press.
Samaniego, R. M., and J. Y. Sun (2019): "The Embodiment Controversy: On the
  Policy Implications of Vintage Capital Models," Working paper.
Schmidt, K. (2003): "On the Covariance of Monotone Functions of a Random Variable,"
  Dresdner Schriften zur Versicherungsmathematik.
Stiglitz, J. E. (1982): "The Inefficiency of the Stock Market Equilibrium," Review of
  Economic Studies, 49(2), 241­261.
Villalvazo, S. (2020): "Inequality and Asset Prices during Sudden Stops," Working
  Paper.
Wright, R., S. X. Xiao, and Y. Zhu (2020): "Frictional Capital Reallocation with Ex
 Post Heterogeneity," Review of Economic Dynamics, 37, S227­S253.



                                          42
                                        APPENDIX
This appendix provides additional details and proofs for the stylized model of Section 3.

A.1       Lagrangian for Constrained-Efficient Allocation
In this section, we explicitly formulate the Lagrangian of the problem discussed in Section
                                                                          N          O                     
3.4. The planner chooses sequences of functions d0t (w ), d1,t+1 (w ), kt  +1 (w ), kt+1 (w ), bt+1 (w )   t=0
and a sequence of prices {qt }                                       N      O
                                t=0 , given an initial condition k0 (w ), k0 (w ), b0 (w ) , to max-
imize the present discounted value of aggregate dividends ­ or equivalently, aggregate con-
sumption ­ subject to the sequence of firms' budget constraints when young and old (with
multipliers µ0t (w ) and µ1t+1 (w ), respectively), collateral constraints (with multiplier t (w )),
non-negativity constraints on new and old capital (with multipliers  N                       O
                                                                              t (w ) and  t (w ), re-
spectively), and market-clearing conditions for old capital (with multiplier t ). We now
state the Lagrangian of this problem, dropping the dependence of allocation and distribu-
tion on net worth w to simplify notation:

        
  L           t     (d0t - (-d0t ) + d1t ) d -                             N
                                                       µ0t d0t - w - bt + kt       O
                                                                             + qt kt d
        t=0

                            N      O           N      -1                          N
      -       µ1t d1t - f (kt-1 + kt-1 ) - qt kt-1 +     bt-1 d +         t qt+1 kt - bt d

                                   +     N  N
                                         t kt d +        O  O
                                                         t kt d - t
                                                                              O
                                                                             kt d -      N
                                                                                        kt-1 d      .


A.2       Firm Life Cycle and Long-Lived Capital
In this section, we discuss the model with a stochastic firm life cycle and long-lived capital
from Section 3.8 in more detail and we prove Proposition 5.
    Competitive Equilibrium with Financial Frictions. The expected present discounted
value of dividends, net of equity issuance costs, of a firm born at time t is
                                                              
                              a a [(da,t+a - (-da,t+a ))] +          a a-1 wa,t+a
                       a=0                                    a=1


where dat are dividends of continuing firms of age a at time t and wat is net worth. We leave
implicit the dependence of allocations on initial firm net worth w0 to simplify notation.
   The dividend of a continuing firm satisfies the following budget constraint:

                                                        N        O
                                     dat = wat + bat - kat - qt kat


                                                  43
         N       O
where kat  and kat  are investments in new and old capital, respectively, qt is the price of old
capital, and bat is debt. Firm net worth evolves as follows. For a > 0, we have

                                                                                -1
       wat = f (ka-1,t-1 ) + (1 -  N (1 - qt ))ka
                                                N                 O O
                                                 -1,t-1 + qt (1 -  )ka-1,t-1 -     ba-1,t-1

                   N          O            -1
where ka-1,t-1 = ka -1,t-1 + ka-1,t-1 and     is the gross interest rate.
   Firms face a collateral constraint, which states that debt cannot exceed a fraction  of
the resale value of new and old capital:

                       (1 -  N (1 - qt+1 ))kat
                                            N
                                               + qt+1 (1 -  O )kat
                                                                O
                                                                     -1 bat .

    Denote the multiplier on the collateral constraint by  t+1 at and the marginal equity
issuance cost by d,at . The firm's optimality conditions for new capital, old capital, and
debt, are

              1 + d,at =  fk (kat ) + (1 -  N (1 - qt+1 )) (1 + (1 - )d,a+1,t+1 )
                              +at (1 -  N (1 - qt+1 ))
          qt (1 + d,at ) =  fk (kat ) + (1 -  O )qt+1 (1 + (1 - )d,a+1,t+1 )
                              +at (1 -  O )qt+1
                   d,at = (1 - )d,a+1,t+1 + at .

   The market-clearing condition for old capital is
                                                                   
                      a  N ka,t
                            N            O O
                               -1 + (1 -  )ka,t-1 d0 (w0 ) =
                                                                           O
                                                                        a kat d0 (w0 ).
                a=0                                               a=0


    We define a stationary competitive equilibrium writing the firm problem and the mar-
ket clearing condition recursively. A stationary competitive equilibrium is a set of policy
functions mapping net worth to an allocation, that is, dividends, investment, and bor-
rowing choices for continuing firms, {d(w ), k N (w ), k O (w ), b(w )}, a stationary distribution
of net worth  (w ), and a price of old capital q , such that firms maximize the present
discounted value of dividends net of equity issuance cost, w , the stationary distribution
is consistent with firms' policy functions, and the market for old capital clears, that is,
  k N (w )d (w ) = k O (w )d (w ). Notice that the stationary distribution of net worth  is
an equilibrium object, whereas the distribution of net worth of new firms 0 is taken as
exogenous.
    With long-lived capital, we define the down payment per unit of new and old capital


                                                44
as N  1 - (1 -  N (1 - q )) and O  q 1 - (1 -  O ) , respectively, and the user
cost of new and old capital to an unconstrained firm as uN  1 -  1 -  N (1 - q ) and
uO  q 1 -  (1 -  O ) , respectively. Analogously to (15) and (16) we define the user cost
of new and old capital to a firm with net worth w as

         uN (w )  uN + d N = 1 -  (1 -  N (1 - q )) + d (1 - (1 -  N (1 - q )))

and
                uO (w )  uO + d O = q (1 -  (1 -  O ) + d (1 - (1 -  O ),

respectively. The investment Euler equations for new and old capital are

                     1 + (1 - )d       fk (k ) +  (1 - )(1 -  N (1 - q ))  N /(1 + d )
         1 =                                                             +                      (A1)
                        1 + d                          N                       N
                     1 + (1 - )d       fk (k ) +  (1 - )(1 -  O )  O /(1 + d )
         1 =                                                      +            .                (A2)
                        1 + d                      O                     O

Combining these two Euler equations we obtain

          1 + (1 - )d       (1 - )((1 -  N (1 - q )) - q (1 -  O )) ( N -  O )/(1 + d )
 1=                                                                +                    . (A3)
             1 + d                       N - O                           N - O

To see that q < 1 in a stationary equilibrium, suppose instead that q  1; then uO > uN
and O > N , implying that old capital would be dominated. To see that N > O
in a stationary equilibrium, suppose instead that N  O ; then (A3) would imply that
 O > 0, that is, no firms would invest in old capital, a contradiction. Note that N > O
is equivalent to
                                     1 - (1 -  N )
                             q<                           < 1.
                                 1 +  N - (1 -  O )
To see that uN  uO in a stationary equilibrium, note that otherwise uN (w ) > uO (w )
for all firms, so there would not be any new investment, which cannot be an equilibrium.
Further, uN  uO is equivalent to

                                                1 -  (1 -  N )
                                q  qF B                          ,
                                             1 +  N -  (1 -  O )

that is, the price of old capital in competitive equilibrium must be weakly higher than the
price of old capital in a frictionless economy.
                        N (1-q ))-q (1- O ))
    Let RO  (1-)((1- N     - O
                                             . Since q  q F B , RO   -1 (with equality if q = q F B ).
For firms that are indifferent between investing in new and old capital we can write (A3)


                                                 45
as
                                                  1 + (1 - )d
                                          1=                        RO .
                                                     1 + d
For such firms, we can then write the investment Euler equation for new capital (A1) as

                                       -1   fk (k ) + (1 - )(1 -  N (1 - q ))
                                  1 = RO                                      ,
                                                           N

implying that such firms all invest the same amount k . (If q = q F B , then k = k F B .)
   Constrained Efficiency. The planner maximizes the present discounted value of aggre-
gate dividends net of equity issuance costs
                                                                 
                              t
                                         a [(dat - (-dat ))] +         a-1 wat d0 (w0 )     (A4)
                     t=0           a=0                           a=1


subject to the transition for net worth, the collateral constraint and the market-clearing
condition for old capital, with multiplier t .
   The optimality condition for the price of old capital is

      
              O
           a kat (1 + d,at )d0 (w0 ) =
     a=0
                
                     a  N ka,t
                           N            O O
                              -1 + (1 -  )ka,t-1 (1 + (1 - )d,a+1,t + a,t-1 )d0 (w0 ). (A5)
               a=0


    The summation on the left-hand side of equation (A5) represents the marginal cost of
increasing the price qt for firms that purchase old capital. The summation on the right-
hand side represents the marginal benefit of increasing net worth for firms that own old
capital, as well as the marginal effect of qt on the borrowing capacity of constrained firms
at t - 1.
    We now prove that in the stationary competitive equilibrium the distributive externality
is larger than the collateral externality, that is,

      
              O
           a kat (1 + d,at )d0 (w0 ) >
     a=0
                       
                              a  N ka,t
                                    N            O O
                                       -1 + (1 -  )ka,t-1 (1 + (1 - )d,a+1,t + a,t-1 )d0 (w0 ),
                      a=0




                                                       46
or, written recursively,


     k O (w )(1 + d (w ))d (w ) >

                                N k N (w ) + (1 -  O )k O (w ) (1 + (1 - )d (w  ) + (w ))d (w )

where w  denotes future net worth associated with current net worth w . Simplifying using
the market-clearing condition, we have


     k O (w )d(w )d (w ) >         N k N (w ) + (1 -  O )k O (w ) ((1 - )d (w  ) + (w ))d (w ).

Using the first-order condition for debt to substitute out (w ), we obtain


     k O (w )d(w )d (w ) >

                   N k N (w ) + (1 -  O )k O (w ) (d (w ) + (1 - )(1 - )d (w ))d (w ). (A6)

   Notice that d is weakly decreasing in net worth. Moreover, d (w )  d (w ) + (1 -
)(1 - )d (w  ). Hence, if inequality (A6) holds (weakly) for  = 1, it holds (strictly) for
any  < 1. Accordingly, we now prove the following inequality:

              k O (w )d (w )d (w )           N k N (w ) + (1 -  O )k O (w ) d (w )d (w ),

which, rearranging, we can equivalently express as follows

                    O      k O (w )d(w )d (w )   N        k N (w )d(w )d (w ).              (A7)

As no firm invests in old capital above w O , market clearing implies:
                                wO                        w
                           O         k O (w )d (w )   N        k N (w )d (w ).              (A8)
                                                          wN


Furthermore, we can bound the two sides of (A7) as follows. Since d (w ) is weakly de-
creasing in w ,
                      wN                                        wN
                           k O (w )d (w )d (w )  d (wN )             k O (w )d (w ).        (A9)

In the region of indifference between new and old capital, we apply the following result:
E[k O d ] = COV(k O , d ) + E[k O ]E[d ]. Since k O and d are both decreasing in w , we have


                                                 47
COV(k O , d )  0.31 Thus,

                              wO                              wO
                                    O
                                   k (w )d(w )d (w )  d            k O (w )d (w )      (A10)
                             wN                              wN


                 wO
where d          wN
                      d (w )d (w ). Since d (w N )  d , we can combine (A9) and (A10) and get

                              wO                              wO
                                    O
                                   k (w )d (w )d (w )  d           k O (w )d (w ).     (A11)

Analogously, since k N is increasing in w , we obtain
                               w                              w
                                   k N (w )d (w )d (w )  d        k N (w )d (w ).      (A12)
                              wN                             wN


Notice that our characterization of the stationary equilibrium implies wO k O (w )d(w )d (w ) =
 w
   k N (w )d(w )d (w ) = 0. Hence, combining (A8), (A11), and (A12), we get


                         O     k O (w )d(w )d (w )   N       k N (w )d(w )d (w ),

which, given  < 1, proves Proposition 5.




 31
      See Schmidt (2003) for a proof of this result.

                                                       48
               Table A1: Quantitative Results ­ Sensitivity Analysis
This table provides the sensitivity analysis of the quantitative results with respect the collat-
eralizability  (Panel A), elasticity of substitution  (Panel B), and scrap value q (Panel C).
Output, investment, consumption, and the price of used capital for the competitive equilibrium
and constrained efficient allocation are expressed as fractions of the corresponding first-best value,
reported in parenthesis the first column of Panel A. See Table 1 for the baseline parameter values.

                                   Panel A: Collateralizability 

                                              =0                                = 0.75
   Variable           First Best     Comp. Eqm. Constr. Eff.          Comp. Eqm. Constr. Eff.
   Output              (9.910)          0.808      0.949                 0.949         0.985
   Investment          (4.497)          0.736      0.929                 0.925         0.978
   Consumption         (5.413)          0.865      0.966                 0.968         0.991
   Price q             (0.547)          1.023      0.183                 1.004         0.183
   Average tax  N          0              0        -8.8%                   0           -8.6%
   Average tax  O          0              0       106.9%                   0          102.9%

                               Panel B: Elasticity of Substitution 

                                             =1                                = 10
   Variable                          Comp. Eqm. Constr. Eff.          Comp. Eqm. Constr. Eff.
   Output                              0.894       0.944                0.905        0.985
   Investment                          0.850       0.919                0.864        0.978
   Consumption                         0.929       0.964                0.937        0.990
   Price q                             1.011       0.183                1.010        0.183
   Average tax  N                        0         -8.6%                  0          -8.6%
   Average tax  O                        0        103.7%                  0         103.3%

                                      Panel C: Scrap Value q

                                              q = 0.05                         q = 0.2
   Variable                          Comp. Eqm. Constr. Eff.          Comp. Eqm. Constr. Eff.
   Output                               0.899          0.979            0.899          0.959
   Investment                           0.857          0.969             0.857         0.942
   Consumption                          0.933          0.986             0.933         0.974
   Price q                              1.010          0.091             1.010         0.366
   Average tax  N                         0            -9.6%               0           -6.7%
   Average tax  O                         0           229.9%               0           40.5%




                                                 49
            ONLINE APPENDIX ­ Not for Publication

OA.1          Constrained-Efficient Allocation: No Taxes on Old Capital
In this section, we discuss the problem introduced at the end of Section 3.5. Relative to
the problem described in Appendix A.1, we impose the following additional constraint for
all firms:
                                   qt (1 + d,t )  fk (kt ),                       (OA1)

which is equivalent to imposing that the planner cannot tax old capital in the implemen-
tation with taxes on new and old capital.
    The Lagrangian of this problem is

        
    L         t     (d0t - (-d0t ) + d1t ) d -                          N
                                                     0t d0t - w - bt + kt       O
                                                                          + qt kt d
        t=0

                           N      O           N      -1                        N
        -     1t d1t - f (kt-1 + kt-1 ) - qt kt-1 +     bt-1 d +       t qt+1 kt - bt d

                            N    O
+    t qt (1 + d,t ) - fk (kt + kt ) d +            N  N
                                                    t kt d +        O  O
                                                                    t kt d - t
                                                                                     O
                                                                                    kt d -    N
                                                                                             kt-1 d   .

    The first-order conditions with respect to new capital, old capital, and debt are

        1 + d,t =  [fk (kt ) + qt+1 ] + t qt+1 + t+1 + t [qt dd,t - fkk (kt )] +  N
                                                                                  t (OA2)
                                      2
    qt (1 + d,t ) = fk (kt ) - t + t qt dd,t - fkk (kt ) +  O
                                                            t                            (OA3)
        1 + d,t = 1 + t + t qt dd,t ,                                                    (OA4)

and the first-order condition with respect to the price of old capital is

             O                   N                                               O
            kt (1 + d,t )d =    kt-1 (1 + t-1 )d +         t (1 + d,t + qt dd,t kt )d.   (OA5)

    The complementary slackness condition is

                                 t [qt (1 + d,t ) - fk (kt )] = 0,

and thus for firms that buy a positive amount of old capital, (OA3) implies that
                                                     t
                                    t =    2
                                                                .                        (OA6)
                                          qt dd,t   - fkk (kt )

    Consider firms that purchase a strictly positive amount of new capital; for such firms,


                                                 1
equation (OA2) in stationary equilibrium is

                   1 + d =  [fk (k ) + q ] + q +  +  [qdd - fkk (k )] .

Compare this optimality condition of the planner with the analogous competitive-equilibrium
condition in the presence of taxes on new capital for such firms:

                             (1 + d )(1 +  N ) =  [fk (k ) + q ] + q.

Notice that in stationary equilibrium  > 0, since (OA1) is violated if it is not imposed.
Therefore (OA6) implies that  > 0 and we have  N < 0. We assume that the planner
can also use a tax on debt to induce its desired value for the multiplier  in competitive
equilibrium, consistent with equation (OA4). With a tax on borrowing  B , the first-order
condition for debt is (1 + d )/(1 +  B ) = 1 + , which by comparing to (OA4) implies that
 B  0.32
   We solve for this allocation in our numerical example with parameter values as in the
example in Figure 1 and display the policy functions in Figure OA1. We find that the aver-
age subsidy on new capital is approximately 1%. The price of old capital is approximately
2% lower than in competitive equilibrium: the planner is severely constrained in reducing
the price of old capital, because a low price induces unconstrained firms to also buy old
capital, given that these purchases cannot be taxed. This is reflected in the last term on
the right-hand-side of equation (OA5), which must be positive, implying that the planner
must tolerate a distributive externality that is larger than the collateral externality, and
thus cannot achieve the first-best level of welfare.


OA.2        Risk-Averse Entrepreneurs
In this section, we analyze the case from Section 3.6 in which each firm is owned by a
risk-averse entrepreneur whose consumption at each date equals the dividend paid by the
firm.
    Competitive Equilibrium with Financial Frictions. Given their initial net worth w and
the price of old capital qt , entrepreneurs maximize their utility by choosing consumption
  32
    Numerically, in our example this assumption is immaterial for the sign of  N , and we obtain a similar
subsidy if we impose the absence of taxes on debt.




                                                    2
          1.5                                                   1.5


            1                                                     1


          0.5                                                   0.5


            0                                                     0
                       0.5            1            1.5                       0.5        1    1.5


          1.4                                                   0.1

                                                               0.08
          1.3
                                                               0.06
          1.2
                                                               0.04
          1.1
                                                               0.02

            1                                                     0
                       0.5            1            1.5                       0.5        1    1.5


Figure OA1: Stationary competitive equilibrium and constrained-efficient allocation (new-capital
taxes only) ­ example. Top left: new capital k N ; top right: old capital kO ; bottom left: total
capital k ; bottom right: marginal cost of equity issuance d . The x-axes report net worth w.
Solid lines denote the competitive-equilibrium allocation, dashed lines the constrained-efficient
allocation. See the caption of Figure 1 for the parameter values.

                                      N
c0t and c1,t+1 , new and old capital kt      O
                                        and kt ,and borrowing bt , to solve33

                                          max                  u (c0t ) + u (c1,t+1 )              (OA7)
                                            N ,k O ,b }R4 ×R
                             {c0t ,c1,t+1 ,kt   t    t  +



where u is the utility function, with uc > 0, ucc < 0, and limc0 uc (c) = +, subject to
the budget constraints for the current and next period,

                                                                 N       O
                                               w0t + bt = c0t + kt + qt kt                         (OA8)
                                  N
                             f (k t    O
                                    + kt           N
                                         ) + qt+1 kt = c1,t+1 +  -1 bt ,                           (OA9)
  33
     Because we now interpret dividends as consumption, we require that dividends are non-negative. We
could alternatively allow for negative dividends, in which case this model becomes a generalization of our
stylized model, which can be obtained as the special case u(d)  d - (d).



                                                         3
and the collateral constraint
                                              N
                                        qt+1 kt   -1 bt .                                       (OA10)

    Denote the multipliers on the budget constraints by µ0t and µ1,t+1 , on the collateral
constraint by t , and on non-negativity constraint for new and old capital by  N        O
                                                                                t and  t ,
respectively. The optimal demand for new capital, old capital, and borrowing, as functions
of initial net worth w , satisfy the following first-order conditions

                    uc (c0t ) = uc(c1,t+1 ) [fk (kt ) + qt+1 ] + t qt+1 +  N
                                                                           t                    (OA11)
                  qt uc (c0t ) = uc(c1,t+1 )fk (kt ) +    O
                                                          t                                     (OA12)
                    uc (c0t ) = uc (c1,t+1 ) + t ,                                              (OA13)

               N     O
where kt = kt     + kt . Moreover, the firm's marginal value of net worth at date t is µ0,t =
uc (c0t ).
    A stationary competitive equilibrium is a set of policy functions mapping initial net
worth to an allocation {c0 (w ), c1(w ), k N (w ), k O (w ), b(w )}, that is, consumption, invest-
ment, and debt choices, and a price of old capital q , such that entrepreneurs maximize
their utility, w  W , and the market for old capital clears, that is, k N (w )d (w ) =
  k O (w )d (w ).
    In a stationary equilibrium, the first-order conditions for new and old capital (OA11)
and (OA12) can be written as investment Euler equations

                                    uc (c1 ) [fk (k ) + (1 - )q ]
                                1                                                               (OA14)
                                    u c ( c0 )         N
                                    uc (c1 ) fk (k )
                                1                    ,                                          (OA15)
                                    u c ( c0 ) q

with equality if k N > 0 and k O > 0, respectively, where we use the same definition of the
down payments as in Section 3.
   Using (OA13), we can rewrite (OA14) and (OA15) as

                                                             
             u N (w )  u N +            N = 1 - q +                 (1 - q )  fk (k )
                             u c ( c1 )                  u c ( c1 )
                                                                           
                            u O (w )  u O +              O = q +                  q  fk (k ),
                                              u c ( c1 )               u c ( c1 )

where we use the same definitions of the user cost as in Section 3.




                                                  4
    Combining (OA14) and (OA15) we moreover have

                                    uc (c1 ) (1 - )q  ( -  O )/uc (c0 )
                             1=                      + N                .                           (OA16)
                                    uc (c0 ) N - O       N - O

    Equation (OA16) implies N > O . Thus, in equilibrium, uN  uO . Consider first
entrepreneurs for which  = 0. They invest k which solves 1 =  fk (k)+(1                  N
                                                                                            - )q
                                                                                                   . Moreover
  N             O              FB
k = k and k = 0 if q > q . Entrepreneurs with  = 0 have net worth w  w , where w
solves w - N k = f (k ) + (1 - )qk .
    Entrepreneurs with sufficiently low w strictly prefer old capital, because as w  0,
                                  c (c1 )
fk (k )  + and therefore u       uc (c0 )
                                           0, and thus equation (OA16) implies  N > 0. Hence,
for sufficiently low w , k N = 0 and k O > 0. Moreover, k O is strictly increasing in w . To
                                                      O
see this, consider w+ > w and assume k+                  k O . Then, c1,+ = f (k+   O
                                                                                      )  f (k O ) = c1 and
                              uc (c1,+ )    uc (c1,+ )    c (c1 )
fk (k+O
        )  fk (k O ), whereas uc (c0,+ )
                                          > u  c (c0 )
                                                        uuc (c0 )
                                                                  , which contradicts equation (OA15).
    For w sufficiently close to w and w < w, k N > 0 and k O = 0. Hence (OA14) holds
with equality. Moreover, k N is strictly increasing in w . To see this, consider w+ > w
                 N
and assume k+         k O . Then, fk (k+   N
                                             )  fk (k N ), whereas c1,+ = f (k+        N
                                                                                         ) + q (1 - )k+   N
                                                                                                            
    N                 N                      uc (c1,+ )   uc (c1,+ )    uc (c1 )
f (k ) + q (1 - )k = c1 and hence uc (c0,+ ) > uc (c0 )  uc (c0 ) , which contradicts equation
(OA14).
                                                                                             c (c1 )
    Consider now entrepreneurs for which  N =  O = 0. Then, 1 =  u                                   R , where
                                                                                            uc (c0 ) O
         (1- )q
RO =      N - O
                  . Since c0 is strictly increasing in w , c1 is strictly increasing in w . Moreover
           [
        -1 kf (k )+(1- )q ]    -1 fk (k )
1 = RO            N
                            = RO    q
                                          . Hence, k = k  k . Since c1 = f (k ) + (1 - )qk N , k N is
strictly increasing and k O = k - k N is strictly decreasing in w .
    Entrepreneurs who are indifferent between new and old capital have net worth wN 
w  w O  w and these thresholds are implicitly characterized as follows: c0 (wN ) = wN -qk ,
                                 uc (c1 (w N ))
c1 (w N ) = f (k ), 1 = RO uc       (c0 (w ))
                                                ; c0 (wO ) = wN - N k , c1 (wO ) = f (k ) + (1 - )qk ,
                                         N
             c (c1 (w O ))
1 = RO u    uc (c0 (w O ))
                           .
                                                                                    N
     Constrained Efficiency. Given an initial distribution of new and old capital, k- 1 (w ) and
 O
k- 1 (w ), a utilitarian planner maximizes the total present discounted value of utility

                                         
                        u (c10 (w )) +          t (u (c0t (w )) + u (c1,t+1 (w ))) d (w ),
                                         t=0


subject to the budget constraints (OA8) and (OA9) with multipliers  t µ0,t and  t+1 µ1,t+1 ,
the collateral constraint (OA10) with multiplier  t+1 t , the non-negativity constraints on
new and old capital with multipliers  t  N      t O
                                         t and   t , and the market clearing condition for
old capital (3) with multiplier  t t .



                                                        5
      The first-order condition with respect to the price of old capital qt for t = 1, 2, .. is

                  O                                    N
                 kt (w )uc (c0t (w )) d (w ) =        kt-1 (w ) [uc (c1t (w )) + t-1 (w )] d (w ).


Thus, in the stationary constrained-efficient allocation, we have

                    k O (w )uc (c0 (w )) d (w ) =       k N (w ) [uc (c1 (w )) + (w )] d (w ).

    We now show that, in stationary competitive equilibrium, the distributive externality
is larger than the collateral externality, that is,

                    k O (w )uc (c0 (w )) d (w ) >       k N (w ) [uc (c1 (w )) + (w )] d (w ).

To do so, it is sufficient to prove that

                          k O (w )uc (c0 (w )) d (w ) >       k N (w )uc (c0 (w )) d (w ),           (OA17)

because uc (c0 (w )) = uc (c1 (w )) + (w )  uc (c1 (w )) + (w ).
                                                                                  wO
   We can bound the two sides of (OA17) as follows. Let uc                        wN
                                                                                       uc (c0 (w )) d (w ). We
have
                                                 wO                         wO
                            k O uc (c0 )d =           k O uc (c0 )d  uc          k O d,              (OA18)

because (i) uc (c0 ) > uc for w < w N , and (ii) both k O and uc (c0 ) are strictly decreasing
                                                                             w
in w for w N  w  wO , thus their covariance is positive, implying w O k O uc (c0 )d 
                                                                                             N
      wO
uc    wN
           k O d .34 Similarly, we have


                             k N uc (c0 )d =          k N uc (c0 )d  uc         k N d,               (OA19)
                                                 wN                        wN


because (i) uc (c0 ) < uc for w > w, and (ii) k N is strictly increasing in w for w N  w  wO ,
                                                                 w                    w
implying its covariance with uc (c0 ) is negative, and thus w O k N uc (c0 )d  uc w O k N d .
                                                                  N                    N
Furthermore, notice that at least one of the two inequalities (OA18) and (OA19) is strict,
because the distribution of net worth  (w ) is non-degenerate. Thus, combining (OA18),
                                                                 wO O
(OA19), and the market-clearing condition w k N d =                 k d , we get (OA17). This
                                                   N
proves Proposition 3.
   We now discuss the case q = q F B , which is not included in Proposition 3. We have
 34
      See Schmidt (2003) for a proof of the sign of the covariance of monotone functions.



                                                         6
wN = wO = w . In this case, the individual choice of new and old capital for unconstrained
firms is indeterminate. However, in the aggregate, market clearing implies w k N d (w ) >
  w
    k O d (w ). Under a weak condition, our result on the sign of constrained inefficiency still
obtains. Assume that k N > k O for all unconstrained firms.
     Then, uc (c0 ) is strictly decreasing in w , we have
                                             w
      k O uc (c0 )d -      k N uc (c0 )d >       k O uc (c0 )d - uc (c0 (w))        (k N - k O )d   (OA20)
                                                                               w


Using the market-clearing condition, we can rewrite (OA20) as follows
                                                  w                                   w
         k O uc (c0 )d -      k N uc (c0 )d >         k O uc (c0 )d - uc (c0 (w))         k O d     (OA21)

Because uc (c0 ) > uc (c0 (w)) for w  w , the right-hand side of (OA21) is positive, and thus
also the left-hand side is positive. Hence, (OA17) holds.


OA.3       Heterogeneity in Productivity
In this section, we analyze the model with productivity heterogeneity from Section 3.7 in
more detail.
    Competitive Equilibrium with Financial Frictions. A firm that draws initial net worth
w and productivity s maximizes (6) subject to the budget constraints (7) and

                                   N
                              sf (kt    O
                                     + kt           N
                                          ) + qt+1 kt = d1,t+1 +  -1 bt ,                           (OA22)

and the collateral constraint (9). Let v (w, s) denote the value function of the firm.
   Denote the multipliers on the budget constraints by µ0t and µ1,t+1 , on the collateral
constraint by t , and on non-negativity constraint for new and old capital by  N           O
                                                                                    t and  t ,
respectively. The optimality conditions are

                            1 + d,t =  [sfk (kt ) + qt+1 ] + t qt+1 +  N
                                                                       t                            (OA23)
                        qt (1 + d,t ) = sfk (kt ) +        O
                                                           t ,                                      (OA24)

                         N      O
and (12), where kt = kt     + kt  .
   A stationary competitive equilibrium is a set of policy functions mapping initial net
worth and productivity to an allocation, that is, dividends, investment, and borrowing
choices, {d0 (w, s), d1(w, s), k N (w, s), k O (w, s), b(w, s)}, and a price of old capital q , such
that firms maximize the present discounted value of dividends net of equity issuance cost,


                                                       7
(w, s)  W × S , and the market for old capital clears, that is, k N (w, s)d (w, s) =
 k O (w, s)d (w, s).
   In a stationary equilibrium, we can rewrite equations (OA23) and (OA24) as

                         N (1 + d ) =  [sfk (k ) + (1 - )q ] +  N                       (OA25)
                           q (1 + d ) = sfk (k ) +  O                                   (OA26)

where N = 1 - q . Following the same arguments we develop in Section 3.3, one can show
that q  q F B . Moreover, for each value of s, there are thresholds wN (s)  wO (s)  w(s)
(with strict inequalities if q > q F B ) such that: firms with w  wN (s) invest only in old
capital; firms with w  (wN (s), wO (s)) invest k (s) and invest in both new and old capital,
and firms with w  wO (s) invest only in new capital; firms with w  w(s) pay non-negative
dividends and invest k (s)  k F B (s)  k (s).
    We now show that the marginal equity issuance cost d (w, s) (or equivalently the
marginal value of net worth vw (w, s) = 1 + d (w, s)) is weakly increasing in s, that is,
higher productivity firms are more financially constrained, for a given level of net worth.
First, consider firms that pay positive dividends. For these firms, d (w, s) = 0.
    Now consider firms with  N > 0 and  O = 0; for such firms rewrite equation (OA25) as

                                                        sfk (k O )
                                1 + d (qk O - w ) = 
                                                            q
                                                                                            O
where we use d0 = w - qk O ; totally differentiating with respect to s, we obtain dk        ds
                                                                                               =
    fk (s)q -1
qdd -sfkk (k )q -1
                   > 0. Thus, d0 is decreasing in s, which implies that d (w, s) (and vw (w, s))
is increasing in s.
    Next, consider firms with  N = 0 and  O = 0. In this case, combining equations
(OA25) and (OA26), we can write 1 + d = RO , where RO = (1            - )q
                                                                      N -q
                                                                           . Thus, all firms that
are indifferent between new and old capital issue the same level of equity (d0 ), and feature
a constant marginal issuance cost d , independent of productivity s. The total investment
of such firms satisfies
                                  N RO = sfk (k (s)) + (1 - )q,

which implies that k (s) is increasing in s. Hence, also the indifference thresholds wN (s) =
d0 + qk (s) and w O (s) = d0 + N k (s) are increasing in s.
   Finally, for firms with  N = 0 and  O > 0, rewrite equation (OA25) as

                                                   sfk (k N ) + (1 - )q
                         1 + d (N k N - w ) =                           .
                                                             N


                                               8
                                                            N           f (s)-1
Totally differentiating with respect to s, we obtain dk
                                                      ds
                                                         =   -ksf N(k)-1 > 0. Thus, d0 is
                                                              N dd    kk N
decreasing in s, which implies that d (w, s) is increasing in s. We conclude that d (w, s)
(and vw (w, s)) is weakly increasing in productivity s for all firms.
   Constrained Efficiency. The planner maximizes
                           
        d10 (w, s) +           t (d0t (w, s) - (-d0t (w, s)) + d1,t+1 (w, s)) d (w, s),     (OA27)
                       t=0


subject to the budget constraints (7) and (OA22), the collateral constraint (9), and the
market-clearing condition for old capital. The first-order condition with respect to qt is

          O                                             N
         kt (w, s) (1 + d,t (w, s)) d (w, s) =         kt-1 (w, s) (1 + t-1 (w, s)) d (w, s),


which, in stationary equilibrium, can be rewritten as follows

                  k O (w, s)d(w, s)d (w, s) =            k N (w, s)d(w, s)d (w, s),         (OA28)

where we used the market-clearing condition, as well as the fact that planner optimally
sets the marginal equity issuance cost equal to the multiplier on the collateral constraint.
    We now show that in stationary competitive equilibrium, the left-hand side of equation
(OA28) is larger than the right-hand side, that is, the distributive externality dominates
the collateral externality. We can bound the two sides of equation (OA28) as follows.
First, notice that the marginal equity issuance cost d is the lower bound for the marginal
equity issuance cost of any firms with productivity s purchasing old capital, and the upper
bound for the marginal equity issuance cost of any firms with productivity s purchasing
new capital. Thus, for any productivity level s, we get

                           k O (w, s)d(w, s)d (w, s)  d         k O (w, s)d (w, s),
                       w                                    w

and
                           k N (w, s)d(w, s)d (w, s)  d         k N (w, s)d (w, s).
                       w                                    w

Next, recall that d is independent of s. Hence, by summing both sides of these two
inequalities over productivity levels, we obtain

                           k O (w, s)d(w, s)d (w, s)  d         k O (w, s)d (w, s),




                                                   9
and
                        k N (w, s)d(w, s)d (w, s)  d          k N (w, s)d (w, s).

The two bounds reported on the right-hand sides of these inequalities are equal to each
other because of market clearing. Thus,  < 1 implies

                    k O (w, s)d(w, s)d (w, s) >         k N (w, s)d(w, s)d (w, s),

which proves Proposition 4.


OA.4       Relation to Models with Representative Entrepreneur and
           Assets in Fixed Supply
In this section, we connect our results on constrained efficiency in capital reallocation with a
related class of models, that feature a representative infinitely-lived entrepreneur subject to
collateral constraints, possibly impatient relative to the equilibrium interest rate, and with
an asset in fixed supply, which we will refer to as land. This class of models includes the
seminal work of Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) (henceforth KM) and the small-open-economy
models with collateral constraints analyzed by Bianchi and Mendoza (2018) and Jeanne and
Korinek (2019). While there is some variation in the specification of collateral constraints
across these papers, we maintain our formulation of collateral constraints that depend on
future asset prices, as in KM and Rampini and Viswanathan (2010, 2013).
    First, we show that the representative-entrepreneur assumption in this class of models
implies that there is no reallocation of land in stationary equilibrium. This lack of real-
location precludes any distributive effects of asset prices: As D´    avila and Korinek (2018)
show, distributive externalities depend on (i) heterogeneity in the marginal valuation of re-
sources, and (ii) non-zero equilibrium trading.35 We also connect this insight to the effects
of unexpected changes in collateral values described by KM.
    Second, we show that the fact that land is in fixed supply in these models, different from
capital, which is endogenously produced in our model, does not affect the main insights on
distributive externalities vs. collateral externalities in reallocation at the core of our paper.
To illustrate this point, we recover a version of our main result on inefficiency in a model of
land reallocation with overlapping generations of entrepreneurs ­ and hence reallocation in
stationary equilibrium. Finally, we use this model to briefly discuss the role of impatience
for the comparison of distributive and collateral externalities.
  35
    This insight is also related to arguments developed in Stiglitz (1982) and Geanakoplos and Polemar-
chakis (1986), showing that incomplete-markets equilibria with no trading can be constrained efficient.



                                                  10
OA.4.1     Representative Entrepreneur without Reallocation

We now describe an economy with a representative entrepreneur and a representative
lender. The entrepreneur can be interpreted as the "farmer" in KM, or, alternatively,
as the representative household residing in a small open economy. The lender can be in-
terpreted as the "gatherer" in KM, or, alternatively, as a representative household in the
rest of the world in small-open-economy models.
    Model. A representative entrepreneur has preferences represented by the utility function
                                             
                                                   t u ( ct ) ,                             (OA29)
                                            t=0


where  < 1 is the discount factor, ct is consumption, uc > 0, and ucc < 0. The entrepreneur
has access to a technology yt = f (kt-1 ) with fk > 0, fkk < 0, and limk0 fk (k ) = +,
where yt is output and kt-1 is land.
   A representative lender has preferences represented by the following utility function
                                             
                                                   R - t cl
                                                          t,                                (OA30)
                                             t=0


where R  (1,  -1 ] is the inverse of the discount factor and cl         t is consumption. The lender
                               l
has access to a technology yt    = f l (k t
                                          l            l              l                l
                                            -1 ) with fk  0 and fkk  0, where yt is output and
 l
kt -1 is land. The case of a small open economy corresponds to lenders having an exogenous
endowment, and not operating land, that is, f l (kt      l
                                                                  ¯l > 0.
                                                           -1 ) = y
    The resource constraint of the economy is ct + cl                   l
                                                             t = yt + yt . Land is in exogenous fixed
                     l
supply, K = kt + kt    . Entrepreneur and lender can trade land at price qt as well as a one-
period bond bt . Because of our assumptions on preferences, the gross interest rate is given
by R. The budget constraints of entrepreneur and lender are as follows:

                               yt + bt = ct + qt (kt - kt-1 ) + Rbt-1                       (OA31)
                            l
                           yt + Rbt-1 = cl        l    l
                                         t + qt (kt - kt-1 ) + bt .                         (OA32)

Notice that our notation implicitly imposes equilibrium in the bond market, and we inter-
pret a positive value of bt as debt for the entrepreneur and assets for the lender.
   The entrepreneur is also subject to the following collateral constraint

                                          qt+1 kt  Rbt ,                                    (OA33)

which limits borrowing by a fraction  < 1 of the future resale value of the entrepreneur's

                                                   11
land.
   We define the Lagrangian of the entrepreneur's problem as follows

        
  L           t {u(ct ) - µt (ct + qt (kt - kt-1 ) + Rbt-1 - f (kt-1 ) - bt )
       t=0

                                                                    +t (qt+1 kt - Rbt )} , (OA34)

where  t µt and  t+1 t denote the multipliers on the budget constraint (OA31) and the
collateral constraint (OA33), respectively.
    The entrepreneur's optimality conditions with respect to land and debt are respectively

                         qt uc (ct ) = uc (ct+1 ) (fk (kt ) + qt+1 ) + t qt+1               (OA35)
                           uc (ct ) = Ruc (ct+1 ) + Rt .                                    (OA36)

   The lender maximizes utility (OA30) subject to the budget constraint (OA32) and a
non-negativity constraint on land holdings, with multiplier  l
                                                             t . The lender's optimality
condition with respect to land is

                                    qt = R-1 fk
                                              l    l
                                                (k t ) + qt+1 +  l
                                                                 t.                         (OA37)

    A stationary competitive equilibrium is defined as a time-invariant allocation c, cl , k, k l , b
and a price of land q that satisfy the entrepreneur's and lender's optimality conditions, as
well as the market-clearing condition K = k + k l .
    Constrained Efficiency. To analyze the constrained-efficiency properties of the station-
ary competitive equilibrium, we now consider the marginal effect of a change in the price
of land on welfare. For simplicity, we consider a planner who assigns zero weight on the
lender's utility; our insights are unchanged if we allow for a positive weight on the lender.
The derivative of the entrepreneur's Lagrangian with respect to qt is

                                L
                                   = - t µt (kt - kt-1 ) +  t t-1 kt .                      (OA38)
                                qt

In stationary equilibrium, the first term is equal to zero, because the amount of land owned
by the entrepreneur is constant, whereas the second term is weakly positive, and strictly
so if the collateral constraint is binding. In this case, the only pecuniary externality is
the collateral externality, and an increase in the price of land would lead to an increase in
welfare by relaxing the collateral constraint. An equivalent way to formulate this insight
is to observe that even though cheaper land at date t, taking as given the price at t + 1,


                                                   12
would seemingly benefit the entrepreneur by reducing the cost of investment at t, it would
at the same time decrease the value of the entrepreneur's net worth by the same amount.
Furthermore, it would make the collateral constraint tighter at date t - 1, resulting in an
overall negative effect.
    This result arises because there is no net trading of land in stationary equilibrium, so
no equilibrium capital reallocation. Clearly, even if the planner assigned positive weight
to the lender's utility, there would be no distributive externality, as the lender's amount of
land is also constant. This model may feature misallocation in stationary equilibrium, if,
                                                                               l
as in KM, the financial friction induces an allocation such that fk (k ) > fk    (k l ). However,
the model does not feature reallocation, in the sense that land is not traded in stationary
equilibrium, resulting in no effect of the price of land on budget constraints, and thus no
distributive externality.
    Relation to the KM mechanism. To connect our efficiency analysis to the effects of
asset-price changes in the KM model, we can rearrange equation (OA33) as follows, after
substituting out debt bt from the budget constraint (OA31):

                    (qt - R-1 qt+1 )kt - qt kt-1 - f (kt-1 ) + Rbt-1 + ct  0,                 (OA39)

or, equivalently,
                                              1
                                 kt                     ( w t - ct ) ,                        (OA40)
                                       (qt - R-1 qt+1 )
where wt  qt kt-1 + f (kt-1 ) - Rbt-1 denotes the entrepreneur's net worth, which, impor-
tantly, also depends on the price of land.
    Constraints (OA39) and (OA40) correspond to equations (4) and (7) in KM (pages
219 and 220, respectively), which hold with equality in their model, determining the law
of motion of the entrepreneur's land, whenever the collateral constraint is binding.36 KM
consider the following thought experiment: What would the effect of an unexpected increase
in the current and future price of land on this constraint be? Notice that this marginal effect
is different from the derivative (OA38), which accounts for the effects of current prices on
past debt, and moreover treats the price at each date as a distinct variable. Nevertheless,
to consider the KM thought experiment, we assume there are two consecutive dates such
that qt = qt+1 = q and differentiate both sides of inequality (OA39) with respect to q . We
denote this derivative by KM , and obtain

                                   KM = (1 - R-1 )kt - kt-1 .                                 (OA41)
  36
     Under the technology assumption in KM, consumption ct is a constant fraction of output, labeled as
"perishable" output. Moreover, KM focus on the case in which  = 1.



                                                  13
    As KM argue, as long as the constraint is binding and f (kt-1 ) - Rbt-1 - ct < 0, that is, as
long as there is sufficient leverage, we have KM < 0, implying that an increase in the price
of land would relax the collateral constraint, even after accounting for the effects of the
price on the budget constraint. In stationary equilibrium, we have KM = -R-1 k < 0,
because, as we argued, the effects of the price of land on the budget constraint other than
through the collateral constraint cancel out, as the entrepreneur is keeping a constant
amount of land.
    We conclude that the collateral externality is the only pecuniary externality in the
stationary equilibrium of this model, and this insight about efficiency is closely related to
the fact that an unexpected change in current and future collateral values, as analyzed by
KM, relaxes the collateral constraint.

OA.4.2     Heterogeneous Entrepreneurs and Reallocation

We now consider a modification of this model and show how to recover our main insights on
the importance of distributive externalities. Specifically, instead of assuming an infinitely-
lived representative entrepreneur, we consider over-lapping generations of entrepreneurs,
as in Section 3.6 (and as KM consider in the appendix of their paper), which introduces
heterogeneity among entrepreneurs and reallocation in equilibrium.
    Model. For simplicity, we assume that entrepreneurs live for two dates and that all
entrepreneurs are endowed with a common initial level of net worth w . We maintain all
other assumptions from the model in the previous subsection, namely an infinitely-lived
lender with linear preferences and a productive asset in fixed supply.
    The representative entrepreneur born at date t has utility

                                      u(c0t ) + u(c1,t+1 )                              (OA42)

with   R-1 , uc > 0, and ucc < 0. The budget constraints are

                                      w + bt = c0t + kt                                 (OA43)
                              f (kt ) + qt+1 kt = c1,t+1 + Rbt-1 ,                      (OA44)

and the collateral constraint is given by equation (OA33) as before.
   The optimality conditions with respect to land and debt are respectively

                     qt uc (c0t ) = uc(c1,t+1 ) (fk (kt ) + qt+1 ) + t qt+1             (OA45)
                       uc (c0t ) = Ruc (c1,t+1 ) + Rt .                                 (OA46)



                                               14
where, again, t denotes the multiplier on the collateral constraint. Notice that in this
model there is always net trading of land, with young entrepreneurs being buyers and old
entrepreneurs being sellers.
   A stationary competitive equilibrium is defined as a time-invariant allocation c0 , c1 , cl , k, k l , b
and a price of land q that satisfy the entrepreneurs' and lender's optimality conditions, as
well as the market-clearing condition K = k + k l .
   Constrained Efficiency. As in Section 3.6 and Appendix OA.2, we consider a planner
who maximizes the present discounted value of utilities of all generations of entrepreneurs,
with discount factor 
                                           
                              u (c10 ) +          t (u (c0t ) + u (c1,t+1 )) ,
                                           t=0


subject to all budget constraints, collateral constraints, and market-clearing conditions.
   The marginal effect of the price of land qt on aggregate welfare is given by

                              - t (uc (c0t ) - uc (c1t ))kt +  t t-1 kt .                    (OA47)

The two marginal-utility terms represent the distributive externality, due to the fact that
young entrepreneurs buy land, whereas old entrepreneurs sell land in equilibrium. Thus, as
long as they have different marginal utility from consumption, the aggregate distributive
effect of a price change is non-zero. The last term involving the multiplier t-1 denotes
the collateral externality, because the price of land affects the collateral constraint in the
previous period.
    Using equation (OA46) to substitute out t-1 , this expression can be rewritten as

           - t (uc (c0t ) - uc (c1t )) -  -1 R-1  (uc (c0,t-1 ) - Ruc (c1t )) kt .           (OA48)

   Case  = R-1 . We now show that under the baseline assumption on discounting in
our paper, which is  = R-1 , this derivative is negative in stationary equilibrium, because
buyers of land have a higher marginal utility than sellers, and moreover the distributive
externality dominates the collateral externality. To see this, observe that  = R-1 and
equation (OA46) imply uc (c0 ) - uc (c1 )  0. Furthermore, the expression in (OA48) becomes

                               - t (uc (c0 ) - uc (c1 )) (1 - )k  0,                         (OA49)

with strict inequality if the collateral constraint binds. Thus, when  = R-1 , introducing
heterogeneity and equilibrium reallocation in the model with assets in fixed supply over-


                                                      15
turns the result on the sign of inefficiency obtained in representative-entrepreneur models.
The distributive externality dominates the collateral externality, consistent with the main
insight in our model with endogenous investment.
    Case  < R-1 . We now discuss the role of impatience for pecuniary externalities in
the reallocation of land. In the case of relatively impatient entrepreneurs, i.e.,  < R-1 ,
we cannot sign the aggregate welfare effect of the price of land unambiguously in general.
First, notice that under sufficient impatience, equation (OA46) is consistent with young
entrepreneurs having a lower marginal utility than old entrepreneurs. Second, notice that,
as equation (OA48) highlights, the distributive externality from the price qt generates an
aggregate welfare effect at date t, whereas the collateral externality relaxes a constraint at
date t - 1. When  = R-1 , this timing difference is exactly offset by the discounting of the
value of collateral in the collateral constraint. In contrast, when  < R-1 , the difference
in timing between the two externalities implies that the collateral externality is relatively
more important, other things equal, as reflected by the factor  -1 R-1 > 1 that multiplies
the corresponding terms in equation (OA48).


OA.5       Additional Optimality Conditions for Quantitative Model
In this section, we provide the optimality conditions for the planner's problem, restricted
not to distort investment in old capital, discussed at the end of Section 4.4. We denote by
t (sa ) the multipliers on the old-capital Euler equations, which are now constraints for the
planner:

  qt (1 + d,t (sa )) =  Et sa+1 fk (kt (sa ))gO,t(sa ) + (1 -  O )qt+1 (1 + (1 - )d,t+1 (sa+1 ))
                                                                       + t (sa )(1 -  O )qt+1 .

In formulating this constraint on the planning problem, we need to substitute a differen-
tiable expression for the Lagrange multiplier on the collateral constraint t (sa ). We follow,
for instance, Jeanne and Korinek (2019) and use the competitive-equilibrium optimality
condition for debt to substitute

                           t (sa ) = d,t (sa ) - (1 - )Et d,t+1 (sa+1 ).                   (OA50)




                                                16
   The planner's optimality condition for new capital is

  1 + d,t (sa ) =  Et sa+1 fk (kt (sa ))gN,t (sa ) + (1 -  N (1 - qt+1 )) (1 + (1 - )d,t+1 (sa+1 ))
                                                                                          Ot (sa )
                                  + t (sa )(1 -  N (1 - qt+1 )) +  N t+1 + t (sa )         N a
                                                                                          kt (s )

with

  Ot (sa )
   N a
           = - Et sa+1 (fkk (kt (sa ))gN,t (sa )gO,t (sa )+fk (kt (sa ))gN O,t(sa ))(1+(1-)d,t+1 (sa+1 ))
  kt (s )
+dd,t (sa )(qt -(1- O )qt+1 )+ (1-)Et dd,t+1 (sa+1 ) sa+1 fk (kt (sa ))gN,t (sa ) + (1 -  N (1 - qt+1 ))
                                            × sa+1 fk (kt (sa ))gO,t (sa ) + (1 -  O )(1 - )qt+1 .

The optimality condition for old capital is

  qt (1 + d,t (sa )) =  Et sa+1 fk (kt (sa ))gO,t(sa ) + (1 -  O )qt+1 (1 + (1 - )d,t+1 (sa+1 ))
                                                                                          Ot (sa )
                              + (1 -  O )t (sa )qt+1 - t +  (1 -  O )t+1 + t (sa )         O a
                                                                                          kt (s )

with

  Ot (sa )
   O a
           = - Et sa+1 (fkk (kt (sa ))(gO,t(sa ))2 + fk (kt (sa ))gOO,t(sa ))(1 + (1 - )d,t+1 (sa+1 ))
  kt (s )
                                + dd,t (sa )qt (qt - (1 -  O )qt+1 )
              +  (1 - )Et dd,t+1 (sa+1 ) sa+1 fk (kt (sa ))gO,t (sa ) + (1 -  O )qt+1
                                            × sa+1 fk (kt (sa ))gO,t (sa ) + (1 -  O )(1 - )qt+1 .

The optimality condition for debt is

                                                                           Ot (sa )
                  d,t (sa ) = (1 - )Et d,t+1 (sa+1 ) + t (sa ) - t (sa )
                                                                           bt (sa )

with

  Ot (sa )
       a
           = -dd,t (sa )(qt - (1 -  O )qt+1 )
  bt (s )
                   - (1 - )Et dd,t+1 (sa+1 ) sa+1 fk (kt (sa ))gO,t (sa ) + (1 -  O )(1 - )qt+1 .

Notice that this condition implies a difference between the value of this multiplier as per-
ceived by firms (in a competitive equilibrium with taxes, that is, equation (OA50)) and

                                                 17
as perceived by the planner. We verify numerically that this deviation is quantitatively
unimportant, and we also solve an alternative problem in which the planner does not in-
                                                                                            a
                                                                                        t (s )
ternalize the effect of debt choices on the Euler equation for old capital (the term Obt (sa )
                                                                                               ),
thus aligning the values of this multiplier for firms and planner, finding similar results.
    The constrained-efficient price of old capital satisfies

   
        a             p( sa ) k t
                                O a
                                  (s )(1 + d,t (sa )) =
  a=0           sa
    
            a          p(sa+1 )  N kt
                                    N     a         O O      a
                                     -1 (s ) + (1 -  )kt-1 (s ) (1 + (1 - )d,t (s
                                                                                  a+1
                                                                                      ) + t-1 (sa ))
      a=0       sa+1
                                          
                                                                          Ot (sa )                Ot-1 (sa )
                                      +         a        p(sa )(t (sa )            + t-1 (sa ) -1            ) + t
                                          a=0       sa
                                                                           qt                      qt

with
       Ot (sa )                                                       a-1                      a-1
                                                 O a
                = 1 + d,t (sa ) + dd,t (sa )qt (kt (s ) -  N k t
                                                               N
                                                                -1 (s     ) - (1 -  O )kt
                                                                                        O
                                                                                         -1 (s     ))
        qt

and

  Ot-1 (sa )
             = - (1 -  O )(1 + d,t-1 (sa ) + (1 - )(1 - )Et-1 d,t (sa+1 ))
   qt
                     +  (1 - )Et-1 dd,t (sa+1 )( N kt
                                                    N     a         O O      a     O a+1
                                                     -1 (s ) + (1 -  )kt-1 (s ) - kt (s  ))
                                                         × sa+1 fk (kt-1 (sa ))gO,t-1 (sa ) + (1 -  O )(1 - )qt .

The price of old capital affects the planner's value through its effects on the old-capital Euler
equations, which the planner takes as constraints. These additional effects are summarized
                     a              a
                 t (s )        -1 (s )
by the terms O  qt
                        and Otq  t
                                       .


OA.6            Solution Method for Quantitative Model
In this section, we discuss the solution method for the quantitative model. We compute the
stationary constrained-efficient allocation, in the case in which the planner chooses both
new and old capital, using the following iterative procedure:

   1. Guess a value for the multiplier on the market clearing condition for old capital  .

        (a) Guess a value for the price of old capital q .
        (b) Solve for the firm policy functions on a grid for net worth w and productivity s,


                                                               18
           using the optimality conditions (49), (50), and (47) evaluated in stationary equi-
           librium.
       (c) Obtain the stationary distribution of net worth and productivity by simulating
           a continuum of firms.
       (d) Check the market-clearing condition (35) and update the guess for the price q
           accordingly, until convergence.

   2. Evaluate the optimality condition for the price of old capital (51) and update the
      guess for  accordingly, until convergence.

The stationary competitive equilibrium is a special case of steps (a)-(d) with  = 0.


OA.7       Additional Quantitative Results and Sensitivity
This section provides additional figures related to the quantitative analysis of Sections 5
and 6. Figure OA2 displays the optimal tax rates on new and old capital that implement
the constrained-efficient allocation in our calibrated model. Figure OA3 plots the transition




      -0.076
                                                     1.04
      -0.078
                                                     1.02
       -0.08
                                                       1
      -0.082
                                                     0.98
      -0.084
                                                     0.96
      -0.086
                                                     0.94
      -0.088
               5   10   15     20    25    30               5   10   15   20   25    30


Figure OA2: Optimal tax rates. Left panel: tax rate on new capital (a negative value denotes
a subsidy); right panel: tax rate on old capital. The x-axes report net worth w. Thick red lines
refer to the high productivity state; thin blue lines refer to the low state. See Table 1 for the
parameter values.


dynamics associated with the implementation of the optimal tax rate on new capital (at t =
0), common for all firms and constant over time, starting from the competitive equilibrium
without policy intervention (at t = -1).


                                                19
                         10-3

                   0

                  -2

                  -4
                    -1          0   1   2   3   4    5     6    7     8     9    10



                   1

               0.995

                0.99

                   -1           0   1   2   3   4    5     6    7     8     9    10


                1.03

                1.02

                1.01

                   1
                    -1          0   1   2   3   4    5     6    7     8     9    10



Figure OA3: Equilibrium transition dynamics associated with the optimal constant tax rate  N ,
common for all firms. Top panel: tax rate  N ; middle panel: price of old capital qt ; bottom panel:
                                O . See Table 1 for the parameter values.
aggregate stock of old capital Kt




                                                20
