                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      WHERE IS POLLUTION MOVING?
            ENVIRONMENTAL MARKETS AND ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE

                                       Joseph S. Shapiro
                                         Reed Walker

                                      Working Paper 28389
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28389


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2021




We thank our discussant, Maureen Cropper, for insightful comments, Kenneth Lai for
extraordinary research assistance, and NSF SES-1850790 for generous support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Joseph S. Shapiro and Reed Walker. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Where is Pollution Moving? Environmental Markets and Environmental Justice
Joseph S. Shapiro and Reed Walker
NBER Working Paper No. 28389
January 2021
JEL No. H22,Q50,Q52,Q53

                                          ABSTRACT

Do US air pollution offset markets disproportionately relocate pollution to or from low-income or
minority communities? Concerns about an equal distribution of environmental quality across
communities--environmental justice--have growing policy influence. We relate prices and
quantities of offset transactions to demographics of the communities surrounding polluting plants.
We find little association of offset prices or offset-induced movements in pollution with the share
of a community that is Black, Hispanic, or with mean household income. This analysis of twelve
prominent offset markets suggests that they do not substantially increase or decrease the equity of
environmental outcomes.


Joseph S. Shapiro
University of California at Berkeley
714 University Hall #3310
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
joseph.shapiro@berkeley.edu

Reed Walker
Haas School of Business
Department of Economics
University of California Berkeley
2220 Piedmont Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
rwalker@berkeley.edu
   In the half century since the 1970 US Clean Air Act, air quality has improved dramatically,
and concentrations of some pollutants have fallen by 90 percent. At the same time, there has been
increased recognition that low-income and minority communities bear a disproportionate burden
from the environmental harms associated with air pollution--a concern that motivates the modern-
day "environmental justice" movement.
   Environmental justice concerns have prompted regulators at the local, state, and federal levels
to look for policy solutions to address existing disparities. Market-based environmental policy
instruments, like cap-and-trade or pollution taxes, have been one of economists' most important
contributions to policy. They have also led to important equity concerns. Since environmental
markets do not guarantee emissions reductions in all communities, it is possible, for example, that
emissions would increase in some facilities or reductions would be unequally distributed.
   This paper investigates how one of the oldest and most prominent forms of market-based en-
vironmental policy in the United States has affected pollution disparities between communities.
Since the 1970's, the Clean Air Act has allowed for trading of permanent pollution emissions rights
between firms within a metropolitan area, technically known as emissions offsets. Offset markets
represent a distinct market design and differ in many ways from cap-and-trade markets (Shapiro
and Walker, 2020). We investigate the equity implications of these offset markets, asking whether
pollution trades between facilities reallocate emissions towards low income or minority communities.
We also explore what we can learn from these transactions more broadly about how market-based
policies may affect the distribution of pollution going forward.
   Our first approach uses publicly available data from five cities and twelve city×pollutant com-
binations (i.e., twelve markets) in California and Texas. These data provide information on the
locations of facilities that sold their permanent rights to emit a specified amount of pollution (i.e.,
where emissions were reduced) as well as the locations of facilities that purchased these rights (i.e.,
where emissions increased). This allows us to compare the characteristics of communities where
facilities permanently reduced their emissions to the characteristics of communities where facilities
bought these emissions rights for new or expanding facilities.
   The equity implications of market-based environmental policies depend on where facilities with
different marginal abatement costs are located. For example, if policymakers replaced a command-
and-control standard with an emissions fee, pollution emissions should fall most in facilities that
have the lowest cost pollution abatement opportunities, and they should fall the least in facilities
where pollution abatement is most expensive.
   The data from Texas help us understand the spatial distribution of facility marginal abatement
costs across different communities. Shapiro and Walker (2020) show how the bilateral transaction
price between these facilities can be used to understand marginal abatement costs. Thus, our
second approach compares facility-level offset prices to community characteristics, asking whether
strong correlations exist between offset prices and community characteristics in Texas.
   We find little evidence in the twelve offset markets we study to suggest that the tradability
feature of the offset program has disproportionately moved pollution to lower-income communities


                                                  1
or communities of color over the past 30 years. We find that neighborhoods where offsets are sold
and purchased have similar demographics. Similarly, we find little association of facility-level offset
prices with community characteristics. The similarity of offset prices across communities suggests
that expanding the scope of market-based environmental policy instruments for air pollution in
the settings we study may not disproportionately reallocate emissions to low-income or minority
communities.
    This paper builds on a burgeoning literature that studies how environmental markets affect
equity. Papers have provided retrospective evaluations of whether prominent US cap-and-trade
programs have disproportionately reallocated emissions towards low-income or minority communi-
ties (e.g., Fowlie, Holland and Mansur (2012); Hernandez-Cortes and Meng (2020)). We believe no
research has studied the distributional consequences of the Clean Air Act's offset program, which
is the oldest and by some measures the largest market-based environmental program in the US.
More broadly, we are not aware of any research that has directly attempted to use or construct
measures of the spatial distribution of facility-level marginal abatement costs to learn about the
distributional consequences of market-based environmental policy.
    We view this paper as demonstrating an approach to studying how market-based environmental
policies affect environmental justice concerns. That said, several important caveats are warranted.
Data restrictions let us study only 12 markets; each of these markets is large and important, but
together they are still a small sample. Our comparison of the communities where offsets are sold
and purchased provides a simple test of where emissions are moving, but it does not tell us what
the distribution of emissions would look like in the absence of the offset program. Variation in offset
prices within a market can reflect variation in fundamentals like supply and demand for offsets,
in addition to search frictions, marginal abatement costs, and other market forces; while we use
regression analysis to control for some of these fundamentals, we cannot completely rule out that
some of the price variation we observe reflects differences in more than simply marginal abatement
costs of different facilities.
    While this paper finds little evidence to suggest that market-based features of the Clean Air Act
exacerbate existing pollution disparities, important gaps in pollution exposure between communities
remain. Understanding and addressing these disparities is important for future research and policy
design.


1    Data and Institutions
The Clean Air Act created a set of National Ambient Air Quality Standards that regulators enforce
separately for each pollutant and location. Areas where ambient air quality exceeds these standards
are in "nonattainment" for the offending pollutant. The Environmental Protection Agency then
implements a range of regulations to help the region meet the standards.
    Title I of the Clean Air Act effectively bans the entry or expansion of large, polluting facilities
in nonattainment areas unless the new facility offsets its emissions by paying a facility in the


                                                   2
same area to permanently reduce its emissions of the same pollutant. We call these transactions
"offsets," though legally they are called Emissions Reductions Credits. Offset markets seek to
prevent net increases in industrial emissions from polluted cities while still allowing polluting firms
to enter or expand. Regulators carefully evaluate offset transactions, and detailed engineering and
environmental data must accompany transactions to show that changes in pollution emissions are
permanent, quantifiable, enforceable, and surplus (Shapiro and Walker, 2020).
    We use transaction data from twelve large US offset markets that provide facility-level informa-
tion on the seller and buyer of offset transactions. These markets differ by pollutant and location.
The pollutants in our data include nitrogen oxides (NOx ), particulate matter, sulfur oxides, and
volatile organic compounds (VOCs); the locations in our data consist of the San Joaquin (Central)
Valley of California; and Beaumont, Dallas, Houston, and San Antonio, Texas. The most common
offset transactions involve NOx and VOCs. These pollutants contribute to both ground-level ozone
and particulate matter smaller than 2.5 micrometers (PM2.5 ), which have large negative effects on
morbidity and mortality.
    Our data report the latitude and longitude of each facility in these twelve markets. We match
this to demographic data of the surrounding community from the 2006-2010 American Community
Survey 5-Year Estimate files. The American Community Survey data provide block-group infor-
mation on racial composition and median household income. We compute the mean community
characteristics of a facility by taking the area-weighted average of all block groups within a 1-mile
radius of the facility.


2    Results: Where Do Offset Transactions Move Pollution?
We first compare the characteristics of communities where offsets are sold versus where offsets are
purchased. This lets us follow emissions from one community to the next and ask whether these
offset markets move pollution in ways that exacerbate existing disparities.
    The kernel densities in Figure 1 show the characteristics of communities where facilities sell
(dotted line) and buy (solid line) offsets. The two vertical lines show the mean characteristics of
the communities where offsets are sold and purchased. The arrows between the vertical lines show
the difference in mean characteristics. Figure 1 pools over all pollutants and locations. All values
are weighted by the tons of pollution bought or sold.
    Figure 1a suggests that communities where offsets are sold and purchased have fairly similar
shares of the population that is African American or Black. The graph does show suggestive
evidence that offset transactions relocate pollution from communities where 30-40 percent are
Black to communities where a smaller share are Black. Correspondingly, the mean Black share in
communities where offsets are sold is (barely) higher than the share in communities where offsets
are purchased.
    Figure 1b plots the density of Hispanic population shares for communities where offsets are sold
and purchased. This graph suggests similar conclusions. The Hispanic share in communities where


                                                  3
             Figure 1: Densities of Community Characteristics: Offset Origins Versus Destinations




                                                                        1.5
             6




                                                                        1
             4
   Density




                                                              Density
                                                                        .5
             2
             0




                                                                        0
                 0    .2        .4        .6        .8    1                   0    .2         .4        .6          .8   1
                           Black Population Share                                       Hispanic Population Share

                      (a) Black Pop. Share                                        (b) Hispanic Pop. Share




Note: This figure plots kernel densities of community characteristics where offsets are sold (by plants decreasing
emissions) and purchased (by plants opening or expanding). An observation is an offset that is either created or used.
See text for details.


offset transactions are sold is broadly similar to the Hispanic share in communities where offsets
are purchased. The difference in means suggests that communities where offsets are bought have a
slightly lower Hispanic population share than communities where offsets are sold.
     Finally, Appendix Figure A1 plots the density of median household income in the communities
where offsets are sold and purchased. The two densities largely overlap. The graphs show modest
evidence that offset transactions move pollution towards communities with higher median household
income, since the solid line (offset purchases) has higher density in higher-income communities.
     Appendix Table A1 presents statistical tests for the difference in characteristics between com-
munities where offsets are sold (emissions permanently reduced) compared to where offsets are
purchased (emissions expansions). For example, Panel A, column (1), shows that in communities
where offset are sold, 15.6 percent of the population is Black. Conversely, in communities where
offsets are purchased, 15.2 percent of the population is Black. Statistically, we fail to reject the
hypothesis that these shares are equal.
     Appendix Table A1 also separates these comparisons for the two pollutants where we observe
the most transactions, VOCs and NOx . The pollutants have some differences. For example, NOx
trades tend to move pollution towards more Hispanic communities, and VOC trades move pollution
away from Hispanic communities. Neither change is statistically distinct from zero at conventional
levels, however.
     Overall, these patterns suggest little systematic evidence that trades are closely correlated with



                                                          4
                                                       Figure 2: Offset Prices Versus Community Characteristics
                                         12




                                                                                                                              12
    Offset Price (log dollars (2018$))




                                                                                         Offset Price (log dollars (2018$))
                                         11




                                                                                                                              11
                                         10




                                                                                                                              10
                                         9




                                                                                                                              9
                                         8




                                                                                                                              8
                                              0   .2        .4        .6        .8   1                                             0      .2          .4           .6   .8
                                                       Black Population Share                                                              Hispanic Population Share

                                                  (a) Black Pop. Share                                                                 (b) Hispanic Pop. Share


Note: This figure plots the relationship between offset transaction prices and community characteristics. The solid
line represents a linear fit from a regression of offset prices on the respective community characteristic, after controlling
for year, market, and pollutant fixed effects. The points represent the conditional mean offset price for the various
quantiles of the community characteristic. See text for details.


community characteristics, and in particular little evidence that they disproportionately relocate
pollution towards low-income or minority communities. However, averages can obscure the experi-
ences of individual communities. For example, in our Texas data, 5 percent of offset trades represent
a greater than 40 percentage point increase in the share of Hispanic residents living nearby, and
many trades also represent a large decrease in the share of Hispanic residents living nearby.


3                                        Results: Offset Prices and Community Characteristics
Economists tend to support market-based environmental policies like emissions taxes or cap-and-
trade markets because they are cost-effective and so reduce emissions at minimum cost (or, equiv-
alently, maximize the emissions reduction for a given cost). Market-based policies may have other
efficiency benefits, such as generating revenue that can reduce other distortionary taxes.
              Efficiency is not the only criterion for policy, however, and equity concerns have been promi-
nent in recent market-based environmental policy discussions. With market-based environmental
regulations, emissions disproportionately decrease in facilities where pollution abatement is cheap-
est. Thus, the equity implications of market-based policies depend on how facility-level marginal
abatement costs are associated with community-level characteristics.
              Shapiro and Walker (2020) show how market-level transaction prices for Clean Air Act offsets
can represent market-level marginal abatement costs. If offset prices cost less than a firm's potential
abatement technologies, the firm should choose to buy offsets rather than invest in additional


                                                                                     5
abatement. Conversely, if offset prices exceed the cost of abatement technology, the firm should
abate until abatement costs equal the offset price.
    Figure 2 shows correlations between offset prices and community characteristics. The red dots
represent the mean offset price within 15 quantiles of the community characteristic. The line
represents the fitted value from a regression of log offset prices on each community characteristic.
The regression controls for year, market, and pollutant fixed effects.
    The demographic graphs in Figure 2a and the income graph in Appendix Figure A2 show
weak relationships between community characteristics and offset prices. If anything, the graphs
suggest that communities where a larger share of the population is Hispanic have lower offset prices,
and thus markets would tend to move pollution away from Hispanic communities. Overall, these
graphs do not strongly suggest that market-based policies systematically change the distribution
of pollution.


4    Conclusion
While market-based environmental policies are important tools for achieving emissions reductions
at lowest cost, there remain important equity concerns over their use. This paper attempts to
shed light on the equity implications of one of the oldest and most prominent set of environmental
markets in the US, the Clean Air Act's offset program. We find little evidence to suggest that
the tradability of emissions rights has historically reallocated emissions to or from low income or
minority communities. Although this is a limited sample and setting, it echoes related findings that
market-based environmental policies have not exacerbated environmental inequality in the US. At
the same time, important gaps in pollution exposure remain, and regulators may have reason to
consider new tools to address these inequities going forward (Carlson, 2018).


References
Carlson, Ann E. 2018. "The clean air act's blind spot: Microclimates and hotspot pollution."
 UCLA L. Rev., 65: 1036.

Fowlie, Meredith, Stephen Holland, and Erin Mansur. 2012. "What do Emissions Markets
  Deliver and to Whom? Evidence from Southern California's NOx Trading Program." American
  Economic Review, 102(2): 965­993.

Hernandez-Cortes, Danae, and Kyle C. Meng. 2020. "Do Enviornental Markets Cause In-
 justice? Evidence from California's Carbon Market." NBER Working Paper 27205.

Shapiro, Joseph S, and Reed Walker. 2020. "Is Air Pollution Regulation Too Stringent?"
  National Bureau of Economics Research, Working Paper 28199.




                                                 6
Appendix A                Figures and Tables

       Figure A1: Densities of Median Household Income: Offset Origins Versus Destinations




                                                                         1.5
                                                                         1
                                    Density
                                                                         .5
                                                                         0




                                                                               10        10.5              11        11.5     12
                                                                                Median Household Income Log Dollars (2018$)




Note: This figure plots kernel density of community median household income where offsets are sold (due to pollution
abatement) and purchased (for a new or expanding source). The vertical lines represent the respective means of
each distribution, and the arrow points in the direction household income has moved due to trading of offsets. An
observation is an offset that is either sold or purchased. Median household income represents an population-weighted
average of census block group income in all block groups within 1 mile of the corresponding pollution source using
demographic characteristics from the 2006-2010 American Community Survey 5 Year Estimates.


                       Figure A2: Offset Prices Versus Community Characteristics
                                                                         12
                                    Offset Price (log dollars (2018$))
                                                                         11
                                                                         10
                                                                         9
                                                                         8




                                                                                10              10.5            11            11.5
                                                                                Median Household Income Log Dollars (2018$)



Note: This figure plots the relationship between offset transaction prices and median household income of the com-
munities within 1 mile of a facility. The solid line represents a linear fit from a regression of offset prices on median
household income, after controlling for year, market, and pollutant fixed effects. The points represent the conditional
mean offset price for the various quantiles of community median household income. Median household income rep-
resents an population-weighted mean of census block group characteristics in all block groups within 1 mile of the
corresponding pollution source using demographic characteristics from the 2006-2010 American Community Survey
5 Year Estimates.



                                                                                                       7
Table A1: Neighborhood Demographics in Communities where Offsets Increase and Decrease Pol-
lution


                                                            Black or African                   Median
                                                               American          Hispanic     Household
                          Dependent Variable                 Population %      Population %    Income
                                                                   (1)              (2)          (4)

               All Counties                                     13.6%             34.1%        $10.28

               Panel A. All pollutants
                Origin of pollution decrease                    15.6%             35.2%        $10.83
                Destination of pollution increase               15.2%             36.7%        $10.92
                Difference                                       0.4%              1.5%        $0.09
                p val                                           [0.91]            [0.66]       [0.07]
                N                                                                 1,448

               Panel B. Nitrogen oxides (NO x )
                Origin of pollution decrease                    16.7%             29.2%        $10.83
                Destination of pollution increase               18.5%             35.9%        $10.93
                Difference                                       1.8%              6.7%        $0.10
                p val                                           [0.73]            [0.15]       [0.19]
                N                                                                  548

               Panel C. Volatile organic compounds (VOCs)
                Origin of pollution decrease                    14.3%             44.3%        $10.82
                Destination of pollution increase                9.8%             37.8%        $10.91
                Difference                                       4.5%              6.5%        $0.08
                p val                                           [0.12]            [0.09]       [0.09]
                N                                                                  794



Note: This table compares mean neighborhood characteristics of locations where offsets sold and purchased. An
observation is a single offset generation or offset use. Offset data comes from years 1993 to 2020 for the nonattainment
areas in Beaumont, Dallas, Houston, and San Antonio, Texas and San Joaquin Valley, California. "All pollutants"
include nitrogen oxides (NOx ), volatile organic compounds (VOCs), particulate matter of diameter 10 micrometers or
less (PM10 ), and sulfur oxides (SOx ). Mean of demographics and income are weighted by amount of offset generated
or used. Neighborhood are defined as census blockgroups that intersect within the 1-mile radius of plants. In the
case that the 1-mile radius around plant intersected multiple census block groups, the characteristics are taken as
the average of characteristics of all intersected block groups, weighted by the population of intersection between the
block group and the 1-mile-radius circle around the facility. Block group level neighborhood characteristics comes
from the American Community Survey 2006-2010.




                                                                 8
