                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      MYTH OR MEASUREMENT: WHAT DOES THE NEW MINIMUM WAGE RESEARCH
        SAY ABOUT MINIMUM WAGES AND JOB LOSS IN THE UNITED STATES?

                                        David Neumark
                                         Peter Shirley

                                      Working Paper 28388
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28388


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 2021, Revised May 2021




We are grateful to Shantanu Khanna for assistance with this research, and to the authors of most
of the papers we survey for help in this project. We are grateful to Stephen Bazen, Michele
Campolieti, Arindrajit Dube, Kirabo Jackson, Jonathan Meer, Michael Saltsman, Michael Strain,
and William Wascher for helpful comments. The opinions expressed within this paper are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the Joint Committee on Government
and Finance or the West Virginia Legislature, nor those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by David Neumark and Peter Shirley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Myth or Measurement: What Does the New Minimum Wage Research Say about Minimum
Wages and Job Loss in the United States?
David Neumark and Peter Shirley
NBER Working Paper No. 28388
January 2021, Revised May 2021
JEL No. J23,J38

                                          ABSTRACT

The disagreement among studies of the employment effects of minimum wages in the United
States is well known. What is less well known, and more puzzling, is the absence of agreement
on what the research literature says ­ that is, how economists even summarize the body of
evidence on the employment effects of minimum wages. Summaries range from "it is now well-
established that higher minimum wages do not reduce employment," to "the evidence is very
mixed with effects centered on zero so there is no basis for a strong conclusion one way or the
other," to "most evidence points to adverse employment effects." We explore the question of
what conclusions can be drawn from the literature, focusing on the evidence using subnational
minimum wage variation within the United States that has dominated the research landscape
since the early 1990s. To accomplish this, we assembled the entire set of published studies in this
literature and identified the core estimates that support the conclusions from each study, in most
cases relying on responses from the researchers who wrote these papers.

Our key conclusions are: (i) there is a clear preponderance of negative estimates in the literature;
(ii) this evidence is stronger for teens and young adults as well as the less-educated; (iii) the
evidence from studies of directly-affected workers points even more strongly to negative
employment effects; and (iv) the evidence from studies of low-wage industries is less one-sided.


David Neumark
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu

Peter Shirley
West Virginia Legislature
Joint Committee on Government and Finance
1900 Kanawha Blvd. E
Charleston, WV 25305
peter.shirley@wvlegislature.gov
      "There's just no evidence that raising the minimum wage costs jobs, at least when the
      starting point is as low as it is in modern America." ­ Krugman (2015)

      "[T]he literature after Myth and Measurement was about equally likely to find positive as
      negative employment effects of the minimum wage, with the typical estimate very close to
      zero." ­ Card and Krueger (2015, p. xvi)

      "There is considerable support for the competitive market hypothesis that an effective
      minimum wage would result in lower employment... However, a few studies report zero or
      even positive employment responses to higher minimum wages." ­ Liu et al. (2016, p. 19)


I. Introduction

        The empirical evidence on the employment effects of the minimum wage in the U.S. labor

market is voluminous. Key earlier contributions, which also partly demarcate the application of different

empirical strategies to studying this question, include the 1981 Report of the Minimum Wage Study

Commission summarized in Brown et al. (1982), the New Minimum Wage Research Symposium

published in the Industrial and Labor Relations Review in 1992 (Ehrenberg, 1992), and Card and

Krueger's (1995) Myth and Measurement. The latter two represent a break from the earlier research,

shifting from time-series evidence relying only on national minimum wage variation to empirical

strategies using subnational variation. The goal of this shift was to provide more credible evidence by

avoiding the confounding of national minimum wage variation with other aggregate influences on

employment of low-skilled workers ­ the so-called "New Minimum Wage Research."1

        In the veritable explosion of new minimum wage research since this shift, researchers have used

a wide variety of approaches to exploit subnational minimum wage variation in the United States, and

the answers sometimes differ. As illustrated by the quotes above, there are also disagreements among

researchers (and others) over how to interpret the overall body of evidence on the effects of minimum




1
 Although the New Minimum Wage Research is typically characterized by the reliance on state
minimum wage variation and other subnational variation (often differential effects of federal minimum
wage changes across regions), in contrast to the earlier time-series evidence, there were earlier papers
using regional variation in minimum wages (see Brown et al., 1982; Neumark and Wascher, 2008).


                                                    1
wages on employment ­ fundamentally, about whether the effect is negative or not, but also about the

magnitude.

        The absence of complete agreement across a large set of studies is not surprising. It is also not

surprising that advocates on one side or the other emphasize different studies ­ in particular, the ones

more consistent with their policy positions. What is surprising, though, is the absence of agreement on

what the research literature says ­ that is, how economists even summarize what the body of evidence

says about the employment effects of minimum wages. Depending on what one reads about how

economists summarize the evidence, one might conclude that: (1) it is now well-established that higher

minimum wages do not reduce employment, (2) the evidence is very mixed with effects centered on

zero with no basis for a strong conclusion one way or the other, or (3) most evidence points to adverse

employment effects. 2

        Moreover, the quotes that began this paper are not isolated examples. As we document in the

next section, a good deal of recent advocacy for a $15 national minimum wage ­ including by academic

economists ­ takes the position that the research literature by and large establishes that there are no

adverse employment effects of a higher minimum wage. Even more widespread are academic

descriptions of the U.S. research evidence that give the impression that even where there is some

evidence of negative employment effects, there is just as much evidence to the contrary, preventing the

drawing of firm conclusions.

        In this paper, we explore the question of what conclusions can be drawn from the literature,

focusing on the evidence using subnational minimum wage variation that has dominated research on

the minimum wage since the New Minimum Wage Research Symposium. 3 To address this, we

assembled the entire set of published studies in this literature, beginning with the New Minimum Wage


2
  This disagreement (or confusion) among economists can easily spill over into the extensive discussion
of minimum wages in the media and public discourse.
3
  In this paper, we focus solely on the U.S. evidence. See Dube (2019) for a review of the international
evidence.


                                                    2
Research in 1992. 4 We identified the core or "preferred" estimates that reflect the conclusions from

each study of employment effects in the United States, in most cases relying on responses from the

researchers who wrote these papers. We do not use the usual meta-analysis approach of capturing all

estimates reported in studies, because we think that using the entire set of estimates reported is likely

to fail to convey the conclusions of the research, most importantly because many papers present

estimates that the authors do not view as credible. We then summarize the evidence on these core

estimates in a number of ways.

        Once we take stock of the literature in this way, what do we conclude? Does the research

literature by and large establish that there are no employment effects? Do the "on the one hand/on the

other hand" summaries that are most common in academic papers accurately reflect the research

findings, suggesting that "we just don't know" whether a higher minimum wage will reduce

employment? Or does the research point predominantly to job loss for lower-skilled workers from a

higher minimum wage?

        Summarizing the research literature this way, our key conclusions are as follows:

        ·   There is a clear preponderance of negative estimates in the literature. In our data, 78.9% of

            the estimated employment elasticities are negative, 53.9% are negative and significant at

            the 10% level or better, and 46.1% are negative and significant at the 5% level or better.

        ·   This evidence of negative employment effects is stronger for teens and young adults, and

            more so for the less-educated.

        ·   The evidence from studies of directly-affected workers points even more strongly to

            negative employment effects.

        ·   The evidence from studies of low-wage industries is less one-sided, with 66.7% of the

            estimated employment elasticities negative, but only 33.3% negative and significant at the


4
 As this paper is preliminary, we encourage readers to make us aware of any studies that fit our criteria
but we have omitted (see Tables 1A and 1B).


                                                    3
            10% level or better, and the same percent negative and significant at the 5% level or better.

            We suggest, however, that the evidence from low-wage industries is less informative about

            the effects of minimum wages on the employment of low-skill, low-wage workers.

        Overall, we conclude that the preferred estimates of authors of studies evaluating the

employment effects of minimum wages in the United States, since the advent of the New Minimum

Wage Research in 1992, paint a clear picture that is at odds with how this research is often summarized.

In its totality, this body of evidence and its conclusions point strongly toward negative effects of

minimum wages on employment of less-skilled workers, especially for the types of studies that would be

expected to reveal these negative employment effects most clearly. One might argue about the validity

of individual studies ­ a question we do not address in this paper. 5 But our evidence indicates that

concluding that the body of research evidence fails to find disemployment effects of minimum wages

requires discarding or ignoring most of the evidence.

II. How the Research Literature Gets Summarized

        Despite reading the same papers, one can find very different summaries of what the overall

research evidence says about the employment effects of minimum wages in the United States.

        Most academic writing on the U.S. research evidence gives the impression that even where

there is some evidence of negative employment effects, we really cannot reach any conclusions or

consensus. Here we refer not to explicit summaries of the literature (like Wolfson and Belman (2019) or

Neumark (2019)), but instead to briefer summaries included as literature reviews in research papers on

the employment effects of minimum wages. It is common for these summaries of the literature to give

the impression ­ intentionally or not ­ that the evidence may be roughly 50-50 as to whether research




5
 For discussion along these lines, see Neumark and Wascher (2007), Dube et al. (2010), Allegretto et al.
(2011), Neumark et al. (2014a, 2014b), Schmitt (2015), Allegretto et al. (2017), Neumark and Wascher
(2017), Clemens (2019), and Neumark (2019).


                                                      4
finds negative employment effects. 6 The Card and Krueger quote at the start of this paper is typical.

There are many similar examples:7

        "The literature analyzing these historical minimum wage changes has generated much debate
        and little consensus." ­ Clemens and Strain (2018, p. 711)

         "Thus, despite an extensive body of empirical work of increasingly high quality, there is still
        considerable disagreement over the sign and strength of MW employment effects." ­ Hirsch et
        al. (2015, p. 202)

         "... there is currently no empirical consensus. While some researchers ... supported the
        neoclassical perspective that a minimum wage has adverse effects on employment, others ...
        failed to conclude that a minimum wage adversely influences employment." ­ Kim and Jang
        (2020, p. 3)

        "The voluminous literature on minimum wage effects offers little consensus on the extent to
        which a wage floor impacts employment." ­ Meer and West (2016, p. 500)

        "The debate launched by Card and Krueger's study of a New Jersey increase in the minimum
        wage (Newmark and Washcer [sic], 2000) has continued for more than a decade now without a
        decisive resolution. A recent review by Newmark [sic] and Wascher (2008) concludes that the
        traditional view of labor demand curves has been maintained by the bulk of the evidence
        suggesting that higher minimum wages significantly reduce employment. On the other hand,
        Dube et al. (2010) suggest that the evidence supports no effect of minimum wages on low wage
        employment." ­ Persky and Baiman (2010, p. 132)

        "Thus, traditional empirical assessments of the minimum wage yield mixed evidence on the
        employment impact of the minimum wage." ­ Singell and Terborg (2007, p. 40)

        "Despite this long history of attention, economists are still very much divided on the effect of
        minimum wages." ­ Totty (2017, p. 1712)

        This perception that the evidence is equally consistent with job loss as with no job loss is also

reflected in the Chicago Booth IGM Expert Panel's response to the following question, asked in 2015: "If

the federal minimum wage is raised gradually to $15-per-hour by 2020, the employment rate for low-




6
  That is, some of the summaries cited below make direct claims that the evidence is mixed. Other
summaries about a lack of consensus may imply the same, although with weaker statements noting that
there are active researchers on both sides of the debate.
7
  Lest the reader be concerned that we are cherry-picking quotes in this discussion, these quotes come
from the research studies that we include in our survey in this paper, and we have used all quotes that
provide overall summaries of the evidence as opposed to more narrow summaries related, for example,
to a particular econometric technique the study is using.


                                                     5
wage US workers will be substantially lower than it would be under the status quo." 8 The distribution of

responses, whether or not weighted by each expert's confidence, was by and large symmetric and

centered around "uncertain." 9 (To be sure, the phrase "substantially lower" is ambiguous and may imply

a larger negative effect than some studies find.)

        In contrast, some researchers, in advocating for sharply higher minimum wages, argue that the

evidence establishes that the minimum wage does not reduce employment. For example, Michael Reich,

in 2019 testimony before the U.S. House Education and Labor Committee (Reich, 2019, p. 4), asserted:

        "Economists have conducted literally hundreds of studies based on over 160 minimum wage
        changes in the past thirty-five years. The best of these studies do provide a credible guide to the
        likely employment effects of a $15 floor. They indicate that the Act will have minimal to no
        adverse effects on employment and that they will have substantial positive dynamic effects on
        the lowest-wage areas of the U.S." 10

        Similarly, in testimony before the same committee, Ben Zipperer (2019) argued:

        "The bulk of recent economic research on the minimum wage, as well as the best scholarship,
        establishes that prior increases have had little to no negative consequences and instead have
        meaningfully raised the pay of the low-wage workforce."

        Indeed, a 2019 letter signed by scores of economists, including many prominent academics such

as Daron Acemoglu, Sandra Black, David Cutler, Emmanuel Saez, Juliet Schor, and Nobel Laureates

Angus Deaton and Peter Diamond, says that:

        "The last decade has seen a wealth of rigorous academic research on the effect of minimum
        wage increases on employment, with the weight of evidence showing that previous, modest
        increases in the minimum wage had little or no negative effects on the employment of low-
        wage workers." 11

8
  See https://www.igmchicago.org/surveys/15-minimum-wage/.
9
  For reference, the results from the weighted responses were: "strongly agree" (9%); "agree" (25%);
"uncertain" (37%); "disagree" (29%); and "strongly disagree" (0%).
10
   See a similar statement in Reich (2018, p. 3), advocating for a higher minimum wage in New Jersey
claiming that farm workers will benefit. This conclusion is built into simulations of proposed minimum
wage increases that he and his colleagues have written for many jurisdictions, which generally predict
no or even positive employment effects; these can be found on the webpage of his Center on Wage and
Employment Dynamics (https://irle.berkeley.edu/cwed/). To be clear, these writings (and testimony)
refer to "the best" or "credibly-designed" studies, so one could argue that Reich is not simply
summarizing the literature. But there is no explicit statement that refers to how his conclusion differs
from the large literature cited.
11
   See https://www.epi.org/economists-in-support-of-15-by-2024/.


                                                     6
        It is actually far rarer to find studies or statements suggesting that, on balance, the evidence

points to negative employment effects, but some do. Here are two examples (in addition to the Liu et al.

quote at the beginning of the paper): 12

        "... the new conventional wisdom misreads the totality of recent evidence for the negative
        effects of minimum wages. Several strands of research arrive regularly at the conclusion that
        high minimum wages reduce opportunities for disadvantaged individuals." ­ Clemens (2019)

        "My reading of the economics literature leads me to conclude that the weight of the evidence
        suggests that minimum wage increases lead to non-negligible employment reductions." ­ Strain
        (2019)

III. Our Approach

        Our evidence is based on the research findings from the U.S. literature on the employment

effects of minimum wages published beginning with the New Minimum Wage Research (Ehrenberg,

1992). From this literature, we create a database that captures the conclusions the authors of these

studies drew ­ their "preferred estimates." This differs from capturing all estimates reported in studies,

the usual meta-analysis approach. 13 We think that using the entire set of estimates reported is likely to

fail to convey the conclusions of the research, most importantly because many papers present estimates

that the authors do not view as credible (e.g., showing the estimates for a panel data specification

without the fixed effects, prior to showing the preferred estimates with fixed effects).




12
  We could also cite surveys of the evidence by one of us, such as Neumark and Wascher (2007) and
Neumark (2019), which provide similar summaries. But we wanted to focus on how others have
summarized the research on employment effects of the minimum wage in the United States.
Nonetheless, organizations opposed to higher minimum wages, like the Employment Policies Institute,
have cited these surveys in arguing that most evidence in fact points to job loss:
     "The published research on the subject points overwhelmingly in one direction: A summary of the
     last two decades of literature on the minimum wage, co-authored by the lead economist on this
     study [Neumark], concluded that most of the evidence points to job loss following wage hikes." (See
     https://epionline.org/studies/minimum-wages/.)
13
  The two most recent meta-analysis examples for the United States, both of which use all estimates,
are by Wolfson and Belman (2019) and Doucouliagos and Stanley (2009). Campolieti (forthcoming)
presents a meta-analysis for Canada.


                                                     7
        We thus carefully read the papers we include to try to extract the authors' main or preferred

estimates from each study. In general, we first looked for explicit summary measures of each paper's

conclusions in terms of specific elasticities, and when provided, matched those to the table in which the

estimates appear. When this method was not so clear, we read the descriptions of the paper's tables, in

the context of methodological points that authors intended the paper to make, to capture the estimate

or estimates that most fully reflect the contribution of the paper. And we did not capture the estimates

presented as supplementary or robustness analyses. This led us to identify one or more estimates

(generally a small number) from each paper. In some cases, multiple estimates were necessary, as some

papers report estimates for multiple industries, or for different age groups, and do not distinguish or

identify a preferred group, industry, etc.

        This process does potentially allow for some subjectivity in selecting preferred estimates from

the studies we surveyed. 14 To mitigate this issue, we emailed the authors of every study included in our

paper, asking them to report to us the preferred estimates/results from their study. 15 These emails

posed the question in a neutral way, as follows:

        Dear __:

        For research we are doing, we would like to ask you about the elasticity of employment with
        respect to the minimum wage estimated in your paper:

        *** paper title ***

        We have attached a pdf copy for your convenience.

        Specifically, we would like to ask you the following:

        1. What estimated elasticity from your paper best captures its core conclusion? Put
        differently, if you had to reduce the findings of this paper to a single estimate, what
        would it be?
        Note: If you believe that more than one estimate is needed, you can provide the additional

14
   Note, though, that we include all studies that meet our neutral study selection criteria, discussed in
more detail in the following section. We thus avoid the potential subjectivity in selection of "the best"
studies to emphasize in a narrative review ­ a concern with narrative reviews, like that of Neumark and
Wascher (2007), raised by Wolfson and Belman (2019, p. 489).
15
   Naturally, a second "take" on the preferred estimates was not done for papers one of us authored.


                                                     8
        information below.
        Estimated elasticity:
        Standard error:
        Location in paper (a table and column, or page):

        2. If you believe it is impossible to capture your overall conclusion in a single estimated
        elasticity, please repeat this information for other estimated elasticities you believe are
        needed to capture your core conclusion(s).
        Note: We are not asking about estimates that explore robustness/sensitivity of results. But if, for
        example, you have analyses for two or more distinct subgroups, and both are important to your
        core conclusions, you might feel that more than one estimate is needed.

        Estimated elasticity:
        Standard error:
        Location in paper:
        (Please repeat as needed if you are reporting more than two estimates.)

        3. If you responded with additional estimates in question 2, please briefly explain why
        additional estimates are required to capture your core conclusion(s).

        There were 69 papers in total. We emailed the survey questions to the authors of 57 papers,

with a unique email for each paper. Of the remaining 12, 11 were authored or co-authored by one of us,

obviating the need for the survey, and there was one paper for which no contact information for the

author could be found (Dodson, 2002). 16 We received 48 responses, for an 84.2% response rate. For the

48 studies where we received a response, the corresponding author's preferred estimate(s) replaced the

estimates we initially extracted. Appendix Figure A1 shows the differences between our initial selections

of preferred estimates and those in the authors' responses (which we use as our data). 17 Note that we

do this for the median estimates, because there can be multiple estimates for a study, and the authors

did not always respond with the same number of estimates we originally coded. The figure shows that,

for the most part, there was agreement (as reflected in the zero differences in the figure). There were

some deviations in both directions, as shown at the top and the bottom of the figure. 18 But the

deviations are roughly symmetric, indicating no systematic bias in how we recorded preferred estimates



16
   We believe this author is deceased.
17
   The figure excludes the non-responses and papers by one of us.
18
   The non-responses, of course, are not shown in the figure.


                                                    9
(indeed on average we were picking slightly more positive estimates). Thus, we elect to include our

selections for the preferred estimates when we did not receive a response from the paper's author(s).

Our approach vs. meta-analysis

        Our approach shares with meta-analysis the goal of presenting an "analysis of analyses" (Glass,

1976). As such, our evidence is complementary to meta-analyses of the employment effects of minimum

wages. Nonetheless, our approach differs from meta-analyses of minimum wage effects in several

ways. 19 First, as noted above, we focus on the conclusions or preferred estimates from each study,

because studies often report estimates that are not intended to provide unbiased estimates of the

parameter of interest. 20

        Second, meta-analyses typically focus on obtaining an average effect (or treatment) size from a

set of published estimates ­ in the minimum wage literature typically the magnitude of the elasticity of

employment with respect to the minimum wage. In contrast to focusing on arriving at a single estimate,

we are more interested in documenting and understanding the distribution of estimates ­ such as the

share of estimates that are negative (or negative and significant) ­ and how it varies, and of course the

central tendency as well. One can view this is taking a more systematic approach to summarizing the

literature than what apparently underlies at least some of the many quotes provided above, which

clearly cannot all be correct.

        Moreover, averaging across estimates from studies of minimum wage effects, as meta-analyses

do, is problematic. The populations studied vary, and this and other factors can influence how binding


19
   See Wolfson and Belman (2019) for more discussion about different types and uses of meta-analysis in
general, and in the minimum wage literature, as well as the most recent meta-analysis of the
employment effects of minimum wages. See Card and Krueger (1995) and Doucouliagos and Stanley
(2009) for earlier meta-analyses of the minimum wage-employment literature.
20
   In their meta-analysis, Wolfson and Belman (2019) argue against selecting a "best" or average
estimate from each study, arguing that "there are presumably traits that differentiate estimates even
within the same study, so choosing `the best' estimate sacrifices information..." (p. 492). Our approach,
however, does not restrict the evidence to a single estimate from each study, and is explicitly designed
to include multiple estimates when there is important variation to capture (such as differences by
industry or by age group).


                                                    10
the minimum wage is, generating variation in estimated effects that there is no reason to simply

average. For example, Neumark and Wascher (2007) argue that studies more sharply focused on

workers most likely to be affected by minimum wage increases reveal clearer evidence of

disemployment effects. In addition, the time period studied can vary. For example, Clemens and Strain

(2018) study the post-Great Recession period while other studies focus on earlier periods (e.g., Card and

Kruger, 1994) and others study multiple decades. The bindingness of the minimum wage variation (how

it compares to the competitive equilibrium wage) in a particular study can vary with both the time

period and across regions; the latter point was emphasized and documented in Neumark and Wascher

(2002). Minimum wage effects may also vary depending on the time horizon used (see, e.g., Baker et al.,

1999; Sorkin, 2015). In other words, the meta-analysis "paradigm" for combining estimates from many

similar studies ­ say, randomized trials of a drug (Hunt, 1997) ­ carries over poorly to the minimum

wage literature (and likely many other literatures in economics). Our analysis responds to this problem

by not only summarizing the overall distribution of estimates/conclusions in the minimum wage

literature, but also understanding how this distribution varies with key study features. 21

        One other issue often addressed in meta-analyses, which potentially bears on the interpretation

of the evidence, is "publication bias" ­ the possibility that some results are not published because of

editors' and reviewers' (and perhaps authors') prior views, or because of diminished interest in

statistically insignificant results, either of which can lead to bias in average estimates based on published

work. The most recent meta-analysis of the minimum wage literature for the United States (Wolfson

and Belman, 2019), based on all estimates in newer studies that tend to use panel data with subnational

minimum wage variation, finds little effect of publication bias (and evidence of minimum wage-

employment elasticities for teens and other low-skill groups of around -0.1). Andrews and Kasy (2019)


21
   Another issue is that studies vary in quality, and if one believes only a subset of studies are credible, it
is not clear why one would average over all studies. Our analysis both summarizes results and displays
results study by study, so that readers can assess the evidence based on excluding particular studies, if
they so choose (and our data set will be released once this paper is finalized, to make this easy).


                                                      11
find some evidence consistent with publication bias, although they conclude that the only statistically

significant evidence of publication bias in the minimum wage literature regards the significance of

published results, not the sign.

        That said, it can be hard to distinguish between publication bias and other sources of patterns in

the published evidence consistent with publication bias. For example, meta-analyses like Doucouliagos

and Stanley's (2009) argue that if published negative estimates of minimum wage effects have larger

standard errors, this is evidence of publication bias. (And similarly, Andrews and Kasy identify

publication bias in meta-analyses when the distributions of estimates and standard errors are not

independent.) However, the same phenomenon can arise if, e.g., studies using better research designs

lead to "truer" estimates, which happen to be negative, but also have larger standard errors because the

research designs demand more of the data.

IV. Data

        We began with the published papers listed in the comprehensive survey of studies of the

employment effects of minimum wages in Neumark and Wascher (2007). We then added the published

papers in the meta-analysis of Wolfson and Belman (2019), which covered roughly the prior 15 years

and hence most papers subsequent to the first survey. We then supplemented the list of published (or

forthcoming) papers using a web search in Google Scholar for "Minimum Wage," covering the years

1992 to 2020. Papers from this search that did not appear in either survey were read for evidence on

employment effects in the United States, excluding hypotheticals (e.g., Repetti and Roe, 2018) or

simulations (e.g., Gorry and Jackson, 2016). If the paper estimated employment effects of minimum

wages and provided an elasticity estimate, it was retained. The search was ended after 40 pages of

results in Google Scholar, by which time the search results failed to yield additional relevant studies.

Also, we excluded time-series studies, given the fundamentally different and arguably much more

tenuous identification ­ the problem that by and large drove the development of the New Minimum




                                                     12
Wage Research. Finally, we include a few more papers identified as published or forthcoming by readers

of the earliest version of this working paper ("crowdsourced").

        The papers meeting these criteria, and their sources, are listed in Table 1A. Table 1B lists the

papers we identified via our search but excluded because the paper was not published (or forthcoming),

used time-series methods only, had cross-national variation, studied a country other than the United

States, or only provided evidence on outcomes other than employment. 22

        The studies and the estimates differ along two important dimensions, including the source or

use of policy variation, and the group of workers studied or the sector they work in. Table 2 displays the

distribution of estimates across these dimensions.

V. Evidence

Overall evidence

        We begin with Figure 1, which plots the distribution of preferred estimates from all the studies

covered. 23 We plot the preferred elasticity estimates from each study (there can be more than one),

arranged from largest negative to largest positive estimate. The estimates are shaded depending on

statistical significance at the 5% or 10% level. The vertical dashed and dotted lines, respectively, display

the mean (-0.148) and median (-0.112) estimates, but our key focus is on the distribution of the

estimates relative to zero. The figure makes clear that there are far more negative than positive

estimates, and that there is a very large number of negative and significant estimates. In particular, as

shown in Table 3, 78.9% of the estimates are negative, 53.9% are negative and significant at the 10%




22
   As one recent and prominent example, Jardim et al. (forthcoming) focus mainly on total hours of
work, and do not provide estimated elasticities of employment with respect to the minimum wage.
Hence, it is excluded from our analysis. This is not to say that effects of minimum wages on total hours ­
which is the most comprehensive labor demand measure ­ are not very important. But our paper is
focused on the debate over employment effects, and most of the minimum wage literature has focused
on employment.
23
   We realize the author names are difficult to read in this figure. The names are clearer in subsequent
figures.


                                                     13
level or less, and 46.1% are negative and significant at the 5% level or less. 24 Of the remainder, while

21.1% are positive, a very small number are positive and significant (5.5% positive and significant at the

10% level, and 3.9% positive and significant at the 5% level).

        A small number of positive estimates, including some significant, is by no means inconsistent

with the true effect being negative. One simple way to think about this evidence is to treat each

estimate as independent. We can then think of the estimates as Bernoulli trials, with pr equal to the

probability of a negative estimate. Interpreted this way, under the null of no employment effect, pr =

0.5. The actual estimate of pr, 0.789, is significantly greater than 0.5 at the 1% significance level (and

much lower; the z-statistic is 8.01). 25 That is, the probability of observing the percentage of negative

estimates we do under the null is vanishingly small. Of course, this is only a heuristic because estimates

are not independent for a number of reasons (overlapping authors, data, etc.). 26

        This perspective on the overall body of evidence is at odds with conclusions that the research

evidence on the employment effects of minimum wage in the United States points to no adverse effects

or is equally likely to find negative or positive effects. We next turn to several different ways to

summarize the data to see whether there are perspectives on the body of research evidence that lead to

different conclusions.

Is the most recent evidence different?

        One possibility is that the evidence has become more mixed or more firmly supportive of the

conclusion that there is no job loss in more recent ­ and hence possibly more convincing ­ research.

Figure 2 displays the evidence from the same studies from Figure 1, but in chronological order from


24
   It is also interesting that among the larger positive estimated employment effects, the share of
estimates that is statistically insignificant is higher, implying that a number of these large, positive
estimates are quite uninformative.
25
   There are 128 estimates.
26
   One issue we do not delve into is the possibility that monopsony power in low-wage labor markets
generates positive employment effects of the minimum wage in some cases, such as local labor markets
with highly-concentrated low-wage labor markets (e.g., Azar et al., 2019). In principle, this could
generate some positive estimates in the existing literature. (See also Neumark and Wascher, 2002.)


                                                     14
earliest to latest publication. There is no evidence of estimates becoming less negative in more recent

studies. Indeed, when we estimated a regression of the elasticity on the year (treating forthcoming

papers as being published in 2021), the coefficient estimate was essentially zero (-0.001) and

insignificant (p-value = 0.782). Note also from Figure 1 that the largest positive estimates come from

three of the very early studies ­ Katz and Krueger (1992), Card (1992a), and Card and Krueger (1994).

Is the evidence skewed by studies reporting estimates for different groups, industries, etc.?

         A second issue is that even in our preferred estimates there are sometimes multiple estimates

per study ­ e.g., for several different industries, or for teens and young adults. Those who read the

literature may be basing their interpretations of the evidence on the overall conclusions from studies.

We thus want to assess the evidence giving each study equal weight, which we do by choosing the

median estimate from each study. To address this issue, we modify Figure 1 to include only the median

estimate from each study. This information is presented in Figure 3. The qualitative impression is the

same; the estimates are overwhelmingly negative. Looking at Table 3, 75.4% of the estimates are

negative, 49.3% are negative and significant at the 10% level or less, and 40.6% are negative and

significant at the 5% level or less. 27

Do the results differ by source or use of policy variation?

         Studies in the New Minimum Wage Research use different sources of identifying information.

Some use federal variation, with the effects differing across areas or workers. 28 Some use state variation



27
   For the median estimates, there is even less evidence of estimates becoming less negative in more
recent studies. Indeed, when we estimated a regression of the elasticity on the year, the coefficient
estimate was -0.010 (p-value = 0.040) ­ the opposite of the more recent estimates being less
negative/more positive. Also, Appendix Figure A2 adds to Figure 3 the range of estimates in each study
(when there is more than one estimate). This figure shows that the range is typically not large, and many
studies are summarized with a single estimate, so the medians give a good representation of the
evidence.
28
   The papers using federal variation most often use the variation induced by federal minimum wage
changes that have different impacts depending on prior state minimum wage changes (e.g., Deere et al.,
1995), but also sometimes use differences in the induced policy variation stemming from variation in
wages across other units of analysis (e.g., Thompson, 2009).


                                                      15
across many or most states. And some use narrower case-study approaches of one treated area vs. one

control area (or perhaps a synthetic control). Figures 4-6 display the evidence for each of these

categories of studies. Studies using federal or state variation yield evidence that is predominantly

associated with negative effects of minimum wages on employment, as is evident from Figures 4 and 5,

and the summary measures in Table 3. 29 There are not as many case studies. The mean and median

estimated elasticities are smaller in absolute value than for the federal and state studies, but the

differences are not large (see Figure 6). The distribution, too, indicates that the evidence is more

consistent with negative employment effects. However, there is a somewhat lower preponderance of

negative or negative and significant estimates; as shown in Table 3, 65.0% negative, 45.0% negative and

significant at the 10% level, and 40.0% negative and significant at the 5% level.

Do the results differ by the group or sector studied?

        All of the studies focus in some way or another on lower-skilled workers who are more likely to

be affected by the minimum wage. Many estimates are for teens or young adults, a smaller number are

for those with lower education levels, and an increasing number of studies are estimated for low-wage

industries (often using different data sources covering employers rather than workers/households);

these are usually the retail or restaurant sector, with some evidence for farming plus a smattering of

other industries. The logic behind these cuts of the data is that if there are employment effects of the

minimum wage, they should be apparent for lower-wage workers. In contrast, evidence on an absence

of employment effects for high-wage workers would not be informative.

        Finally, some studies use data on wages earned prior to minimum wage increases to identify

workers likely to be directly affected by increases in the minimum wage. Because a sizable share of

workers among teenagers, young adults, the less-educated, or in low-wage industries in fact earn more



29
   The state estimates do not include the studies using local minimum wages, whether alone (Dube et
al., 2007) or along with state variation (Gilyard and Podemska-Mikluch, 2020). The former is included in
the case studies.


                                                     16
than the minimum wage, these latter studies should best isolate the effects of minimum wages on

employment of those whose wages are potentially increased by a higher minimum wage. A potential

downside of this approach is it will tend to miss effects of the minimum wage on non-employment to

employment transitions. 30

        Figure 7 shows the results for estimates for teens. This graph largely mirrors the overall graph

(Figure 1), given the large number of estimates for teens, and is strongly consistent with adverse

employment effects. Figure 8, for young adults, is very similar. Indeed, the mean and median elasticity

estimates are a bit larger (negative). Although the young adult age range includes teenagers, this finding

is striking because it suggests that the evidence of adverse employment effects is by no means limited to

teens. Figure 9, for the less-educated, provides more evidence along these lines, pointing to

predominantly negative effects, with larger negative mean (-0.242) and median (-0.177) estimates.

        The evidence differs for estimates for low-wage industries. Figure 10 appears a good deal more

balanced between negative and positive estimates than the other figures, and the mean and median

elasticities are much closer to zero and on either side of zero (0.023 and -0.029, respectively). This is

also reflected in the percentages of negative and negative and significant estimates in Table 3. While the

percent negative remains above two-thirds (66.7%), this percentage is lower than for teens, young

adults, or the less educated, and the percentages negative and significant at the 10% or 5% level are

notably lower.

        Why are the results so different for younger workers or less-educated workers vs. lower-wage

industries? We believe there are two components to this explanation. First, the share of workers

affected by the minimum wage is a good deal higher for teenagers and for young adults than for retail

trade and farming, and the share is lower, relative to teenagers, for restaurants (once we exclude tipped



30
  This likely results in understating the overall adverse employment effects. See, for example, the
estimated low-wage hiring elasticity of -0.49 in Gopalan et al. (forthcoming), and evidence that higher
minimum wages lower hires in Dube et al. (2016).


                                                     17
workers, which likely gets closer to the limited-service or fast-food sector typically considered in the

studies). This is illustrated in Figure 11, where we use data from the combined CPS ORG files for 2010

(the approximate midpoint of the publication dates of the papers covered). We do this for the 36 states

where the federal minimum wage was binding, so that the data across states are more comparable.

Using either the prevailing $7.25 minimum wage, or a hypothetical $10 minimum wage, we see that the

share at or below the minimum wage is highest for teens, lowest for retail and farming, and about the

same for young adults and restaurants, and for those with less than a high school degree.

        Second, labor-labor substitution may be important, with employers substituting away from the

lowest-skilled workers and toward other workers when the minimum wage increases. The scope for

labor-labor substitution is likely lower when a group is defined by skill (e.g., those with low education) as

then there are fewer other workers in the same group to whom employers could substitute, and they

are more likely to substitute towards differentially-skilled workers. The possibilities for labor-labor

substitution are likely intermediate for young workers, who are on average lower skilled but among

whom there is more heterogeneity by skill. But labor-labor substitution is likely more important when

we look at an industry, where the substitution is within the category, rather than across categories ­ for

example, substituting more-skilled for less-skilled restaurant workers. 31

        As further evidence that labor-labor substitution is important, Figure 12 shows the results for

the studies of workers directly affected by a higher minimum wage, for whom there is, by definition,

limited or no possibility for labor-labor substitution. This graph gives a clear indication of negative

employment effects. All estimates but one are negative, and all of the negative estimates but one are




31
  For recent evidence on that higher minimum wages induce labor-labor substitution towards more-
educated workers, including within the same firms, see Clemens et al. (2020), and other evidence of
labor-labor substitution within firms in Fairris and Bujunda (2008). There can also be labor-labor
substitution within age categories; for evidence for teens, see Neumark and Wascher (1996a).


                                                     18
significant at the 5% level. And the mean estimate is much larger negative (-0.270), while the median is

closer to that for low-skilled groups (-0.130). 32

        What the combined evidence from the studies classified this way indicates is that the evidence

of negative employment effects is stronger for specific workers than specific industries; more so when

the groups are defined by skill; and more so for the lowest-skilled and lowest-wage workers. If we did

not see evidence of stronger disemployment effects for young or less-educated workers, or those

directly affected by minimum wage increases, then the industry studies might not mask gross job loss

for some groups that is larger than net job loss in the industry. But the opposite appears to be the case,

consistent with the weaker evidence for industry studies arising from labor-labor substitution. However,

strong labor-labor substitution in the industry studies implies that there can be relatively weak overall

employment effects for an industry but larger job losses for specific groups of workers in that industry.

Employment elasticities and other parameters

        Our analysis captures and describes employment elasticities reported in the research literature

on the effects of minimum wages. This poses two potential limitations. First, not every employment

elasticity covered in this study is strictly comparable. We have already discussed the fact that the

elasticities are estimated for different subsets of workers for whom the effects might differ ­ for

example, because the minimum wage bites higher in the distribution, or there are more substitution

possibilities. Estimates can also differ because of the comparison group used in the identification

strategy (for example, how narrowly defined is the group relative to which employment effects for


32
   Note that, in interpreting the estimated employment elasticities for directly-affected workers, we
should not assume that the elasticity of the wage with respect to the minimum wage is necessarily near
1 (which would imply that these employment elasticities are also "own-wage elasticities" (the
employment elasticity with respect to the minimum wage change divided by the wage elasticity with
respect to the minimum wage). First, when the minimum wage increases, there can be many workers
earning above the old minimum wage but below the new minimum wage (see, e.g., Clemens and Wither
(2019, Figure 3)), implying a wage elasticity less than 1. Second, there are other sources of wage growth
­ especially experience ­ that will increase wages across even short time periods. As an example,
Neumark et al. (2004) account for these effects and estimate wage elasticities for those very close to the
minimum wage of about 0.4.


                                                     19
directly-affected workers are measured). In addition, the parameter estimated sometimes differs. For

example, Bailey et al. (forthcoming) and Derenoncourt and Montialoux (forthcoming) report own-wage

elasticities, and Meer and West (2016) report an elasticity of employment growth with respect to the

minimum wage.

        Second, other measures of the employment effects of the minimum wage could be more

informative about particular policy questions. For example, the own-wage elasticity tells us more about

how minimum wages are likely to affect incomes of low-skilled workers, and employment effects or

own-wage elasticity for workers in low-income families would tell us more about the effects of minimum

wages on these families' incomes. 33

        However, there is far less research that captures measures like these across a wide range of

studies. Our paper is addressed to the long-standing and most prominent research and policy debate

about minimum wages: Does a higher minimum wage reduce employment? Additional efforts to obtain

more evidence on these measures of the effects of minimum wages, and to synthesize that evidence,

would also be valuable. 34

VI. Conclusions

        We set out to take stock of the U.S. minimum wage literature on employment effects beginning

with the New Minimum Wage Research in 1992, which moved towards more rigorous identification of

minimum wage effects than the earlier, predominantly time-series data. We were motivated not by the

conflicting studies in this literature ­ and indeed in this paper we do not focus on adjudicating between

these conflicting studies. Rather, we were motivated by the sharply different summaries of what this

literature says, because, surprisingly, economists seem to not even agree on which way the entire set of



33
  See, e.g., the discussion in Neumark and Wascher (2008, Chapters 3 and 5).
34
  However, this is not always easy. For example, Jardim et al. (forthcoming, Figure 5) show a substantial
negative impact of the Seattle minimum wage on low-wage labor market entry, and it is hard to
estimate wage effects for those who did enter the labor market to compare with the impact of this
reduced entry.


                                                    20
studies points. Does the research literature by and large establish that there are no employment effects,

as some suggest? Is the evidence roughly balanced between finding disemployment effects or not? Or

does the research point predominantly to job loss for lower-skilled workers from a higher minimum

wage? We answer these questions by summarizing the preferred estimates of authors of the studies in

this literature. Our key conclusions are as follows:

        First, there is a clear preponderance of negative estimates in the literature. In our data, 78.9% of

the estimated employment elasticities are negative, 53.9% are negative and significant at the 10% level

or better, and 46.1% are negative and significant at the 5% level or better.

        Second, there is some difference across studies depending on the minimum wage variation

used, with the studies using state variation across many states, or federal variation, predominantly

pointing to negative effects on employment, while the case studies relying on narrowing comparisons

still point in this direction, but more weakly.

        The more important variation stems from differences across studies in the set of workers for

whom employment effects are estimated. There is strong and consistent evidence of negative

employment effects for teens, young adults, the less-educated, and directly-affected (low-wage)

workers, with the estimated elasticities generally larger for the less-educated than for teens and young

adults, and larger still for directly-affected workers. In contrast, the evidence from studies of low-wage

industries is less one-sided, with a smaller percentage of negative or negative and significant estimates.

        Overall, we conclude that the preferred estimates of authors of studies evaluating the

employment effects of minimum wages in the United States, since the advent of the New Minimum

Wage Research in 1992, paint a clear picture that is at odds with how this research is often summarized.

In its totality, this body of evidence and conclusions points strongly toward negative effects of minimum

wages on employment of less-skilled workers.

        The exception is for the industry studies. However, this is likely because there is far greater

scope for labor-labor substitution within industries than within groups of workers who are lower-skilled


                                                       21
on average, and even more so for groups of workers that are uniformly lower skilled. These industry

studies may tell us that it is not so clear whether employment in an industry declines when the

minimum wage increases. But this does not in any way rule out larger gross employment declines for

the less-skilled workers in those industries; and the clearer evidence of employment declines for less-

skilled workers suggest this is exactly what is going on. In other words, a good deal of the evidence that

is less consistent with disemployment effects comes from industry studies, but this may be the evidence

that is least relevant to the question of whether some low-skilled workers lose their jobs when the

minimum wage increases. Conversely, the evidence is much clearer that employment does decline

among low-skilled workers when the minimum wage increases ­ and the most relevant evidence may be

that for directly-affected workers.

        To be clear, the evidence is not unambiguous. There are studies, including those of low-skilled

workers, that do not find employment effects that are significantly different from zero, and/or with

estimates that are near zero or sometimes even positive. But concluding that the research evidence as a

whole fails to find disemployment effects of minimum wages requires discarding or ignoring most of the

evidence on low-skilled workers or relying on the industry studies where labor-labor substitution is more

likely to mask job loss among the least-skilled workers. 35

        There are other sources readers can consult for discussions of whether a particular subset of

studies is most likely to be correct or incorrect. In particular, we would recommend Neumark and

Wascher (2007), Dube et al. (2010), Allegretto et al. (2011), Neumark et al. (2014a, 2014b), Schmitt

(2015), Allegretto et al. (2017), Neumark and Wascher (2017), Clemens (2019), and Neumark (2019).



35
   Alternatively, one could believe that, despite the clear preponderance of negative estimates,
publication bias is so severe that the true estimate is zero or even positive. We have three responses to
this potential argument. First, we have argued that it is difficult to convincingly test for publication bias
in the minimum wage literature. Second, the evidence on publication bias in the minimum wage
literature that does exist does not support this conclusion. Third, this paper responds to conflicting
summaries of the published estimates of the employment effects of minimum wages, not claims about
publication bias.


                                                     22
Based on these evaluations (or new ones), economists and others may decide that in fact the best

evidence indicates that minimum wages do not reduce employment of less-skilled workers in the United

States. But our analysis shows clearly that most of the evidence indicates the opposite ­ that minimum

wages reduce low-skilled employment. It is incumbent on anyone arguing that research supports the

opposite conclusion to explain why most of the studies are wrong.




                                                  23
                                               References


Aaronson, Daniel, Eric French, Isaac Sorkin, and Ted To. 2018. "Industry Dynamics and the Minimum
   Wage: A Putty-Clay Approach." International Economic Review, Vol. 59, No. 1, pp. 51-84.
Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz, and David N. Margolis. 1999. "Minimum Wages and Employment in
   France and the United States." NBER Working Paper No. 6996.
Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz, Thomas Lemieux, and David N. Margolis. 2000a. "Minimum Wages
   and Youth Employment in France and the United States." In David Blanchflower and Richard
   Freeman, eds. Youth Employment and Joblessness in Advanced Countries, pp. 427-72. Chicago:
   University of Chicago Press.
Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz, David N. Margolis, and Thomas Phillipon. 2000b. "The Tail of Two
   Countries: Minimum Wages and Employment in France and the United States." Institute for the
   Study of Labor (IZA) Discussion Paper No. 203.
Addison, John T., McKinley L. Blackburn, and Chad D. Cotti. 2009. "Do Minimum Wages Raise
   Employment? Evidence from the U.S. Retail-Trade Sector." Labour Economics, Vol. 16, pp. 397-408.
Addison, John T., McKinley L. Blackburn, and Chad D. Cotti. 2012. "The Effect of Minimum Wages on
   Labour Market Outcomes: County-Level Estimates from the Restaurant-and-Bar Sector." British
   Journal of Industrial Relations, Vol. 30, No. 3, pp. 412-35.
Addison, John T., McKinley L. Blackburn, and Chad D. Cotti. 2013. "Minimum Wage Increases in a
   Recessionary Environment." Labour Economics, Vol. 23, pp. 30-9.
Addison, John T., McKinley L. Blackburn, and Chad D. Cotti. 2015. "On the Robustness of Minimum Wage
   Effects: Geographically-Disparate Trends and Job Growth Equations." IZA Journal of Labor Policy,
   4(24): online.
Addison, John T., and Orgul Demet Ozturk. 2012. "Minimum Wages, Labor Market Institutions, and
   Female Employment: A Cross-Country Analysis." ILR Review, Vol. 65, No. 4, pp. 779-809.
Allegretto, Sylvia A., Arindrajit Dube, and Michael Reich. 2009. "Spatial Heterogeneity and Minimum
    Wages: Employment Estimates for Teens Using Cross-State Commuting Zones." Institute for
    Research on Labor and Employment. https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1x99m65f.
Allegretto, Sylvia A., Arindrajit Dube, and Michael Reich. 2011. "Do Minimum Wages Really Reduce Teen
    Employment? Accounting for Heterogeneity and Selectivity in State Panel Data." Industrial Relations,
    Vol. 50, No. 2, pp. 205-40.
Allegretto, Sylvia A., Arindrajit Dube, Michael Reich, and Ben Zipperer. 2017. "Credible Research Designs
    for Minimum Wage Studies." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 70, No. 3, pp. 559-92.
Andrews, Isaiah, and Maximilian Kasy. 2019. "Identification and Correction for Publication Bias."
   American Economic Review, Vol. 109, No. 8, pp. 2766-94.
Azar, José, et al. 2019. "Minimum Wage Employment Effects and Labor Market Concentration." NBER
    Working Paper No. 26101.
Bailey, Martha J., John DiNardo, and Bryan A. Stuart. "The Economic Impact of a High National Minimum
    Wage: Evidence from the 1966 Fair Labor Standards Act." Forthcoming in Journal of Labor
    Economics.
Baker, Michael, Dwayne Benjamin, and Shuchita Stanger. 1999. "The Highs and Lows of the Minimum
   Wage Effect: A Time-Series Cross-Section Study of the Canadian Law." Journal of Labor Economics,
   Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 318-50.
Baskaya, Yusuf Soner, and Yona Rubinstein. 2015. "Using Federal Minimum Wages to Identify the
   Impact of Minimum Wages on Employment and Earnings across U.S. States." Central Bank of
   Turkey.
Bazen, Stephen, and Julie Le Gallo. 2009. "The State-Federal Dichotomy in the Effects of Minimum
   Wages on Teenage Employment in the United States." Economics Letters, Vol. 105, pp. 267-9.
Bazen, Stephen, and Velayoudom Marimoutou. 2002. "Looking for a Needle in a Haystack? A Re-
   examination of the Time Series Relationship between Teenage Employment and Minimum Wages in
   the United States." Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 64, Supplement, pp. 699-725.
Bazen, Stephen, and Velayoudom Marimoutou. 2018. "Federal Minimum Wage Hikes Do Reduce
   Teenage Employment. A Replication Study of Bazen & Marimoutou." International Journal for Re-
   Views of Empirical Economics, 5: online.
Belman, Dale L., and Paul Wolfson. 2010. "The Effect of Legislated Minimum Wage Increases on
   Employment and Hours: A Dynamic Analysis." LABOUR, Vol. 24, No. 1, pp. 1-25.
Bernstein, Jared, and John Schmitt. 1998. "Making Work Pay: The Impact of the 1996-97 Minimum
   Wage Increase." Washington, DC: Economic Policy Institute.
   https://www.epi.org/publication/studies_stmwp/.
Bernstein, Jared, and John Schmitt. 2000. "The Impact of the Minimum Wage: Policy Lifts Wages,
   Maintains Wage Floor for Low-Wage Labor Market." Washington, DC: Economic Policy Institute.
   https://www.epi.org/publication/briefingpapers_min_wage_bp/.
Brown, Charles, Curtis Gilroy, and Andrew Kohen. 1982. "The Effect of the Minimum Wage on
   Employment and Unemployment." Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 20, No. 2, pp. 487-528.
Brummund, Peter, and Michael R. Strain. 2020. "Does Employment Respond Differently to Minimum
   Wage Increases in the Presence of Inflation Indexing." Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 55, No. 4,
   pp. 999-1024.
Burkhauser, Richard V., Kenneth A. Couch, and David C. Wittenburg. 2000a. "A Reassessment of the
   New Economics of the Minimum Wage Literature with Monthly Data from the Current Population
   Survey." Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 18, No. 4, pp. 653-680.
Burkhauser, Richard V., Kenneth A. Couch, and David C. Wittenburg. 2000b. "Who Minimum Wage
   Increases Bite: An Analysis Using Monthly Data from the SIPP and the CPS." Southern Economic
   Journal, Vol. 67, No. 1, pp. 16-40.
Campolieti, Michele. "Does an Increase in the Minimum Wage Decrease Employment? A Meta-Analysis
   of Canadian Studies." Forthcoming in Canadian Public Policy.
Card, David. 1992a. "Using Regional Variation in Wages to Measure the Effects of the Federal Minimum
   Wage." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 46, No. 1, pp. 22-37.
Card, David. 1992b. "Do Minimum Wages Reduce Employment? A Case Study of California, 1987-1989."
   Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 46, No. 1, pp. 38-54.
Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 1994. "Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study of the Fast-
   Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania." American Economic Review, Vol. 84, No. 4, pp. 772-
   93.
Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 1995. "Time-Series Minimum Wage Studies: A Meta-analysis."
   American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 85, No. 2, pp. 238-43.
Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 2000. "Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study of the Fast-
   Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania: Reply." American Economic Review, Vol. 90, No. 5,
   pp. 1397-420.
Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 1995. Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of the Minimum
   Wage. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 2015. Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of the Minimum
   Wage. Twentieth Anniversary Edition. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Cengiz, Doruk, Arindrajit Dube, Attila Lindner, and Ben Zipperer. 2019. "The Effect of Minimum Wages
   on Low-Wage Jobs." Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 134, No. 3, pp. 1405-54.
Chapman, Jeff. 2004. "Employment and the Minimum Wage: Evidence from Recent State Labor Market
   Trends." Washington, DC: Economic Policy Institute Briefing Paper.
   https://www.epi.org/publication/briefingpapers_bp150/.
Clemens, Jeffrey. 2019. "Making Sense of the Minimum Wage: A Roadmap for Navigating Recent
   Research." CATO Institute, Policy Analysis No. 867. https://www.cato.org/publications/policy-
   analysis/making-sense-minimum-wage-roadmap-navigating-recent-research.
Clemens, Jeffrey, Lisa B. Kahn, and Jonathan Meer. 2020. "Dropouts Need Not Apply? The Minimum
   Wage and Skill Upgrading." NBER Working Paper No. 27090.
Clemens, Jeffrey and Michael R. Strain. 2018. "The Short-Run Employment Effects of Recent Minimum
   Wage Changes: Evidence from the American Community Survey." Contemporary Economic Policy,
   Vol. 36, No. 4, pp. 711-22.
Clemens, Jeffrey, and Michael Wither. 2019. "The Minimum Wage and the Great Recession: Evidence of
   Effects on the Employment and Income Trajectories of Low-Skilled Workers." Journal of Public
   Economics, Vol. 170, pp. 53-67.
Couch, Kenneth A., and David C. Wittenburg. 2001. "The Response of Hours of Work to Increases in the
   Minimum Wage." Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 68, No. 1, pp. 171-77.
Currie, Janet, and Bruce Fallick. 1996. "The Minimum Wage and the Employment of Youth: Evidence
    from the NLSY." Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 31, No. 2, pp. 404-28.
Deere, Donald, Kevin M. Murphy, and Finis Welch. 1995. "Employment and the 1990-1991 Minimum-
   Wage Hike." American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 85, No. 2, pp. 232-37.
Derenoncourt, Ellora, and Clair Montialoux. "Minimum Wages and Racial Inequality." Forthcoming in
   Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Dodson, Marvin E. 2002. "The Impact of the Minimum Wage in West Virginia: A Test of the Low-Wage-
   Area Theory." Journal of Labor Research, Vol. 23, No. 1, pp. 25-40.
Doucouliagos, Hristos, and T.D. Stanley. 2009. "Publication Selection Bias in Minimum-Wage Research?
   A Meta-Regression Analysis." British Journal of Industrial Relations, Vol. 47, No. 2, pp. 406-28.
Dube, Arindrajit. 2019. "Impacts of Minimum Wages: Review of the International Evidence." University
   of Massachusetts, Amherst. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/review-of-the-
   international-evidence-on-the-impacts-of-minimum-wages/review-of-the-international-evidence-
   on-the-impacts-of-minimum-wages-terms-of-reference.
Dube, Arindrajit, T. William Lester, and Michael Reich. 2010. "Minimum Wage Effects across State
   Borders: Estimates Using Contiguous Counties." Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 92, No. 4,
   pp. 945-64.
Dube, Arindrajit, T. William Lester, and Michael Reich. 2016. "Minimum Wage Shocks, Employment
   Flows, and Labor Market Frictions." Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 34, No. 3, pp. 663-704.
Dube, Arindrajit, Suresh Naidu, and Michael Reich. 2007. "The Economic Effects of a Citywide Minimum
   Wage." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 60, No. 4, pp. 522-43.
Dube, Arindrajit, and Ben Zipperer. 2015. "Pooling Multiple Case Studies Using Synthetic Controls: An
   Application to Minimum Wage Policies." IZA Discussion Paper No. 8944.
Ehrenberg, Ronald G. 1992. "New Minimum Wage Research: Symposium Introduction. Industrial and
    Labor Relations Review, Vol. 46., No. 1, pp. 3-5.
Evans, William N., and Mark Turner. 1995. "Minimum Wage Effects on Employment and School
   Enrollment: Comment." University of Maryland.
Even, William E., and David A. Macpherson. 2014. "The Effect of the Tipped Minimum Wage on
   Employees in the U.S. Restaurant Industry." Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 80, No. 2, pp. 633-55.
Even, William E., and David A. Macpherson. 2019. "Where Does the Minimum Wage Bite Hardest in
   California." Journal of Labor Research, Vol. 40, pp. 1-23.
Fairris, David, and Leon Fernandez Bujunda. 2008. "The Dissipation of Minimum Wage Gains for Workers
    through Labor-Labor Substitution." Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 75, No. 2, pp. 473-96.
Fiscal Policy Institute. 2004. "State Minimum Wages and Employment in Small Businesses."
    http://fiscalpolicy.org/state-minimum-wages-and-employment-in-small-businesses.
Gilyard, Shaun, and Marta Podemska-Mikluch. 2020. "Effects of Local, State, and Federal Minimum Wage
    on Employment Growth among Teenagers in the Restaurant Industry." International Advances in
    Economic Research, Vol. 26, pp. 89-101.
Gittings, R. Kaj, and Ian M. Schmutte. 2016. "Getting Handcuffs on an Octopus: Minimum Wages,
    Employment, and Turnover." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 69, No. 5, pp. 1133-70.
Glass, Gene. V. 1976. "Primary, Secondary, and Meta-Analysis of Research." Educational Researcher, Vol.
    5, No. 10, pp. 3-8.
Gopalan, Radhakrishnan, et al. "State Minimum Wages, Employment, and Wage Spillovers: Evidence
   from Administrative Data." Forthcoming in Journal of Labor Economics.
Gorry, Aspen, and Jeremy J. Jackson. 2016. "A Note on the Nonlinear Effect of Minimum Wage
   Increases." Contemporary Economic Policy, Vol. 35, No. 1, pp. 53-61.
Hirsch, Barry T., Bruce E. Kaufman, and Tetyana Zelenska. 2015. "Minimum Wage Channels of
    Adjustment." Industrial Relations, Vol. 52, No. 2, pp. 199-239.
Hoffman, Saul D. 2014. "Employment Effects of the 2009 Minimum Wage Increase: New Evidence from
    State-Based Comparisons of Workers by Skill Level." B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, Vol.
    14, No. 3, pp. 1-27.
Hoffman, Saul D. 2016. "Are the Effects of Minimum Wage Increases Always Small? A Reanalysis of
    Sabia, Burkhauser, and Hansen." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 69, No. 2, pp. 295-311.
Hoffman, Saul D., and Diane M. Trace. 2009. "NJ and PA Once Again: What Happened to Employment
    When the PA-NJ Minimum Wage Differential Disappeared?" Eastern Economic Journal, Vol. 35, pp.
    115-28.
Hunt, Morton. 1997. How Science Takes Stock: The Story of Meta-Analysis. New York: Russell Sage
   Foundation.
Kandilov, Amy M.G., and Ivan T. Kandilov. 2019. "The Minimum Wage and Seasonal Employment:
   Evidence from the U.S. Agricultural Sector." Journal of Regional Science, Vol. 60, No. 4, pp. 1-16.
Katz, Lawrence F., and Alan B. Krueger. 1992. "The Effect of the Minimum Wage on the Fast Food
    Industry." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 46, No. 1, pp. 6-21.
Keil, Manfred, Donald Robertson, and James Symons. 2001. "Minimum Wages and Employment." CEPR
     Working Paper No. 497.
Keil, Manfred, Donald Robertson, and James Symons. 2009. "Univariate Regressions of Employment on
     Minimum Wages in the Panel of U.S. States." Claremont McKenna College.
Kim, Hang Soon, and SooCheong Jang. 2020. "Does a Minimum Wage Increase Endanger Restaurant
   Jobs? Examining the Role of Franchising." International Journal of Hospitality Management, Vol. 84.
Kim, Taeil, and Lowell J. Taylor. 1995. "The Employment Effect in Retail Trade of California's 1988
   Minimum Wage Increase." Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, Vol. 13, No. 2, pp. 175-82.
Krugman, Paul. 2015. "Liberals and Wages." New York Times, July 17.
   https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/17/opinion/paul-krugman-liberals-and-wages.html.
Liu, Shanshan, Thomas J. Hyclak, and Krishna Regmi. 2016. "Impact of the Minimum Wage on Youth
     Labor Markets." LABOUR, Vol. 30, No. 1, pp. 18-37.
Lordan, Grace, and David Neumark. 2018. "People versus Machines: The Impact of Minimum Wages on
    Automatable Jobs." Labour Economics, Vol. 52, pp 40-53.
Manning, Alan. 2021. "The Elusive Employment Effect of the Minimum Wage." Journal of Economic
   Perspectives, Vol. 35, No. 1, pp. 3-26.
Meer, Jonathan, and Jeremy West. 2016 "Effects of the Minimum Wage on Employment Dynamics."
   Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 51, No. 2, pp. 500-22.
Michl, Thomas R. 2000. "Can Rescheduling Explain the New Jersey Minimum Wage Studies." Eastern
   Economic Journal, Vol. 26, No. 3, pp. 265-76.
Monras, Joan. 2019. "Minimum Wages and Spatial Equilibrium: Theory and Evidence." Journal of Labor
  Economics, Vol. 37, No. 3, pp. 853-904.
Neumark, David. 2001. "The Employment Effects of Minimum Wages: Evidence from a Prespecified
   Research Design." Industrial Relations, Vol. 40, No. 1, pp. 121-44.
Neumark, David. 2019. "The Econometrics and Economics of the Employment Effects of Minimum
   Wages: Getting from Known Unknowns to Known Knowns." German Economic Review, Vol. 20, No.
   3, pp. 293-329.
Neumark, David, and Olena Nizalova. 2007. "Minimum Wage Effects in the Longer Run." Journal of
   Human Resources, Vol. 42, No. 2, pp. 435-52.
Neumark, David, J.M. Ian Salas, and William Wascher. 2014a. "Revisiting the Minimum Wage-
   Employment Debate: Throwing Out the Baby with the Bathwater?" Industrial and Labor Relations
   Review, Vol. 67, Supplement, pp. 608-48.
Neumark, David, J.M. Ian Salas, and William Wascher. 2014b. "More on Recent Evidence on the Effects
   of Minimum Wages in the United States." IZA Journal of Labor Policy, 3(24): online.
Neumark, David, Mark Schweitzer, and William Wascher. 2004. "Minimum Wage Effects Throughout the
   Wage Distribution." Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 39, No. 2, pp. 425-50.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 1992. "Employment Effects of Minimum and Subminimum
    Wages: Panel Data on State Minimum Wage Laws." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 46,
    No. 1, pp. 55-81.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 1994. "Employment Effects of Minimum and Subminimum
   Wages: Reply to Card, Katz, and Krueger." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 47, No. 3, pp.
   497-512.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 1995a. "Minimum Wage Effects on Employment and School
   Enrollment." Journal of Business and Economics Statistics, Vol. 13, No. 2, pp. 199-206.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 1995b. "Minimum Wage Effects on School and Work Transitions
   of Teenagers." American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 85, No. 2, pp. 244-49.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 1996a. "The Effects of Minimum Wages on Teenage
   Employment and Enrollment: Evidence from Matched CPS Surveys." Research in Labor Economics,
   Vol. 15, pp. 25-63.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 1996b. "Minimum Wage Effects on Employment and School
   Enrollment: Reply to Evans and Turner." FEDS Working Paper 1996-28. Board of Governors of the
   Federal Reserve System.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2000. "The Effect of New Jersey's Minimum Wage Increase on
   Fast-Food Employment: A Reevaluation Using Payroll Records." American Economic Review, Vol. 90,
   No. 5, pp. 1362-96.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2002. "State-Level Estimates of Minimum Wage Effects: New
   Evidence and Interpretations from Disequilibrium Models." Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 37,
   No. 1, pp. 35-62.
Neumark, David, and William L. Wascher. 2003. "Minimum Wages and Skill Acquisition: Another Look at
   Schooling Effects." Economics of Education Review, Vol. 22, No. 1, pp. 1-10.
Neumark, David, and William L. Wascher. 2007. "Minimum Wages and Employment." Foundations and
   Trends in Microeconomics, Vol. 3, Nos. 1-2, pp. 1-182.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2008. Minimum Wages. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2011. "Does a Higher Minimum Wage Enhance the Effectiveness
   of the Earned Income Tax Credit." ILR Review, Vol. 64, No. 4, pp. 712-46.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2017. "Reply to Credible Research Designs for Minimum Wage
   Studies." ILR Review, Vol. 70, No. 3, pp. 593-609.
Orazem, Peter R., and J. Peter Mattila. 2002. "Minimum Wage Effects on Hours, Employment, and
   Number of Firms: The Iowa Case." Journal of Labor Research, Vol. 23, No. 1, pp. 3-23.
Orrenius, Pia M., and Madeline Zavodny. 2008. "The Effect of Minimum Wages on Immigrants'
    Employment and Earnings." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 61, No. 4, pp. 544-63.
Pabilonia, Sabrina W. 2002. "The Effects of Federal and State Minimum Wages Upon Teen Employment
   and Earnings." U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Partridge, Mark D., and Jamie S. Partridge. 1999. "Do Minimum Wage Hikes Reduce Employment? State-
    Level Evidence from the Low-Wage Retail Sector." Journal of Labor Research, Vol. 20, No. 3, pp. 393-
    413.
Persky, Joseph, and Ron Baiman. 2010. "Do State Minimum Wage Laws Reduce Employment? Mixed
    Messages from Fast Food Outlets in Illinois and Indiana." Journal of Regional Analysis & Policy, Vol.
    40, No. 2, pp. 132-42.
Potter, Nicholas. 2006a. "Earnings and Employment: The Effect of the Santa Fe Living Wage Ordinance in
    Santa Fe, New Mexico." University of New Mexico, Bureau of Business and Economic Research.
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/33022463_Earnings_and_Employment_The_Effects_of_
    the_Living_Wage_Ordinance_in_Santa_Fe_New_Mexico.
Potter, Nicholas. 2006b. "Measuring the Employment Impacts of the Living Wage Ordinance in Santa Fe,
    New Mexico." University of New Mexico, Bureau of Business and Economic Research.
    https://www.researchgate.net/publication/33022462_Measuring_the_Employment_Impacts_of_th
    e_Living_Wage_Ordinance_in_Santa_Fe_New_Mexico.
Powell, David. 2017. "Synthetic Control Estimation Beyond Case Studies: Does the Minimum Wage
   Reduce Employment?" RAND Labor & Population Working Paper WR-1142.
Reich, Michael. 2018. "Advice Letter on the Effects of a $15 Minimum Wage on New Jersey Agriculture."
    February 16.
Reich, Michael D. 2019. "Likely Effects of a $15 Federal Minimum Wage by 2024." Center on Wage and
    Employment Dynamics, February 7. https://irle.berkeley.edu/likely-effects-of-a-15-federal-
    minimum-wage-by-2024/.
Reich, Michael, and Peter Hall. 2001. "A Small Raise for the Bottom." Chapter 6 in The State of California
    Labor, 2001. Institute for Labor and Employment. https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9rb8m3vt.
Repetti, Toni, and Susan Roe. 2018. "Minimum Wage Change Effects on Restaurant Pricing and
   Employment." International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management, Vol. 30, No. 3, pp.
   1545-62.
Romich, Jennifer L., et al. 2020. "Employer Responses to a City-Level Minimum Wage Mandate: Early
   Evidence from Seattle." Urban Affairs Review, Vol. 56, No. 2, pp. 451-79.
Sabia, Joseph J. 2006. "The Effect of Minimum Wage Increases on Retail and Small Business
    Employment." Washington, DC: Employment Policies Institute. http://epionline.org/studies/r98/.
Sabia, Joseph J. 2008. "Minimum Wages and the Economic Well-Being of Single Mothers." Journal of
    Policy Analysis and Management, Vol. 27, No. 4, pp. 848-66.
Sabia, Joseph J. 2009a. "Identifying Minimum Wage Effects: New Evidence from Monthly CPS Data."
    Industrial Relations, Vol. 48, No. 2, pp. 311-28.
Sabia, Joseph J. 2009b. "The Effects of Minimum Wage Increases on Retail Employment and Hours: New
    Evidence from Monthly CPS Data." Journal of Labor Research, Vol. 30, pp. 75-97.
Sabia, Joseph J., Richard V. Burkhauser, and Benjamin Hansen. 2012. "Are the Effects of Minimum Wage
    Increases Always Small? New Evidence from a Case Study of New York." Industrial and Labor
    Relations Review, Vol. 65, No. 2, April, pp. 350-76.
Sabia, Joseph J., Richard V. Burkhauser, and Benjamin Hansen. 2016. "When Good Measurement Goes
    Wrong: New Evidence that New York's State Minimum Wage Reduced Employment." ILR Review,
    Vol. 69, No. 2, pp. 312-9.
Schmitt, John. 2015. "Explaining the Small Employment Effects of the Minimum Wage in the United
   States." Industrial Relations, Vol. 43, No. 4, pp. 547-81.
Singell, Larry D., and James R. Terborg. 2007. "Employment Effects of Two Northwest Minimum Wage
    Initiatives." Economic Inquiry, Vol. 45, No. 1, pp. 40-55.
Sorkin, Isaac. 2015. "Are There Longer-Run Effects of the Minimum Wage?" Review of Economic
    Dynamics, Vol. 18, No. 2, pp. 306-33.
Spriggs, William E., and Bruce W. Klein. 1994. "Raising the Floor: The Effects of the Minimum Wage on
    Low-Wage Workers." Washington DC: Economic Policy Institute.
    https://www.epi.org/publication/studies_1994_floor/.
Strain, Michael R. 2019. "A $15 Minimum Wage Will Harm Workers." Statement before the House
    Committee on Education and Labor, Feb. 7. https://www.aei.org/research-products/testimony/a-
    15-dollar-minimum-wage-will-harm-workers/.
Thompson, Jeffrey P. 2009. "Using Local Labor Market Data to Re-examine the Employment Effects of
   the Minimum Wage." ILR Review, Vol. 62, No. 3, pp. 343-66.
Totty, Evan. 2017. "The Effect of Minimum Wages on Employment: A Factor Model Approach."
    Economic Inquiry, Vol. 55, No. 4, October, pp. 1712-37.
Turner, Mark D., and Berna Demiralp. 2001. "Do Higher Minimum Wages Harm Minority and Inner City
    Teens?" Review of Black Political Economy, Vol. 28, No. 4, pp. 95-121.
Wang, Wuyi, Peter C.B. Phillips, and Liangjun Su. 2019. "The Heterogeneous Effects of the Minimum
  Wage on Employment." Economics Letters, Vol. 174, pp. 179-85.
Wellington, Alison. 1991. "Effects of the Minimum Wage on the Employment Status of Youths: An
   Update." Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 27-46.
Williams, Nicolas. 1993. "Regional Effects of the Minimum Wage on Teenage Employment." Applied
    Economics, Vol. 25, No. 12, pp. 1517-28.
Williams, Nicolas, and Jeffrey A. Mills. 2001. "The Minimum Wage and Teenage Employment: Evidence
    from Time Series." Applied Economics, Vol. 33, No. 3, pp. 285-300.
Wolfson, Paul, and Dale Belman. 2001. "The Minimum Wage, Employment, and the AS-IF Methodology:
   A Forecasting Approach to Evaluating the Minimum Wage." Empirical Economics, Vol. 26, pp. 487-
   514.
Wolfson, Paul, and Dale Belman. 2004. "The Minimum Wage: Consequences for Prices and Quantities in
   Low-Wage Labor Markets." Journal of Business and Economics Statistics, Vol. 22, No. 3, pp. 296-311.
Wolfson, Paul, and Dale Belman. 2019. "15 Years of Research on US Employment and the Minimum
   Wage." LABOUR, Vol. 33, No. 4, pp. 488-506.
Yelowitz, Aaron S. 2005. "How Did the $8.50 Citywide Minimum Wage Affect the Santa Fe Labor
    Market." Washington, DC: Employment Policies Institute, Washington, DC.
    https://epionline.org/studies/r91/.
Zavodny, Madeline. 2000. "The Effect of the Minimum Wage on Employment and Hours." Labour
   Economics, Vol. 7, No. 6, pp. 729-50.
Zipperer, Ben. 2019. "Gradually Raising the Minimum Wage to $15 would be Good for Workers, Good
    for Businesses, and Good for the Economy." Testimony Before the U.S. House of Representatives
    Committee on Education and Labor." February 7. https://www.epi.org/publication/minimum-wage-
    testimony-feb-2019/.
                                                        Table 1A: Included Paper List
              Author(s)             Year                                   Journal        Source     No. of Elas.
 Card                              1992a   ILR Review                                   N&W (2007)        1
 Card                              1992b   ILR Review                                   N&W (2007)        2
 Katz & Krueger                     1992   ILR Review                                   N&W (2007)        1
 Neumark & Wascher                  1992   ILR Review                                   N&W (2007)        4
 Williams                           1993   Applied Economics                            N&W (2007)        9
 Card & Krueger                     1994   American Economic Review                     N&W (2007)        1
 Neumark & Wascher                  1994   ILR Review                                   N&W (2007)        2
 Deere, Murphy, & Welch             1995   American Economic Review: P&P                N&W (2007)        6
 Kim & Taylor                       1995   Journal of Business & Economic Statistics    N&W (2007)        1
 Neumark & Wascher                 1995a   Journal of Business & Economic Statistics    N&W (2007)        1
 Currie & Fallick                   1996   Journal of Human Resources                   N&W (2007)        1
 Partridge & Partridge              1999   Journal of Labor Research                    N&W (2007)        2
 Burkhauser, Couch, & Wittenburg   2000a   Journal of Labor Economics                   N&W (2007)        1
 Burkhauser, Couch, & Wittenburg   2000b   Southern Economic Journal                    N&W (2007)        6
 Card & Krueger                     2000   American Economic Review                     N&W (2007)        1
 Michl                              2000   Eastern Economic Journal                     N&W (2007)        2
 Neumark & Wascher                  2000   American Economic Review                     N&W (2007)        1
 Zavodny                            2000   Labour Economics                             N&W (2007)        1
 Neumark                            2001   Industrial Relations                         N&W (2007)        4
 Dodson                             2002   Journal of Labor Research                    W&B (2019)        1
 Neumark & Wascher                  2002   Journal of Human Resources                   N&W (2007)        1
 Orazem & Mattila                   2002   Journal of Labor Research                    W&B (2019)        1
 Neumark, Schweitzer, & Wascher     2004   Journal of Human Resources                   W&B (2019)        3
 Dube, Naidu, & Reich               2007   ILR Review                                   W&B (2019)        1
 Neumark & Nizalova                 2007   Journal of Human Resources                   W&B (2019)        3
 Singell & Terborg                  2007   Economic Inquiry                             W&B (2019)        4
 Orrenius & Zavodny                 2008   ILR Review                                   W&B (2019)        2
 Sabia                              2008   Journal of Policy Analysis and Management    W&B (2019)        1
 Bazen & Le Gallo                   2009   Economics Letters                            N&W (2007)        1
 Hoffman & Trace                    2009   Eastern Economic Journal                     Web search        1
 Sabia                             2009a   Industrial Relations                         W&B (2019)        1
 Sabia                             2009b   Journal of Labor Research                    W&B (2019)        1
 Thompson                           2009   ILR Review                                   Web search        2
 Addison, Blackburn, & Cotti        2009   Labour Economics                             W&B (2019)        1
(continues)
                                                         Table 1A (continued): Included Paper List
                Author(s)                  Year                                       Journal                                      Source          No. of Elas.
 Dube, Lester, & Reich                     2010     Review of Economics and Statistics                                          W&B (2019)              1
 Persky & Baiman                           2010     Journal of Regional Analysis and Policy                                     W&B (2019)              1
 Allegretto, Dube, & Reich                 2011     Industrial Relations                                                        W&B (2019)              1
 Neumark & Wascher                         2011     ILR Review                                                                  W&B (2019)              6
 Addison, Blackburn, & Cotti               2012     British Journal of Industrial Relations                                     W&B (2019)              1
 Sabia, Burkhauser, & Hansen               2012     ILR Review                                                                  W&B (2019)              1
 Addison, Blackburn, & Cotti               2013     Labour Economics                                                            W&B (2019)              1
 Neumark, Salas, & Wascher                2014a     ILR Review                                                                  W&B (2019)              1
 Neumark, Salas, & Wascher                2014b IZA Journal of Labor Policy                                                     W&B (2019)              2
 Even & Macpherson                         2014     Southern Economic Journal                                                   W&B (2019)              2
 Hoffman                                   2014     The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy                            W&B (2019)              2
 Addison, Blackburn, & Cotti               2015     IZA Journal of Labor Policy                                                 Web search              1
 Hirsch, Kaufman, Zelenska                 2015     Industrial Relations                                                        Web search              1
 Dube, Lester, & Reich                     2016     Journal of Labor Economics                                                  W&B (2019)              2
 Gittings & Schmutte                       2016     ILR Review                                                                  W&B (2019)              2
 Hoffman                                   2016     ILR Review                                                                  Web search              2
 Liu, Hyclak, & Regmi                      2016     LABOUR                                                                      Web search              3
 Meer & West                               2016     Journal of Human Resources                                                  W&B (2019)              1
 Sabia, Burkhauser, & Hansen               2016     ILR Review                                                                  Web search              1
 Allegretto, Dube, Reich, & Zipperer       2017     ILR Review                                                                  W&B (2019)              1
 Totty                                     2017     Economic Inquiry                                                            W&B (2019)              2
 Aaronson, French, Sorkin, & To            2018     International Economic Review                                               Web search              1
 Cengiz, Dube, Lindner, & Zipperer         2019     Quarterly Journal of Economics                                              Web search              1
 Clemens & Wither                          2019     Journal of Public Economics                                                 W&B (2019)              1
 Even & Macpherson                         2019     Journal of Labor Research                                                   Web search              2
 Monras                                    2019     Journal of Labor Economics                                                  Web search              1
 Wang, Phillips, & Su                      2019     Economics Letters                                                           Web search              2
 Brummund & Strain                         2020     Journal of Human Resources                                                  Web search              2
 Gilyard & Podemska-Mikluch                2020     International Advances in Economic Research                                 Web search              1
 Kim & Jang                                2020     International Journal of Hospitality Management                             Web search              1
 Manning                                   2021     Journal of Economic Perspectives                                           Crowdsourced             2
 Bailey, DiNardo, & Stuart                Forth.    Journal of Labor Economics                                                 Crowdsourced             3
 Derenoncourt & Montialoux                Forth.    Quarterly Journal of Economics                                             Crowdsourced             2
 Gopalan, Hamilton, Kalda, & Sovich       Forth.    Journal of Labor Economics                                                  Web search              3
 Kandilov & Kandilov                      Forth.    Journal of Regional Science                                                 Web search              1
Note: N&W (2007) refers to all studies from Table 5.1 in Neumark and Wascher (2007). W&B (2019) refers to all studies included for meta-analysis in Wolfson
and Belman (2019). Papers were also identified via a web search involving searching Google Scholar for "Minimum Wage" covering the years 1992 to 2020. If the
candidate paper was not included in N&W (2007) or W&B (2019), it was subsequently read for mention of employment effects in the United States, excluding
hypotheticals (e.g., Repetti and Roe (2018)) or simulations (e.g., Gorry and Jackson (2016)). If the paper estimated minimum wage employment elasticities it was
retained. The search ended after 40 pages of results. Finally, a few were identified via crowdsourcing.
                                                                 Table 1B: Excluded Paper List
                   Author(s)                    Year                                              Journal/Source                                      Source
 Wellington                                     1991    Journal of Human Resources                                                                  N&W (2007)
 Spriggs & Klein                                1994    Economic Policy Institute Report                                                            N&W (2007)
 Card & Krueger                                 1995    American Economic Review: P&P                                                               N&W (2007)
 Evans & Turner                                 1995    Unpublished                                                                                 N&W (2007)
 Neumark & Wascher                             1995b    American Economic Review: P&P                                                               N&W (2007)
 Neumark & Wascher                             1996b    FEDS Working Paper                                                                          N&W (2007)
 Bernstein & Schmitt                            1998    Economic Policy Institute Brief                                                             N&W (2007)
 Abowd, Kramarz, & Margolis                     1999    NBER Working Paper                                                                          N&W (2007)
 Abowd, Kramarz, Lemieux, & Margolis           2000a    NBER Volume: Youth Employment and Joblessness in Advanced Countries                         N&W (2007)
 Abowd, Kramarz, Margolis, & Philippon         2000b    IZA Discussion Paper                                                                        N&W (2007)
 Bernstein & Schmitt                            2000    Economic Policy Institute Brief                                                             N&W (2007)
 Couch & Wittenburg                             2001    Southern Economic Journal                                                                   N&W (2007)
 Keil, Robertson, & Symons                      2001    Discussion Paper                                                                            N&W (2007)
 Reich & Hall                                   2001    UC Institute for Labor and Employment                                                       N&W (2007)
 Turner & Demiralp                              2001    Review of Black Political Economy                                                           N&W (2007)
 Williams & Mills                               2001    Applied Economics                                                                           N&W (2007)
 Wolfson & Belman                               2001    Empirical Economics                                                                         N&W (2007)
 Bazen & Marimoutou                             2002    Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics                                                 W&B (2019)
 Pabilonia                                      2002    Working Paper                                                                               N&W (2007)
 Neumark & Wascher                              2003    Economics of Education Review                                                               N&W (2007)
 Chapman                                        2004    Economic Policy Institute Brief                                                             N&W (2007)
 Fiscal Policy Institute                        2004    Fiscal Policy Institute Working Paper                                                       N&W (2007)
 Wolfson & Belman                               2004    Journal of Business & Economic Statistics                                                   N&W (2007)
 Yelowitz                                       2005    Employment Policies Institute Report                                                        N&W (2007)
 Potter                                        2006a    UNM, Bureau of Business and Economic Research                                               N&W (2007)
 Potter                                        2006b    UNM, Bureau of Business and Economic Research                                               W&B (2019)
 Sabia                                          2006    Employment Policies Institute Report                                                        N&W (2007)
 Allegretto, Dube, & Reich                      2009    IRLE Working Paper                                                                          W&B (2019)
 Keil, Robertson, & Symons                      2009    Robert Day School of Economics and Finance Research Paper                                   W&B (2019)
 Belman & Wolfson                               2010    LABOUR                                                                                      W&B (2019)
 Addison & Ozturk                               2012    ILR Review                                                                                  W&B (2019)
 Baskaya & Rubinstein                           2015    Unpublished                                                                                 Web search
 Dube & Zipperer                                2015    IZA Discussion Paper                                                                        W&B (2019)
 Powell                                         2017    SSRN Working Paper                                                                          W&B (2019)
 Bazen & Marimoutou                             2018    International Journal for Re-Views in Empirical Economics                                  From authors
 Clemens & Strain                               2018    Contemporary Economic Policy                                                                Web search
 Lordan & Neumark                               2018    Labour Economics                                                                            Web search
 Rinz & Voorheis                                2018    CARRA Working Paper Series                                                                 Crowdsourced
 Romich et al.                                  2020    Urban Affairs Review                                                                        Web search
 Jardim et al.                                 Forth.   American Economic Journal: Economic Policy                                                 Crowdsourced
Note: See notes to Table 1A. The studies listed here failed to meet our inclusion criteria. The most common reasons for exclusion were that the study was not
published at the time of creating this list, it used a time-series methodology, it did not estimate the relationship between the minimum wage and employment, or
the study used cross-country minimum wage variation. Note that one paper was provided by authors in response to our survey about a different paper.
                         Table 2: Characteristics of Estimates
                                                                                  Low           Low-wage        Directly-affected
                                                  Teens      Young adults      education         industries          workers
                           Federal variation        17             20              7                 1                  0
                            State variation         23             37              4                16                  7
                             Case studies            3              4              3                10                  0
                         Note: Teens are generally 16-19. Young adults are generally 16-24. Low education is generally high
                         school dropouts. Low-wage industries are retail, restaurant, hotels, or farming. The definition of directly-
                         affected workers varies across studies. The total number of estimates in the table exceeds our total
                         number of estimates (121) because some estimates fit into more than one category (e.g., Neumark
                         (2001) looks at low-education young adults).



 Table 3: Summary of Estimates from Different Figures
               Figure                % negative         % negative, p < .1   % negative, p < .05      % positive     % positive, p < .1   % positive, p < .05
  1: All                                 78.9                  53.9                46.1                 21.1                5.5                  3.9
  3: Median study estimates              75.4                  49.3                40.6                 24.6                7.2                  4.3
  4: Federal variation                   82.4                  52.9                47.1                 17.6                2.9                  0.0
  5: State variation                     80.6                  56.9                47.2                 19.4                4.2                  4.2
  6: Case studies                        65.0                  45.0                40.0                 35.0               15.0                  10.0
  7: Teens                               79.5                  56.8                40.9                 20.5                2.3                  2.3
  8: Young adults                        82.3                  56.5                45.2                 17.7                1.6                  1.6
  9: Less educated                       78.6                  50.0                50.0                 21.4                7.1                  7.1
  10: Low-wage industries                66.7                  33.3                33.3                 33.3               18.5                  11.1
  12: Directly-affected workers          75.0                  75.0                62.5                 25.0                0.0                  0.0
Note: Three estimates that are exactly zero are classified as positive.
Figure 1: Preferred Elasticity Estimates




Note: The dashed and dotted lines show the mean (-0.148) and median (-0.112) elasticity estimates.
Figure 2: Preferred Elasticity Estimates in Order of Publication Year




Note: The dashed and dotted lines show the mean (-0.148) and median (-0.112) elasticity estimates.
Figure 3: Preferred Elasticity Estimates, Median for Each Study




Note: The dashed and dotted lines show the mean (-0.130) and median (-0.105) elasticity estimates.
Figure 4: Preferred Elasticity Estimates, Studies using Federal Variation




Note: The dashed and dotted lines show the mean (-0.145) and median (-0.144) elasticity estimates.
Figure 5: Preferred Elasticity Estimates, Studies using State Variation




Note: The dashed and dotted lines show the mean (-0.158) and median (-0.106) elasticity estimates.
Figure 6: Preferred Elasticity Estimates, Case Studies




Note: The dashed and dotted lines show the mean (-0.103) and median (-0.083) elasticity estimates.
Figure 7: Preferred Elasticity Estimates, Studies of Teens




Note: The dashed and dotted lines show the mean (-0.170) and median (-0.121) elasticity estimates.
Figure 8: Preferred Elasticity Estimates, Studies of Young Adults




Note: The dashed and dotted lines show the mean (-0.190) and median (-0.152) elasticity estimates.
Figure 9: Preferred Elasticity Estimates, Studies of Less-Educated




Note: The dashed and dotted lines show the mean (-0.242) and median (-0.177) elasticity estimates.
Figure 10: Preferred Elasticity Estimates, Studies of Low-Wage Industries




Note: The dashed and dotted lines show the mean (0.023) and median (-0.029) elasticity estimates.
Figure 11: Share of Workers at or Below $7.25 or $10 Minimum Wage, 2010 CPS ORGs (Weighted), States where Federal
                                        Minimum Wage was Binding (36 States)

                                        Share of Workers At or Below $7.25 (Federal) Minimum Wage
                           100%

                           90%

                           80%

                           70%
  Share Below MW (%)




                           60%

                           50%

                           40%

                           30%

                           20%

                           10%

                            0%
                                  All        Teen   Young Adult   Restaurant     Restaurant Retail Trade   Farming   Less than HS   HS Grad or
                                                                                (Non-tipped)                           Degree          Less
                                                                               Type of Worker



                                                    Share of Workers At or Below $10/hr
                           100%

                           90%

                           80%

                           70%
  Share Below $10/hr (%)




                           60%

                           50%

                           40%

                           30%

                           20%

                           10%

                            0%
                                  All        Teen   Young Adult   Restaurant     Restaurant Retail Trade   Farming   Less than HS   HS Grad or
                                                                                (Non-tipped)                           Degree          Less
                                                                               Type of Worker
Figure 12: Preferred Elasticity Estimates, Studies of Directly-Affected Workers




Note: The dashed and dotted lines show the mean (-0.270) and median (-0.130) elasticity estimates.
Appendix Figure A1: Differences Between Our Estimate Selections and Author Estimate Selections, Median Estimates




Note: The dashed and dotted lines show the mean (0.003) and median (0) differences in the elasticity estimates (our selected estimates minus the authors'
responses). This figure does not include estimates for eight papers (five groups of authors) that did not respond, or the papers by one of us.
Appendix Figure A2: Preferred Elasticity Estimates, Median for Each Study and Range of Estimates for Each Study




Note: The I-bars represent the range of elasticities from each author group. Papers where the I-bar is a single line consist of a single estimate. Aside
from the ranges shown, this is the same as Figure 3.
