                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




HUNGRY FOR SUCCESS? SNAP TIMING, HIGH-STAKES EXAM PERFORMANCE, AND
                       COLLEGE ATTENDANCE

                                        Timothy N. Bond
                                          Jillian B. Carr
                                        Analisa Packham
                                         Jonathan Smith

                                      Working Paper 28386
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28386


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2021




We thank The College Board for providing data. We also thank Angela Boatman, Jason Cook,
Chloe East, Brent Evans, Joshua Goodman, Nathaniel Hendren, Melissa Kearney, Matthew
Notowidigdo; conference participants at the 2019 Allied Social Science Associations, Society of
Labor Economists, Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management, Southern Economic
Association meetings, and the 2020 NBER Children's Spring Meeting; and seminar participants
at Miami University, Montana State University, Purdue University, University of Illinois,
University of Alabama Birmingham, Florida State University, Peking University, West Virginia
University, Vanderbilt University and Texas Tech University for helpful suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Timothy N. Bond, Jillian B. Carr, Analisa Packham, and Jonathan Smith. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Hungry for Success? SNAP Timing, High-Stakes Exam Performance, and College Attendance
Timothy N. Bond, Jillian B. Carr, Analisa Packham, and Jonathan Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 28386
January 2021
JEL No. I18,I2,I38,J18

                                            ABSTRACT

Monthly government transfer programs create cycles of consumption that track the timing of
benefit receipt. In this paper, we exploit state-level variation in the staggered timing of nutritional
assistance benefit issuance across households to analyze how this monthly cyclicality in food
availability affects academic achievement. Using individual-level score data from a large national
college admissions exam in the United States linked to national college enrollment data, we find
that taking this high-stakes exam in the last two weeks of the SNAP benefit cycle reduces test
scores and lowers the probability of attending a 4-year college for low-income high school
students.

Timothy N. Bond                                    Analisa Packham
Department of Economics                            Department of Economics
Krannert School of Management                      Vanderbilt University
Purdue University                                  2301 Vanderbilt Place
403 W. State Street                                Nashville, TN 37235
West Lafayette, IN 47907                           and NBER
tnbond@purdue.edu                                  analisa.packham@vanderbilt.edu

Jillian B. Carr                                    Jonathan Smith
Department of Economics                            Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Krannert School of Management                      P.O. Box 3992
Purdue University                                  Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
West Lafayette, IN 47907                           jsmith500@gsu.edu
carr56@purdue.edu
1        Introduction

There is a strong link between income inequality and nutritional inequality. More than 35 percent

of families under the federal poverty line are food insecure, compared to less than 10 percent for

those with incomes more than three times the federal poverty line (Schanzenbach, Bauer, and

Nantz, 2016). This inequality extends to and perhaps perpetuates inequality in human capital

accumulation. Low socioeconomic status (SES) students perform increasingly worse on achievement

tests relative to their higher-income peers, exacerbating gaps in high-school completion and college

attendance (Reardon, 2011).

        In this paper we exploit a natural experiment in the timing of Supplemental Nutrition Assistance

Program (SNAP) benefits and show that the timing of benefits has substantial impacts on student

achievement for low-income high school students. SNAP, formerly known as the Food Stamp Pro-

gram, provides food-purchasing assistance to 41 million low-income Americans each year. Because

states have authority to determine their own distribution schedules, there is significant variation

in when households receive benefits. For example, while many states use case ID numbers to de-

termine the monthly disbursement date, some use the first letter of a family's surname. For each

household, benefits are issued on the same day each month, and no household currently receives

SNAP benefits more than once per month. As a result, recent studies have shown that households

increase the quantity and quality of food expenditures right after SNAP receipt and subsequently

decrease consumption, creating a "calorie crunch" just before their next disbursement (Shapiro,

2005; Kuhn, 2018; Tarasuk, McIntyre, and Li, 2007; Castner and Henke, 2011; Todd, 2015; Laurito

and Schwartz, 2019).

        To identify families most likely to experience food insecurity due to the "calorie crunch", we first

use student data from 7 states and Washington DC that determine benefit timing by surname.1

Then, we match SNAP schedules to the administration dates of the SAT, a high-stakes exam used

for college admission decisions in the United States, to estimate how the timing of benefits affects

test scores and college enrollment. Since the SAT date varies from year to year, we are able to

measure effects of SNAP benefit disbursement across cohorts, states, and years.

        Using detailed, individual-level data on SAT scores and college attendance, we find that low-
    1
    These data contain information on a student's potential benefit cycle, based on the first letter of their surname,
and measures of low-income status.


                                                          1
income students who sit for the exam two weeks after their assigned SNAP issuance date score

around 6 points, or 0.06 standard deviations, lower than those who sit in the two weeks following

disbursement.2 We also find some evidence that low-income students scoring comparatively lower

on their SAT are 0.7 percentage points less likely to initially attend a 4-year college, and those

who do attend college attend less-selective universities. Because we are not able to directly link

students receiving SNAP to those taking the SAT, we note that these effects are intent-to-treat

estimates and represent a lower bound of the effects of nutritional resource scarcity on student

performance. Moreover, we note that stress, family conflict, and hunger may all play a role in

affecting academic achievement when households exhaust their SNAP benefits, and our estimates

are unable to disentangle each contributing effect. Even so, we estimate in our subset of 7 states

plus DC that this relative performance loss results in over 1,150 students not initially enrolling in

a 4-year college.

       Our findings expand on and contribute to the current literature in a number of ways. We

build on a body of work showing that short-run environmental and psychological shocks, including

sleep, temperature, pollution, local violence, and stress, can affect students' cognitive performance,

to provide new evidence of the effects of nutritional shocks on academic performance and longer-

run outcomes.3 Previous research on the relationship between nutritional quality and educational

outcomes has generally focused on long-term measures of food security or program participation,

rather than the causal effect of immediate nutritional shortages.4 While there is some evidence
   2
     We note that these effects are smaller than the standard error of measurement calculated by the College Board
(approximately 32 points), but fit within the 0.002­0.3 standard deviations range of estimates of related SAT inter-
ventions, discussed in further detail below.
   3
     In particular, Alhola and Polo-Kantola (2007) provides a literature review showing sleep deprivation impairs
attention and long-term memory. Zivin, Hsiang, and Neidell (2017) finds that changing the temperature 10 degrees
Celsius decreases math scores by 0.12 standard deviations, while Garg, Jagnani, and Taraz (2019) finds that high
temperatures similarly reduce math and reading scores. Ebenstein, Lavy, and Roth (2016) uses data on Israeli students
and finds that a 10-unit increase in PM2.5 exposure decreases student performance by 0.083 standard deviations,
lowers educational attainment by 3 percentage points and earnings by 2.1 percent. Chang and Padilla-Romo (2019)
use data from Mexico and determine that exposure to nearby violent crime the week before a high-stakes test reduces
test scores for female students (but not male students) by 0.11 standard deviations. Heissell, Adam, Doleac, Figlio,
and Meer (2019) shows that low-income students in grades 3­8 experiencing high levels of cortisol during high-stakes
standardized exam score 0.4 standard deviations lower than expected. Mani, Mullainathan, Shafir, and Zhao (2013)
run a randomized controlled trial and show that inducing thoughts about finances reduces cognitive performance
among the low-income individuals.
   4
     For example, Winicki and Jemison (2003) report that the children of parents who report frequently worrying
about food running out due to lack of income, or that their children have skipped at least one meal in the last 12
months because money was not available, perform worse on kindergarten assessments. Beharie, Mercado, and McKay
(2017) find that among children who are living in poverty, SNAP participants have lower rates of grade retention.
Laurito and Schwartz (2019) find that SNAP households are more likely to participate in school lunch at the end of the
SNAP benefit cycle. Aurino, Fledderjohann, and Vellakkal (2019) find that adolescents in food-insecure households


                                                          2
that school-sponsored lunch programs can mitigate these effects for elementary-aged and middle-

school children, there is less evidence on how food availability affects educational attainment for

high-school students (Figlio and Winicki, 2005; Schwartz and Rothbart, 2019; Mangrum, 2019).5

    Two recent studies focus on performance on single-state assessments in young children.6 Gassman-

Pines and Bellows (2018) estimate the relationship between days since SNAP receipt and test scores

using OLS and find that for third through eighth graders in North Carolina end-of-grade test scores

peak by 0.021­0.022 standard deviations 17­19 days after benefit issuance. They interpret these

relatively small effects on test scores as a delayed effect of the improved nutrition and reduced

household stress induced by the receipt of a SNAP payment. Cotti, Gordanier, and Ozturk (2015)

exploit variations in SNAP disbursement schedules and exam testing dates in South Carolina and

find a negative effect of taking the exam towards the end of the benefit cycle on third through

eighth grade standardized math test scores, particularly for African American boys. However, we

note that these results vary depending based on subgroup.

    Our study has several key differences relative to the existing literature. First, the aforementioned

studies focus on standardized tests that were high-stakes for the schools but not the students.

Schools thus had incentives to mitigate factors, nutritional or otherwise, that would hurt student

test scores, while the students themselves suffered no potential consequences of the calendar-induced

inequality. In particular, these state standardized tests are taken each year on a weekday, when

school lunch and breakfast programs may help fill gaps in a student's nutritional intake, and schools

may alter caloric offerings to boost scores. In contrast, the SAT is high-stakes for students but does

not affect funding or hiring decisions for schools and is generally taken on the weekend, further

lessening the ability for schools to reduce nutritional gaps with free or reduced-price breakfast and

lunch. Second, using college attendance data, we measure long-term consequences of food scarcity

using information on college matriculation rates and college quality, which more closely reflect
in India score lower on vocabulary, reading, math, and language tests.
    5
      Specifically, Figlio and Winicki (2005) finds that increasing calories on school menus on testing days increases
math and English pass rates by 11.1 percent and 5.8 percent, respectively. Schwartz and Rothbart (2019) estimates
the impact of providing universal free lunch to middle-school students in New York City and finds that school lunch
participation increases test scores by 0.08 standard deviations in math and 0.07 standard deviations in reading.
Mangrum (2019) analyzes a program that provided low-income elementary students with take-home meals at school
on Fridays and finds that treated students scored 0.16­0.28 standard deviations higher on reading and math tests.
    6
      Other work provides evidence that the SNAP benefit cycle has important effects on students beyond test scores
as well. For example, Gennetian, Seshadri, Hess, Winn, and George (2016) finds that participating students in grades
5­8 are more likely to receive a disciplinary infraction at the end of the benefit month, as compared to non-SNAP
students.


                                                          3
achievement gaps in adults, as best as these outcomes can be measured by cognitive test scores. In

doing so, we link the cyclicality of in-kind food benefits in adolescence with determinants of adult

earnings through the mechanism of underperformance on high-stakes exams.

        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we discuss in more detail

how SNAP issuance schedules present a natural experiment for studying the effects of food insecurity

on adolescent outcomes. We then describe our data and empirical approach and present the results

of our analysis on test scores and college outcomes. We conclude by providing evidence against

the existence of strategic test-scheduling behavior by students and discuss the costs of nutritional

resource scarcity in lost wages.



2        Background on SNAP Issuance Schedules

SNAP is a means-tested entitlement program administered and funded by the United States De-

partment of Agriculture (USDA).7 Each month participating households receive cash-like electronic

food vouchers to be spent at authorized SNAP retailers. Although SNAP is federally funded, and

the USDA sets minimum allotment standards, state public assistance agencies run the program

through their local offices and determine the organization and timing of benefits. As a result, there

is significant variation in state SNAP disbursement schedules. While seven states currently dis-

tribute all benefits on one day of the month, a majority of states stagger issuance throughout the

month, allocating different households benefits on different days of the month.

        We focus on students in DC as well as 7 states that assign benefit dates by last name: Arizona,

Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Maryland, Utah, and West Virginia.8 Table A1 provides these schedules of

SNAP issuance days throughout the month based on the first letter of the last name, and we will

henceforth refer to these separate groups as "letter groups." Since states vary in the assignment of

letter groups and receipt day, and SAT test date opportunities are the same for all students, we use

this last name-based benefit issuance scheme to isolate as-good-as-random variation in the timing

of receipt in our empirical models, which we discuss in further detail below.
    7
    For more details on the program and its administration, see https://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/facts.
    8
    Although Connecticut, Hawaii, and Wyoming also stagger benefits by last name, SNAP issuance dates are closely
clustered within 2­3 days, which does not provide enough variation to differentiate between potentially "SNAP scarce"
or "not SNAP scarce" students for this analysis. Delaware was the only state to change its SNAP schedule timing
during this period; we drop Delaware from the analysis (because the schedule is at times ambiguous), but its inclusion
does not impact results.


                                                          4
3        Data

3.1       SAT and College Attendance Data

To measure how SNAP timing affects academic performance and post-secondary enrollment, we use

administrative data on SAT scores, college attendance, and college selectivity from three main data

sets for students in high school cohorts between 2009 and 2014. Data on student characteristics,

including race, ethnicity, gender, and grade, as well as high-school characteristics, and SAT scores

are from College Board. The SAT is a college admissions exam, administered by College Board,

intended to test college readiness. Across the US, high-school students voluntarily sit for the 3-hour

exam on 1 of 7 annual offered test dates, typically in their junior or senior year. The SAT consists

of math and verbal sections scored on a 200 to 800 point scale, with a highest possible composite

score of 1600. The scores are scaled by College Board depending on test difficulty. In 2014, the

average SAT score among college-bound seniors was 1010 (The College Board, 2016).

        Students are allowed to retake the SAT as many times as they wish. However, retakers vary

from other students along important unobservable dimensions like race and socioeconomic status

(see Goodman, Guarntz, and Smith, 2020), and in this context, low-income students who experience

SNAP scarcity are more likely to retake the exam. We keep only first-time SAT scores to avoid

the issues created by this endogenous sample selection.9 For similar reasons, we also use only test

takers in their junior or senior year of high school.

        College attendance data are from the National Student Clearinghouse (NSC) for 2009­2014

cohorts. These data contain information on college going, including enrollment and information on

whether the institution is considered a 2-year or 4-year college. As of 2015, over 3,600 colleges and

universities participate in the NSC, comprising over 98 percent of all students enrolled in American

postsecondary institutions.10 Despite the fact that the NSC tracks each college and university that

a student attends, we only consider the first destination, and we do not consider graduation as

an outcome due to the fact that the cohorts observed in our data have not had enough time to

graduate by the end of our sample period. Importantly, the NSC tracks students' outcomes at

all institutions of higher education, so we retain outcomes for students who attend an out-of-state
    9
     This precludes us from leveraging students who take multiple tests to exploit within student variation in SNAP
scarcity via student fixed effects.
  10
     See Dynarski, Hemelt, and Hyman (2015) for information regarding deficiencies in NSC data.



                                                        5
or private institution, despite only looking at students who take the exam in a limited number of

states.

       We measure college selectivity using data from the National Center for Education Statistics

Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS). These data include institution-level

information on admissions, 12-month enrollment, graduation rates, flagship status, and whether the

institution is classified as "selective" according to the Barron's Profiles of American Colleges.11 We

do not observe college quality measures for students who do not attend college, but we do know

where every SAT-taker attends college if they do. In our main models we use the same sample

throughout, controlling for whether a student did not attend college when the outcome of interest

is a measure of college quality.


3.2       Potential SNAP Eligibility

SNAP is a means-tested program. We cannot directly observe in our data whether any student

is a SNAP participant, but can use multiple income measures to classify those who likely would

be eligible. First, we observe the student's reported household income on the questionnaire given

to SAT-takers, categorized into $10,000 or $20,000 income bins. Our preferred approach uses this

binned income to judge whether a student is a likely SNAP participant. Although SNAP eligibility

limits vary based on state and federal regulations, it is very unlikely that any family earning more

than $60,000 per year would be able to participate in the program. Indeed, based on data from

the SNAP Quality Control Database, a nationally representative survey of SNAP participants, all

SNAP households in our 7 sample states and Washington DC with one or more 16- and/or 17-

year olds reported having a household income below $50,000 in 2014, although approximately one

percent of respondents reported an income of more than $40,000.12 This provides us with reason

to believe that some students reporting a household income of $40,000­$60,000 are participating

in the program, and none over $60,000 should be participating. In our preferred specifications, we

classify students as low-income if they select a bin below $60,000, although we additionally present
  11
      For Barron's selectivity categories, "1" indicates colleges that are "most competitive," "2" is "highly competi-
tive plus," "3" is "highly competitive," and "4 is "very competitive plus." See https://archive.nytimes.com/www.
nytimes.com/interactive/2013/04/04/business/economy/economix-selectivity-table.html for a list of colleges
ranked by their selectivity score.
   12
      These publicly available data contain information on 48,250 households categorically eligible for SNAP or eli-
gible via applicable income and asset tests, and are accessible here: https://host76.mathematica-mpr.com/fns/
Download.aspx?.


                                                          6
results for households earning below $40,000.


3.3        Defining Household Income

Because household income data are self-reported by students, we additionally use several alternative

definitions of whether a student is low-income. We consider College Board fee waivers as a measure

of low-income status, as waivers are available upon request to students who qualify for Free or

Reduced Price Lunch (FRPL). In practice, the granting of fee waivers is not guaranteed due to the

request process, making this an imperfect measure as well.13 We also create both school-level and

geographic measures to get a better sense of students who are most likely to be affected by SNAP

cyclicality. In our school-level measures we classify students as attending a low-income school if

50% of students who report an income select a bin below $60,000.

         Moreover, students report their resident zip code which we merge with Census data from the

2012 American Community Survey to track levels of income and SNAP participation within the

area that a student lives. Therefore, we define a student's zip code as low-income if the median

income is below $60,000 and define a zip code as high SNAP usage if more than 15% of residents

participate in SNAP.14

         Because we selected these cutoffs among other options, we also report treatment effects for

individual bins that we expect to be treated and not treated to show that results are concentrated

among low-income students. Overall, we focus on students who reported income in the College

Board survey, match to a zip code, and attend a school containing observations from at least 50

students.15



4         Implementing the Natural Experiment

In our main analysis, we adopt a fixed effects approach that exploits variation in state-level SNAP

benefit schedules and accounts for the recurring timing of benefits, individual characteristics that
    13
     For reference, in our sample 160,089 students report an income below $60,000, but only 39 percent of these
students use a fee waiver for the SAT. Out of the students reporting a household income below $40,000, approximately
half use a fee waiver.
  14
     This SNAP usage cutoff, although seemingly low is around 1 standard deviation above the mean in our sample,
and nearly the 90th percentile.
  15
     When we do not condition on students answering this survey question, in an effort to include more observations,
and focus only on zip code definitions of low-income status, our results are similar in sign and magnitude across
outcomes.


                                                         7
are correlated with benefit timing, and unobserved school characteristics.

       We begin by considering a model of the following form:




                      yicst = 0 + 1 SN APicst + c + d + s + t + Xicst + uicst ,                                  (1)


where i, c, s, t represent the student, cohort, school, and test, respectively. y represents outcome

variables of interest: SAT score, no college attendance, 2-year college attendance, 4-year college

attendance, and college selectivity measures.16 We use two different measures of SNAP-induced

scarcity, represented in the above equation as SN APicst . First, we consider a student i to be

"SNAP scarce" if student i sits for SAT exam t 15 days or more after SNAP issuance. This measure

is an indicator variable equal to one if a student meets that criteria and zero otherwise. Based

on the literature on SNAP families' consumption decisions, 15 days is a reasonable estimate for

when families begin to experience SNAP-induced scarcity, as a majority of households exhaust all

of their benefits before that point (Castner and Henke, 2011). Alternatively, we measure scarcity

more continuously as the number of days since an individual could have been issued SNAP benefits,

based on a student's last name.17 c are cohort fixed effects to account for unobserved characteristics

across graduation cohorts, t are test fixed effects to control for differences in SAT exam difficulty

common to a particular test, and s are high-school fixed effects to control for any systematic

differences across schools. d represent state-by- disbursement day-of-month fixed effects. These

are akin to first letter of last name group fixed effects to control for common characteristics of

students with the same disbursement date and state, and are especially important to include if last

name letter corresponds to race or other factors related to average test scores. Although controlling

for first letter of last name would be more accurate, we do not have first letter of last name for

privacy reasons.

       In some specifications, we include Xicst , which contains dummy variables for ethnicity, and
  16
     Math and verbal scores contribute nearly equally to the overall effect, so we present combined scores throughout
the paper. Appendix Table A2 and Appendix Figure A2 contain scores for math and verbal sections separately for
reference.
  17
     Appendix Figure A3 plots the residuals of SAT scores, and college attendance variables (after removing the
standard set of controls and fixed effects) by the number of days since SNAP benefit disbursement day. We plot the
low- and high-income students separately to show that downward trends in outcomes for low-income students are
generally not present for higher-income students.



                                                         8
gender. Finally, uicst is a random error term that we allow to be correlated across time within a

state-by-cohort-by day of disbursement.18

       There are a number of reasons that we opt to use this specification. We recognize that first letter

of last name may be related to race or ethnicity, as some surnames are more common within a given

race or ethnicity. This implies that last name letters may be predicted by race and/or ethnicity,

and therefore the effects of such benefit schedules are not totally random (e.g. see Tables 1 and

A3). Outside of controlling for race and ethnicity directly, we also include the state-by-disbursement

day-of-month fixed effects to account for this or any other impacts of first letter of last name on

academic achievement.19 We also note that, based on the states' distribution schedules and the

limited number of SAT dates, many students sit for the SAT either near the beginning or near

the very end of their potential SNAP benefit month, with fewer students receiving benefits in days

10­20.20

       Because SAT exam dates vary across months and within months across cohorts, causal identifi-

cation in this context relies on comparisons between students within cohort, exam, school, and last

name letter group. Our approach implies that, once accounting for the extensive set of fixed effects

listed above, there is as-good-as-random variation in students taking the test while experiencing

SNAP-induced scarcity. In Section 5, we discuss this idea further and provide additional tests to

support the validity of our identification assumption.

       As discussed above, it is very unlikely that a student with household income above $60,000

would be able to participate in SNAP. Exploiting the fact that SNAP is a means-tested program,

we consider those students who report an income below that threshold to be the potential treatment

group in a difference-in-differences style model as our main specification. We focus on this approach

for two reasons. First, although effects are still intent-to-treat in this model, this coefficient will

be closer to capturing the treatment-on-the-treated than the full sample approach of Equation (1).

Second, using higher-income students as a control group helps to address any lingering concerns

that our set of fixed effects cannot fully account for endogeneity between scores and taking the exam
  18
     While we cluster on state-by-disbursement day-of-month-by-cohort level because that determines for which test
a student is considered "SNAP scarce," our estimates are not sensitive to this choice. Clustering by state and
state-by-cohort yield similar results, and results can be found in Table A4.
  19
     Another possibility is that a student has a different name than the parent receiving benefits. We note that while
this would result in measurement error, it should bias our estimates towards zero.
  20
     Refer to Figure A1 for a density plot of the number of students in each potential SNAP benefit day bin.



                                                          9
more than 15 days after potential disbursement. We estimate the following:




                   yicst = 0 + 1 SN APicst  lowincomeicst + 2 SN APicst + 3 lowincomeicst

                                                                 +c + d + s + t + Xicst + uicst ,               (2)


where and lowincomeicst is an indicator variable equal to one if a student is identified as low

income and all other variables remain unchanged from Equation (1). In our preferred specification,

we consider a student low income if their reported household income is below $60,000, but we

also compare other measures of this, including student-level and community-level income measures.

Our coefficients of interest in Equations (1) and (2) are both 1 . These coefficients identify the

effect of nutritional resource scarcity off of differences in the change in performance of individuals

with the same letter group sitting for the exam at different times between high-income (non-SNAP

participant) and low-income (likely SNAP participant) students.



5         Estimating the Effects of Nutritional Shortfalls on Cognitive

          Performance and College Attendance

5.1         Effects on SAT Scores

Table 1 separately presents summary statistics. In the first two columns, we report means and

standard deviations for all students, then in Columns 3 and 4 we report means for students within

15­31 days of potential SNAP receipt (i.e. "SNAP scarce" students), based on last name, and

those within 0­14 days of SNAP issuance (i.e. "Not SNAP scarce" students). In the last column,

we present estimates from a t-test showing whether the means for these two groups of students

are statistically different for each outcome.21 These statistics show that, on average, SAT scores

are approximately 5 points lower for the SNAP scarce students. (Math and verbal scores are

approximately 3.7 and 1.3 points lower, respectively.) Moreover, these students are more likely to

attend no college or attend a 2-year college, while students who take the SAT for the first time

while not experiencing SNAP scarcity are more likely to attend a 4-year college but less likely to
    21
         Similarly, we provide summary statistics by a student's reported household income level in Table A3.


                                                            10
attend a flagship or more selective college. Although this simple comparison provides some useful

descriptive evidence on the relationship between SNAP issuance, SAT scores and college attendance,

the empirical analyses below address a wide set of potential confounders, including differences in

demographics, economic conditions, and state-wide policies. Some of these confounders are related

to a student's first letter of their last name, which is an important source of underlying variation in

SNAP scarcity. This relationship is an important factor in our preference for using the difference-

in-difference model described in Equation (2), and it means that a balance test is likely to be

uninformative as it will not account for the endogeneity related to first letter of last name and other

confounders.

       In Figure 1 we analyze the effects of SNAP scarcity across household income levels, using an

adaptation of Equation (2). We include indicator variables for each family income bin in the SAT

survey and their interactions with our "treatment" variable indicating SNAP scarcity.22 We present

coefficients and 95% confidence intervals for each of the interactions.

       As discussed previously, it is highly unlikely that any student in a household reporting over

$60,000 in annual income would be a SNAP participant. In Figure 1, we find statistically significant

effects for SAT scores in income ranges below this cutoff (with the exception of the $10,000 to

$20,000 bin). Point estimates indicate that taking the exam in the last two weeks of the benefit

cycle reduces SAT scores by 4­8 points for low-income students.

       Overall, these estimates imply that the reach of SNAP issuance policies, in terms of having

an impact on student testing performance, is concentrated within the population of students re-

porting household annual income less than $60,000. Therefore, in subsequent analysis we focus on

specifications that compare potentially SNAP scarce students in these lower-income households to

potentially SNAP scarce students who report household income over $60,000.23 Because SNAP can

serve students with higher incomes, depending on household size, and because some students may

not accurately report their household income, this approach can be viewed as estimating a lower

bound of the true treatment effect. We also emphasize that any estimates based on this research
  22
     Students can select $10,000 bins for incomes below $80,000, but not above. We group all students reporting over
$100,00 together.
  23
     Dropping students reporting income between $40,000-$120,000 yields estimates that are statistically significant
at the 1% level and indicate a 6.6 point decrease in SAT scores. Omitting only students in the somewhat ambiguously
treated $40,000­$60,000 bin, we find a 6.3 point decrease in scores, again statistically significant at the 1% level. Es-
timates of Equation 1 on only students reporting income below $60,000 yield a decrease of 2.3 SAT points. Estimates
of Equation 1 for only students with household incomes over $120,000 are small and statistically insignificant.


                                                           11
design will represent intent-to-treat effects, because SNAP participation for eligible households is

less than 100 percent. Thus, our estimates will likely understate the effects of SNAP on the students

actually served.

       In Table 2 we show corresponding effects of SNAP issuance on SAT scores. Beginning with the

top panel, which reports estimates from Equation (2), in Column 1 we control for state-specific letter

group (i.e. "state-by-disbursement day-of-month"), cohort, and test fixed effects.24 We find that

when students sit for the SAT in the last two weeks of the benefit cycle, scores fall by 10.8 points.

As expected, low-income students perform worse on the SAT than their higher-income counterparts.

       The inclusion of state-by-disbursement day-of-month (i.e. state-by-letter group) fixed effects

should account for any permanent differences in race or socioeconomic status that are correlated

within state with last name. In Column 2 we include student-level controls for race, ethnicity

and gender. We find that disparities in SAT scores persist across race, ethnicity, and student

background, with black students scoring around 140 SAT points lower than white students and

Hispanic students scoring around 60 points lower. When including these controls, estimates indicate

that SNAP scarcity reduces scores by 7 points for low-income students.

       We present our preferred specification in Column 3, which includes school fixed effects. We do so

to account for the fact that school interventions, like counselors or other nutritional initiatives, affect

SAT performance differentially across students. Importantly, these controls have little impact on our

point estimates, suggesting that, all else equal, the effects within schools do not differ from effects

across schools. Across all specifications, the coefficient for SNAP scarcity (2 ), which measures the

impact on high-income students, is not statistically significant, suggesting our controls are likely

capturing confounders for the natural experiment, mirroring findings from Figure 1.

       We find that, for low-income students, taking the SAT at the end of the SNAP benefit cycle

leads to a reduction in SAT scores of 5.8 points. Overall, these results imply that taking the exam

during periods of relative food insecurity reduces scores by approximately 0.06 standard deviations,

which suggests that SNAP timing has larger effects on test scores than heat exposure, but smaller

effects than retaking the exam (Goodman, Hurwitz, Park, and Smith, 2020; Goodman, Guarntz, and
  24
    We have also substituted "SAT opportunity" (i.e. whether it's the first, second, or so on test of the 11 most
popular exam choices for a cohort) for exact exam fixed effects and zip code fixed effects for school fixed effects.
Estimates are similar to those in Tables 2 and 3, and can be found in Table A4. Moreover, our main estimates are
not sensitive to dropping any one state or any one exam, and indicate effects of approximately 4­8 SAT points. See
Figure A4.


                                                        12
Smith, 2020). Furthermore, our effects are in line with other work showing that students in grades

3­8 receiving benefits 26 days prior to a standardized exam score 0.014­0.045 standard deviations

lower than expected (Cotti, Gordanier, and Ozturk, 2018).25

    In the lower panel of Table 2, we estimate Equation (2) using a continuous definition of SNAP

scarcity that measures the impact of SNAP scarcity as the days since the last eligible disbursement

for a student's letter group. Similar to our discrete measure, we find performance decreases as

students reach the end of the benefit month. Specifically, we find that SAT scores fall by 0.21

points, respectively, for each day after initial SNAP disbursement. Moreover, in Figure A3, we plot

means of residuals for students by high-income and low-income status separately to highlight the

day-by-day variation in scores. While SAT scores for higher-income students remain relatively flat

over the month, scores for low-income students are highest at the beginning of the benefit month

(e.g. days 1­5) and dip to their lowest levels between days 14­20.26

    There are a number of different ways a 6-point decrease in the average SAT composite score could

occur, and not all may be of equal value to students or policymakers.27 For example, suppose this

decrease was driven solely by a large drop in the scores of the highest achievers. While representing

a real decrease in cognitive performance, it may have little actual impact on the trajectory of

low-income students. High-ability, low-income students rarely apply to the selective schools that

require such high scores for entry (Hoxby and Avery, 2013). In contrast, if these losses were driven

by a decrease in performance by marginal students who just barely qualified for admission to state

flagships, the economic losses could be quite large (Hoekstra, 2009).

    We investigate this latter scenario by analyzing changes in the density of scores in Figure 2. Here,

we estimate a set of fixed effects models, as specified by Equation (1), considering whether a student

scored in a 100-point range on the SAT. We focus on low-income students for simplicity. Our findings

suggest that the performance losses are indeed concentrated among marginal students. Students

at the end of their potential SNAP benefit cycle are more likely to score between 800­900 points
  25
     In particular, Goodman, Hurwitz, Park, and Smith (2020) document that a one standard deviation in heat
exposure (or three days about 90 degrees F) reduces test scores by 0.002 standard deviations, while Goodman,
Guarntz, and Smith (2020) find that students retaking the SAT improve their scores by 90 points, on average, or 0.3
standard deviations.
  26
     Specifically, we present residuals from models based on Equation (1), estimating effects for low- and high-income
students separately that include all fixed effects and race and gender controls, and exclude the variable of interest
and income variables. We also report coefficients on linear and quadratic functions of days since disbursement for
estimates of the continuous form of Equation (2) extended to a quadratic form.
  27
     This is because test scores are ordinal measures of achievement. See Bond and Lang (2013).


                                                         13
and less likely to score between 1000­1200 points-- well-within the relevant scope for admissions

decisions.28 In the following section, we will look at the effects on these college attendance and

quality outcomes directly.


5.2    Effects on College Attendance and Quality

In the above section, we present stark evidence that low-income students perform relatively poorly

on the SAT in the two weeks preceding SNAP disbursement. Given that the SAT is a prominently

used college admissions exam, and many flagship schools have strict SAT admissions and/or financial

aid cutoffs, any effects on SAT scores could have large long-run consequences for underperforming

students. In this section, we consider to what extent these effects translate into college attendance

and quality.

    In Table 3, we estimate the effects of SNAP disbursement on initial college attendance using

Equation (2) with a full set of controls (as in Column 3 in Table 2). In general, we note that estimates

indicate that low-income students are more likely to forgo college, or enroll in less selective colleges.

While we find little evidence that taking the exam during a time of scarcity reduces the rate of post-

secondary enrollment for low-income students (Column 2), we do see evidence that it changes the

type of colleges where students enroll (Columns 3 and 4). Students taking the exam during a period

of potential food scarcity are 0.89 percentage points more likely to attend a 2-year college, and 0.72

percentage points less likely to attend a 4-year college.29 This corresponds to approximately 1,150

fewer students initially attending a 4-year college as a result of taking the exam during a period of

relative resource scarcity over the span of 6 cohorts in our data.30 Given that many 2-year colleges

do not require SAT scores for admission, this result is perhaps unsurprising.
  28
     These cutoffs vary by state. For example, the SAT admissions cutoff for West Virginia University is a composite
score of 910, while the recommended score at Indiana University is 1140. Moreover, Goodman, Hurwitz, and Smith
(2017) find that many colleges use hidden SAT cutoffs, and that these cutoffs substantially affect a student's college-
going behavior. In particular, marginal low-income students that just made the cutoff were 10­14 percentage points
more likely to attend a 4-year college.
  29
     For context, our estimates imply an economically meaningful effect, but are smaller than SAT-focused initiatives.
In our sample, 68.1 percent of students who are not experiencing scarcity when they take the exam attend a 4-year
college, so the 0.7 percentage point decrease is less than a 1 percent decrease. Specifically, Bulman (2015) analyzes
how much SAT taking responds to the distance of an available testing center and finds that opening a testing center
corresponds to an increase in 4-year enrollment by 4 percent, while offering free in-school administration of the SAT
increases enrollment by nearly 8 percent. Goodman, Guarntz, and Smith (2020) estimate that retaking the SAT
increases the probability of enrolling in a 4-year college by 20 percent, and Hurwitz, Smith, Niu, and Howell (2015)
document that SAT requirements for high-school juniors increases 4-year enrollment by 4-6 percent.
  30
     This calculation is based on the fact that our data contain 169,085 students within a household income below
$60,000.


                                                          14
       Table 3 Columns 5­8 explore the quality dimension further, by estimating the effect on the overall

graduation rate and the average SAT score of the college attended, whether or not the school is

classified as "selective" according to Barron's rankings, and if the college is considered a flagship

university.31 We find evidence for a reduction in quality on each of these dimensions. In particular,

students who take the SAT for the first time 3­4 weeks after possible SNAP issuance attend colleges

with a 2.81 point lower average SAT score. Moreover, these students are 0.93 percentage points less

likely to attend a selective college and are 0.51 percentage points (2.9 percent) less likely to attend

a flagship.

       These estimated magnitudes provide further support for the notion that SNAP cyclicality affects

student test scores and longer-run academic outcomes. Based on the underlying data for all students,

we estimate that for every increase of 10 SAT points, a student is 0.87 percentage points more likely

to attend college. If we rescale our main estimates from Table 2 to capture the impact of 6­11 SAT

points using this relationship in the overall data, we should estimate a change in college attendance

of 0.52­0.95 percentage points. Our findings indicate that a student sitting for the SAT at the

end of the potential benefit cycle is 0.72 percentage points less likely to attend college. Therefore,

our college attendance estimates are in line with what would be expected for the corresponding

estimated change in SAT scores.

       These findings are especially important for informing how immediate resource scarcity can affect

student trajectories. For example, Goodman, Hurwitz, and Smith (2017) show that attending a

higher quality institution increases college completion for low-income students by 46 percentage

points, which is consistent with other work showing the graduation rate penalty associated with

students choosing a 2-year over a 4-year college (Long and Kurlaender, 2009; Reynolds, 2012; Brand,

Pfeffer, and Goldrick-Rab, 2014). In Section 6 we further discuss the potential costs to students

facing these food availability gaps.
  31
    For students who do not attend college, we assign 0 for all college selectivity measures and we add a control to
Equation (2) indicating that a student did not attend college. If we instead only consider college quality for students
who attend some kind of post-secondary education, we find effects are a slightly larger and remain statistically
significant.




                                                          15
5.3     Subgroups and Treatment-on-the-Treated Effect

Because we cannot observe whether any student is enrolled in SNAP, all of our findings so far

represent intent-to-treat estimates. In this section, we present additional subgroup results for the

groups we think are most likely to experience food insecurity. As any of our subgroups approaches

100% SNAP participation, our estimates will approach the treatment-on-the-treated effect for at

least that subgroup.32

    First, in Table 4, we show effects on scores, college attendance, and college selectivity outcomes

by neighborhood type.33 In the first panel, we use a school-level measure indicating that at least half

of students in a school who report an income in the SAT survey report one that is below $60,000.

In the second panel, we measure low-income status using SNAP usage in the student's zip code,

considering all students whose zip codes have at least 15% SNAP participation. Last, we focus on

zip codes where the median income is less than $60,000.34

    Table 4 Column 1 reports effects on SAT scores. Overall, estimates are similar to our main

results, but larger. We find that sitting for the exam at the end of the SNAP benefit cycle leads to a

decrease in SAT score of approximately 9 points for students in low-income schools, or 0.09 standard

deviations. Moreover, students living in zip codes with relatively high levels of SNAP participation

experience a decrease of about 4.2 points, while effects for students living in low-income zip codes

are relatively imprecise.

    In Columns 2­4, we show estimates for college attendance outcomes. Across panels, we find that

students in low-income schools, high SNAP usage zip codes, and low-income zip codes are between

0.5­1.2 percentage points less likely to go to any college, and are up to 1.6 percentage points less

likely to attend a 4-year college. Estimates for 2-year colleges are statistically insignificant and

relatively imprecise.

    Additionally, in the last four columns, we show effects of SNAP cyclicality on college selectivity

outcomes. In general, we find that students in low-income communities taking the exam when
   32
      Alternatively, it is possible that by separating effects by income level, we are picking up heterogeneous effects;
that is, higher student-reported income could have smaller or larger Food Stamp cycle impacts. Below we discuss
results from models using several different measures of income, which paints a broader picture of the reduced-form
effects.
   33
      In Figures A2 and A5 we additionally present how these estimates change across these various poverty measures.
Overall, estimates indicate that effects are largest for those areas with the most poverty.
   34
      Given that school attended and zip code are both determined or defined geographically, we do not include school
fixed effects, noting that including school fixed effects has little impact on our baseline estimates, reported in Table 2.



                                                            16
"SNAP scarce" attend less selective colleges with lower average graduation rates. Specifically, stu-

dents in low-income high schools are 1.4 percentage points less likely to attend a selective college,

and attend a college with a 3.5 point lower average SAT score. When analyzing high SNAP and

low-income zip codes, these effects are similar; estimates indicate that for those low-income, "SNAP

scarce" students attending college choose a school that has a lower average SAT score and are

0.7­0.9 percentage points less likely to choose a selective college.

       Furthermore, we take advantage of the continuous nature of the SNAP participation variable

by interacting it with SN AP scarceicst , and we show these results in Table 5. Estimates for SAT

scores indicate that students living in zip codes with 100% household SNAP participation score 60

points lower when they take the SAT 15 days or more after their SNAP benefit receipt date. In a

zip code where 100% of children receive SNAP benefits, any student we observe must be a SNAP

recipient - that means low-income students taking the SAT at the end of their SNAP benefit cycle

experience a loss of up to 104 points on the exam. These reductions in SAT scores are mirrored by

larger effects on college going and college selectivity outcomes.

       That said, there are very few places where SNAP usage is so high, and none in our sample, so we

are extrapolating out of sample. Moreover, this large estimate may not represent an average effect

because it is possible that the effects are amplified in neighborhoods with high SNAP usage. While

we recognize these realities, we submit that the results in Table 5 are a plausible upper bound of

the treatment on the treated.35

       In Tables 6 and 7, we further explore effects by income status to get a better sense of which

students are most likely to be affected by SNAP benefit issuance timing. To do so, we interact various

income measures used in the above analyses, to estimate effects of SNAP timing on SAT scores

and college attendance for students that meet multiple low-income criteria, including reporting a

household income below $60,000 and below $40,000, using a fee waiver, and attending a low-income

high school (Table 6 Columns 1­4, respectively). Specifically, Columns 5 and 6 display effects

for students who are low-income, based on the household income definition, and use a fee waiver.

Columns 7­9 display effects for students in low-income households or students using a fee waiver and

attending low-income schools. Columns 10 and 11 show effects for students that meet three criteria:
  35
    Similarly, when using data on median income from the ACS, we find that a student living in a zip code with an
additional $10,000 of median income will score around 2 points lower on the exam when experiencing scarcity. These
estimates are consistent with the main models in Table 2.


                                                       17
reported low household income, used a fee waiver, and attended a low-income school. Estimates for

our main variable of interest are negative and statistically significant across all columns. Effects are

largest for low-income students attending low-income schools, which may indicate that there are

spillover effects for these students, and/or fewer school resources to prepare students for SAT test

day. Moreover, we note that effects for students using waivers are slightly smaller than the baseline

estimates, suggesting that there is non-random selection into which students request a fee waiver.

    In Table 7, we further explore effects for this select group of students. In the top panel, we

estimate effects on SNAP scarce students using a fee waiver, while in the middle and bottom panel

we additionally consider fee waiver students from low-income households as well as those from low-

income households attending low-income schools. Overall, estimates indicate that SNAP scarcity

does reduce SAT scores by 3­7 points for these students, although we estimate no statistically

significant effects on college attendance. However, we note that our estimates indicate that when

these students take the SAT at the end of their potential SNAP benefit cycle, they are less likely to

attend a selective college, and attend colleges with 0.5­0.6 percentage point lower graduation rates.

    Finally, to get a better sense of the treatment variation across student subgroups, in Figure 3

and Table A5, we explore how effects differ across minority status and gender.36 Specifically, in

Figure 3, the left panel of each figure displays point estimates from the labeled coefficient of interest

and their corresponding 95 percent confidence intervals from analogues of Equation (2), interacting

our main treatment variable (SN AP scarceicst ) with a dummy variable for the 4 most common

reported selections for race/ethnicity: white, black, Hispanic, and Asian. We also include dummy

variables for race (omitting white) and the interaction between the set of race dummy variables and

lowincomeicst to capture the effects of race alone and the interaction of race and socioeconomic

status. In the right panel of each figure, we do the same for reported gender. Each shaded bar

represents the cumulative effect of these three main equation coefficients.

    Overall, estimates for Hispanic and Asian students are larger than our main results, with reduc-

tions in SAT scores ranging from 8­24 points, and reductions in 4-year college attendance ranging

from 4.5­2.1 percentage points. For college attendance outcomes, black students are not impacted
  36
     We note that only students who reported an answer to the race/ethnicity survey question are included in this
analysis and those who selected "other" are omitted. Moreover, many of our race subgroups are geographically
concentrated in our set of states. For example, the majority of the Hispanic students live in Arizona. While these
results are interesting and informative, they should be interpreted cautiously.



                                                       18
any more than the general student population by SNAP scarcity. They may even be impacted

less for some outcomes, namely whether they attend a 2-year college or attend a selective college.

Because underrepresented minorities are less likely to attend high-quality institutions at baseline,

this may reflect the fact that the possible magnitude of a reduction is limited.

       When separating effects for low-income SNAP scarce students by gender, we find reductions in

SAT scores for both male and female students; however, we note that such male students experience

a larger overall drop than female students (8.7 versus 3.6 points) and are less likely to attend a four-

year college. These findings are especially interesting considering the growing achievement gap,

as the college enrollment rate for female students has outnumbered males since 2000, and females

currently hold 57 percent of the bachelor's degrees awarded by U.S. institutions (Fry, 2019).37


5.4      Effects on Test-Taking

It is possible that students make decisions about whether to register for an exam or show up for an

exam for which they are registered based on whether they are experiencing SNAP-induced scarcity

on the test date. Based on the strength of norms about which tests students take, and the fact that

registration deadlines are a month before the exam, we think that the latter phenomenon is more

likely; specifically, students may not show up to take the test when they are experiencing SNAP

scarcity. Unfortunately, we do not observe these "no shows" directly. Therefore, to investigate the

extent to which SNAP benefit timing affects student selection into test taking, we instead use the

even larger population of PSAT-takers to determine whether students are less likely to take the

SAT (ever) when the test schedule is such that they are likely experiencing scarcity during the most

popular tests.38

       For each PSAT-taker, we create a measure of likely scarcity using the dates of SAT exams

during that student's junior and senior year and their SNAP disbursement date. We determine

whether the student would have been classified as "SNAP scarce" during the 4 most common

exams: May and June of junior year and October and November of senior year. We then estimate a
  37
     We have also considered effects by seniority. When we estimate effects for students taking the SAT as a junior
and as a senior separately, estimates for both groups mirror the main results but are more pronounced for students
taking the SAT as a senior. See Figure A6.
  38
     The PSAT is an exam given only once per year primarily to freshmen-juniors in high school. While often cited
as a practice for the SAT, as it is very similar in format, it also plays a primary role in the National Merit Scholars
program. Eligibility for this nationwide scholarship program is determined by scores in the junior year of high school,
and most college-bound students take it.


                                                          19
model using the proportion of those exams during which the student would have been classified as

experiencing SNAP-induced scarcity as our independent variable, like substituting this proportion

for SN AP scarceicst in Equation (1). Our outcome of interest is whether students ever take an SAT

test. For reference, 10% of students have scarcity for zero exams, 16% have scarcity for 1 exam,

10% have scarcity for 2 exams, 20% have scarcity for 3 exams, and the remaining 44% have scarcity

for all of the most common exams. These proportions are the same for students at low-income

schools. We take the fact that so many students face scarcity during all of the major exams as

further evidence that students are unlikely to intentionally schedule exam-taking during an exam

when they do not experience scarcity.

         We include controls for race and gender, and the full set of fixed effects as in Column 3 in

Table 2. Importantly, we also cannot use a student's reported family income because it will only

exist for students who take the SAT, so we instead rely on our measure of school-level socioeconomic

status and our two zip code measures as defined in the previous section to focus on the students

most likely impacted.

         Table 8 contains the results of this analysis. Because the measure of scarcity ranges from zero

to one, the coefficient captures the effect of a student experiencing scarcity for all 4 exams relative

to experiencing scarcity for none of them. Estimates indicate that there is no perceptible effect on

test-taking behavior. In Column 2 we analyze effects for students who attend low-income schools

(again measured by the percentage of low-income students). Estimates are statistically insignificant

are close to zero, suggesting no meaningful effects on test-taking behavior. Similarly, there are no

differential effects related to zip code level poverty measures.39



6         Assessing Costs to Students

In this section, we aim to quantify the costs associated with performance losses for students who

take the SAT while experiencing scarcity. First, we consider the tradeoffs in wages for attending a

4-year versus a 2-year college. Carnevale, Rose, and Cheah (2011) estimate that an average college
    39
    We can also use the PSAT data to estimate whether "SNAP scarce" students perform worse on this exam as
well. Overall, effects are smaller and less precise than our main results, indicating a 0.25 point decrease in PSAT
scores (or 2.5 points scaled to SAT points) from estimating a model analogous to the first panel of Table 4, using
low-income school attendance as an indicator that a student is low income. Estimates remain consistent if we focus
only on students taking the PSAT in their junior year.



                                                        20
graduate will earn $2.8 million over his/her lifetime. Reynolds (2012) estimates that wage penalties

for starting at a 2-year college are approximately 3.0 percent for women and 2.3 percent for men,

even if a student later matriculates to a 4-year college. Therefore, these estimates suggest that

the lifetime penalty of the marginal student attending a 2-year college instead of a 4-year college

is $84,000 for women and $64,400 for men.40 If the 0.7 percentage point decrease that we find in

4-year college-going for low-income students is completely transferred to 2-year college attendance

(as Table 3 suggests), then the foregone wages are at least $85.3 million for the 1,150 students who

do not attend a 4-year college.

    If we instead focus on students who chose to forego college altogether, this wage gap is even

higher. For example, the earnings of bachelor's graduates from households with earnings of less

than 1.85 times the federal poverty level are 71 percent higher than those of high school graduates,

or $812,250, on average (Bartik and Hershbein, 2018).41 If the 0.7 percentage point decrease that

we find in 4-year college-going for low-income students results in those 1,150 students not attending

college (as the geographic subgroups would suggest), the lost earnings are $934 million.42

    Next, we can consider the foregone benefits of a student who chooses to attend a 4-year college

attending a less selective college. Dale and Krueger (2002) estimate up to a 7 percent wage premium

for those attending a college whose students score 100 points higher on the SAT. Following the

procedure in Pallais (2015), we use this estimate specifically since Dale and Krueger (2002) analyze

a subset of low-income students. Because the students eligible for SNAP are low-income, these

estimates will yield an estimate closer to the treatment on the treated. Using these estimates, the

average lifetime wage cost of a low-income student scoring 6 points lower on the SAT and attending

a less selective 4-year college is $2,800,000 x 7% x 0.06= $11,760. For our alternative measure of

low-income students based on geography, estimates imply an even larger cost of $2,800,000 x 7% x

0.09= $17,640 (based on a 9-point reduction in SAT scores reported in the first panel of Table 4).

    Moreover, these estimates will understate the costs of SNAP cyclicality to low-income students
  40
     The calculations for men's and women's earnings respectively are $2,800,000 x 3% and $2,800,000 x 2.3%. Esti-
mates are calculated in 2008 dollars.
  41
     This is based on discounted lifetime earnings of $475,000 for low-income students who obtain only a high school
diploma (Bartik and Hershbein, 2018).
  42
     Considering estimates from Bartik and Hershbein (2018) are not plausibly causal, this estimate is likely an upper
bound. According to Zimmerman (2014), students just missing the cutoff for a 4-year state university yield total
earnings losses of $12,000 7 years after high-school graduation, although these gaps are expected to grow as workers
age.



                                                         21
if graduation is more likely at these higher quality colleges. Indeed, Hoekstra (2009) finds that

attending a flagship state university increases earnings by 20 percent. Similarly, Goodman, Hurwitz,

and Smith (2017) find that inducing low-income students to attend a 4-year college instead of a 2-

year college increases completion by 22 percentage points, suggesting that institutional peer effects

play an important role in longer-run outcomes.

    We recognize that for a student whose alternative is going straight into the workforce, the

opportunity costs of attending college is lost wages at an entry-level job. We also acknowledge that

there are additional costs and burdens a student must consider when deciding to attend a 4-year

college over a 2-year college or no college at all. These upfront costs include time to complete the

application to a 4-year school, the time of the admissions officer evaluating the application, tuition

and fees, and potential moving and transitional/psychic costs that a student would otherwise not

incur if they lived at home. These costs of attending college are salient for students, but unlikely

to outweigh the benefits accrued to students of attending a 4-year college detailed above.



7    Discussion

In this paper we use variation in state SNAP schedules to analyze how nutritional assistance timing

can affect high-stakes exam scores and college attendance. We find that when SAT dates fall more

than two weeks after a student's SNAP benefit issuance date, SAT scores are 6 points lower for

low-income students. This translates into lower 4-year college attendance, and we provide some

evidence of substitution to 2-year colleges. Notably, we find large, robust effects indicating that

students attend lower quality institutions measured by selectivity rankings and average SATs of

admitted students. Effects are largest for students attending low-income schools and living in zip

codes with high levels of SNAP participation, and are not driven by changes in test-taking behavior.

    Most importantly, these findings are critical for understanding the hurdles to college going that

children in poverty face. Taken together, our findings suggest that the documented socioeconomic

gap in nutritional intake results in lifelong gaps in human capital formation, and the potential bene-

fits of alleviating resource scarcity at the end of the benefit month could far outweigh administrative

transition costs. Considering the evidence that lower SAT scores result in students attending lower-

quality colleges, leading to lower lifetime wages, our findings provide evidence that achievement gaps


                                                  22
for low-income students may be related to the timing of nutritional assistance (Hoekstra, 2009). We

also show that students living in low-income communities perform even worse on the SAT when

experiencing resource scarcity.

       Finally, we note that there are a number of policy implications that could address the obstacles

that low-income children face and ensure that food cyclicality does not stunt the earnings trajectory

for these students. Considering that food insecurity, and the household financial and relationship

stressors that can accompany it, can affect not only the SAT, but standardized exams throughout a

child's schooling career, policymakers should consider the spillover benefits of optimal SNAP timing

and/or expanding the scope of school meals. For example, offering the SAT and other high-stakes

exams on school days would potentially increase participation and allow students eligible for free

school breakfast and lunch to eat prior to the test. Indeed, many school districts have in recent

years been moving in this direction; as of 2019, 43 percent of SAT takers took the exam on a school

day, up from 36 percent the previous year (The College Board, 2019).

       Moreover, expanding SNAP participation or monthly benefit amounts could in and of itself

improve gaps in nutritional availability and, subsequently, child health and academic performance

(East, 2018). Alternatively, deliberately staggering the electronic delivery of multiple types of

transfers over the course of the month would be relatively low cost, but could benefit families

and communities more broadly.43 Given that the cyclicality of SNAP benefits has been shown to

affect household conflict (Carr and Packham, 2019b), crime (Carr and Packham, 2019a), alcohol

purchases (Castellari, Cotti, Gordanier, and Ozturk, 2017), drunk driving (Cotti, Gordanier, and

Ozturk, 2015), and substance use events (Allen, Atwood, Young, Pauly, and Harrington, 2019) our

estimates contribute to a broader literature on how the timing of other government transfers can

affect total social welfare. In focusing on the timing of public health interventions, policymakers

could more directly address the consequences of food insecurity and poverty more generally.




  43
    For example, one state in 2014 estimated that delivering benefits to recipients on different days of the month
would cost approximately $294,010, of which only $76,500 was due to internal systems staff programming time, while
the remainder represents one-time notification costs (House Joint Resolution 43, 2013).


                                                       23
References
Alhola, P., and P. Polo-Kantola (2007): "Sleep Deprivation: Impact on Cognitive Performance,"
  Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment, 3, 553­567.

Allen, L., A. Atwood, S. Young, N. Pauly, and R. Harrington (2019): "The Impact of Staggered
  Benefit Distribution on Opioid Use," Working Paper.

Aurino, E., J. Fledderjohann, and S. Vellakkal (2019): "Inequalities in Adolescent Learning: Does the
 Timing and Persistence of Food Insecurity at Home Matter?," Economics of Education Review,
 70, 94­108.

Bartik, T. J., and B. J. Hershbein (2018): "Degrees of Poverty: The Relationship between Family
  Income Background and the Returns to Education," Upjohn Institute Working Paper 18-284,
  "Available at https://doi.org/10.17848/wp18-284".

Beharie, N., M. Mercado, and M. McKay (2017): "A Protective Association between SNAP Par-
  ticipation and Educational Outcomes Among Children of Economically Strained Households,"
  Journal of Hunger and Environmental Nutrition, 12(2), 181­192.

Bond, T. N., and K. Lang (2013): "The Evolution of the Black-White Test Score Gap in Grades
  K-3: The Fragility of Results," Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(5), 1468­1479.

Brand, J. E., F. T. Pfeffer, and S. Goldrick-Rab (2014): "The Community College Effect Revis-
  ited: The Importance of Attending to Heterogeneity and Complex Counterfactuals," Sociological
  Science, 1, 448­465.

Bulman, G. (2015): "The Effect of Access to College Assessments on Enrollment and Attainment,"
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(4), 1­36.

Carnevale, A. P., S. J. Rose, and B. Cheah (2011): "The College Payoff: Education, Oc-
  cupations, Lifetime Earnings," "Available at https://www2.ed.gov/policy/highered/reg/
  hearulemaking/2011/collegepayoff.pdf".

Carr, J. B., and A. Packham (2019a): "SNAP Benefits and Crime: Evidence from Changing Dis-
  bursement Schedules," Review of Economics and Statistics, 101, 1­16.

        (2019b): "SNAP Schedules and Domestic Violence," Working Paper.

Castellari, E., C. Cotti, J. M. Gordanier, and O. D. Ozturk (2017): "Does the Timing of Food Stamp
  Distribution Matter? A Panel-Data Analysis of Monthly Purchasing Patterns of US Households,"
  Health Economics, 26, 1380­1393.

Castner, L., and J. Henke (2011): "Benefit Redemption Patterns in the Supplemental Nutrition
  Assistance Program," Discussion paper, Mathematica Policy Research.

Chang, E., and M. Padilla-Romo (2019): "The Effects of Local Violent Crime on High-Stakes Tests,"
  Working Paper.

Cotti, C., J. Gordanier, and O. Ozturk (2018): "When Does it Count? The Timing of Food Stamp
  Receipt and Educational Performance," Economics of Education Review, 66, 40­50.

Cotti, C., J. M. Gordanier, and O. D. Ozturk (2015): "Eat (and Drink) Better Tonight: Food Stamp
  Benefit Timing and Drunk Driving Fatalities," Available at SSRN 2589553.

                                                 24
Dale, S. B., and A. B. Krueger (2002): "Estimating the Payoff to Attending a More Selective CollegeL
 An Application of Selection on Observables and Unobservables," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 117, 1491­1527.

Dynarski, S. M., S. W. Hemelt, and J. M. Hyman (2015): "The Missing Manual: Using National Stu-
 dent Clearinghouse Data to Track Postsecondary Outcomes. Educational Evaluation and Policy
 Analysis," Educational Evaluation and Policy Management, 37.

East, C. N. (2018): "The Effect of Food Stamps on Children's Health: Evidence from Immigrants'
  Changing Eligibility," Journal of Human Resources.

Ebenstein, A., V. Lavy, and S. Roth (2016): "The Long-Run Economic Consequences of High-Stakes
  Examinations: Evidence from Transitory Variation in Pollution," American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics, 8, 36­65.

Figlio, D. N., and J. Winicki (2005): "Food for Thought: The Effects of School Accountability Plans
  on School Nutrition," Journal of Public Economics, 89(2), 381­394.

Fry,  R. (2019):     "U.S. Women Near Milestone in the College-Educated La-
  bor   Force,"   Available  at   https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2019/06/20/
  u-s-women-near-milestone-in-the-college-educated-labor-force/?utm_source=
  AdaptiveMailer&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=19-06-20%20women%20in%20labor%
  20force%20FT&org=982&lvl=100&ite=4253&lea=982361&ctr=0&par=1&trk=&utm_source=
  AdaptiveMailer&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=19-06-20%20women%20in%20labor%
  20force%20FT&org=982&lvl=100&ite=4253&lea=982361&ctr=0&par=1&trk=.

Garg, T., M. Jagnani, and V. Taraz (2019): "Human Capital Costs of Climate Change: Evidence
 from Test Scores in India," Working Paper.

Gassman-Pines, A., and L. Bellows (2018): "Food Instability and Academic Achievement: A Quasi-
 Experiment Using SNAP Benefit Timing," American Education Research Journal, 55(5), 897­927.

Gennetian, L., R. Seshadri, N. Hess, A. Winn, and R. George (2016): "Supplemental Nutrition
 Assistance Program (SNAP) Benefit Cycles and Student Disciplinary Infractions," Social Service
 Review, 90(3), 403­433.

Goodman, J., O. Guarntz, and J. Smith (2020): "Take Two! SAT Retaking and College Enrollment
 Gaps," American Economic Journal - Economic Policy, 12(2), 115­158.

Goodman, J., M. Hurwitz, J. Park, and J. Smith (2020): "Heat and Learning," American Economic
 Journal - Economic Policy, 12(2), 306­339.

Goodman, J., M. Hurwitz, and J. Smith (2017): "Access to 4-Year Public Colleges and Degree
 Completion," Journal of Labor Economics, 35(3), 829­867.

Heissell, J. A., E. K. Adam, J. L. Doleac, D. N. Figlio, and J. Meer (2019): "Testing, Stress, and
  Performance: How Students Respond Physiologically to High-Stakes Testing," Working Paper.

Hoekstra, M. (2009): "The Effect of Attending the Flagship State University on Earnings: A
 Discontinuity-Based Approach," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(4), 717­724.

House Joint Resolution 43 (2013): "Task Force on Hunger and the Efficient Distribution of SNAP
  Benefits," 98th General Assembly.

                                                25
Hoxby, C., and C. Avery (2013): "The Missing "One-Offs": The Hidden Supply of High-Achieving,
  Low Income Students," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2013(1), 1­65.

Hurwitz, M., J. Smith, S. Niu, and J. Howell (2015): "The Maine Question: How Is 4-Year College
 Enrollment Affected by Mandatory College Entrance Exams?," Educational Evaluation and Policy
 Analysis, 7(1), 138­159.

Kuhn, M. A. (2018): "Who Feels the Calorie Crunch and When? The Impact of School Meals on
 Cyclical Food Insecurity," Journal of Public Economics, 166, 27­38.

Laurito, A., and A. E. Schwartz (2019): "Does School Lunch Fill the "SNAP Gap" at the End of
  the Month?," NBER Working Paper No. 25486, "Available at https://www.nber.org/papers/
  w25486.pdf".

Long, B. T., and M. Kurlaender (2009): "Do Community Colleges Provide a Viable Pathway to a
  Baccalaureate Degree?," Educational Evaluation and Police Analysis, 31, 30­53.

Mangrum, D. (2019): "You're Not You When You're Hungry: Measuring the Impact of a Supple-
 mental Nutrition Program on Childhood Test Scores," Working Paper.

Mani, A., S. Mullainathan, E. Shafir, and J. Zhao (2013): "Poverty Impedes Cognitive Function,"
 Science, 341, 976­980.

Pallais, A. (2015): "Small Differences That Matter: Mistakes in Applying to College," Journal of
  Labor Economics, 33(2), 493­520.

Reardon, S. (2011): "The Widening Academic Achivement Gap Between the Rich and the Poor: New
  Evidence and Possible Explanations," Whither Opportunity? Rising Inequality and the Uncertain
  Life Chances of Low-Income Children.

Reynolds, C. L. (2012): "Where to Attend? Estimating the Effects of Beginning College at a
  Two-Year Institution," Economics of Education Review, 31, 345­362.

Schanzenbach, D. W., L. Bauer, and G. Nantz (2016): "Twelve Facts about Food In-
  security and SNAP," Accessed 2-February-2019 at https://www.brookings.edu/research/
  twelve-facts-about-food-insecurity-and-snap/.

Schwartz, A. E., and M. W. Rothbart (2019): "Let Them Eat Lunch: The Impact of Universal Free
  Meals on Student Performance," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 0, 1­29.

Shapiro, J. M. (2005): "Is There a Daily Discount Rate? Evidence from the Food Stamp Nutrition
  Cycle," Journal of public Economics, 89(2), 303­325.

Tarasuk, V., L. McIntyre, and J. Li (2007): "Low-Income Women's Dietary Intakes are Sensitive to
  the Depletion of Household Resources in One Month," The Journal of Nutrition, 137(8), 1980­
  1987.

The College Board (2016): "2016 College-Bound Seniors Total Group Profile Report," Discussion
  paper.

       (2019): "SAT Results Class of 2019," Discussion paper, Available at https://reports.
  collegeboard.org/sat-suite-program-results/class-2019-results.



                                              26
Todd, J. (2015): "Revisiting the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program Cycle of Food In-
  take: Investigating Heterogeneity, Diet Quality, and a Large Boost in Benefit Amounts.," Applied
  Economics Perspectives and Policy, 37(1), 437­458.

Winicki, J., and K. Jemison (2003): "Food Insecurity and Hunger in the Kindergarten Classroom:
 Its Effect on Learning and Growth," Contemporary Economic Policy, 21(2), 145­157.

Zimmerman, S. D. (2014): "The Returns to College Admission for Academically Marginal Students,"
  Journal of Labor Economics, 32(4), 711­754.

Zivin, J. G., S. M. Hsiang, and M. Neidell (2017): "Temperature and Human Capital in the Short-
  and Long-Run," Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, 5(1),
  77­105.




                                               27
                                             Table 1: Summary Statistics


                                       All Students           SNAP Scarce         Not SNAP Scarce
                                      Mean       St.Dev.          Mean                   Mean               Difference

  Student Characteristics
  SAT Score                           994.6       192.4            992.6                  997.6              5.06***
  SAT Math                            499.9       105.4            498.4                  502.2              3.74***
  SAT Verbal                          494.7       102.8            494.1                  495.5              1.31***
  Took >1 SAT                          0.47        0.50             0.48                   0.44             -0.042***
  Black                                0.15        0.36             0.17                   0.12             -0.053***
  Hispanic                            0.089        0.29            0.088                  0.091             0.0029**
  Asian                               0.051        0.22            0.056                  0.044             -0.013***
  Male                                 0.47        0.50             0.47                   0.47            -0.0059***

  College Outcomes
  No College                          0.13         0.33            0.13                   0.13             -0.0050***
  Attend 2 Yr College                 0.21         0.41            0.22                   0.19              -0.032***
  Attend 4 Yr College                 0.66         0.47            0.65                   0.68               0.037***

  College Characteristics
  Barrons Top 4            0.58                   0.49             0.59                   0.58             -0.0085***
  Flagship                 0.15                   0.36             0.15                   0.15              0.0066***
  College 6 Yr. Grad Rate  57.2                   18.6             57.8                   56.2               -1.63***
  College Avg. SAT        1090.6                  123.3           1093.4                 1086.7              -6.73***
  Observations                      420,881                       253,773               167,108

Notes: Data span 2009­2014 cohorts and include the following states: Arizona, District of Columbia, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas,
Maryland, Utah, and West Virginia. Data on SAT scores are from The College Board. Data on college attendance are from
the National Student Clearinghouse. Data on college characteristics are from IPEDS and are only reported for students who
attend college, so the number of observations reported is not accurate for those measures in this table. Students within 15­31
days of potential SNAP receipt, based on state-level SNAP issuance schedules and student last name are the students who may
be experiencing scarcity. Students within 0­14 days of potential SNAP receipt are less likely to be experiencing SNAP-related
scarcity.




                                                             28
                                  Table 2: Effects of SNAP Timing on SAT Score


                     Scarcity Indicator
                      15 days since SNAP * Income < 60k           -10.8125***       -6.9949***       -5.7611***
                                                                    (2.0209)         (1.6241)         (1.2327)
                      15 days since SNAP                             -2.3115          -1.4598          -0.5697
                                                                    (1.5443)         (1.2916)         (1.0952)
                     Income < 60k                                 -63.9966***      -42.8232***      -26.6516***
                                                                    (1.7834)         (1.3848)         (1.0646)
                     Black                                                        -141.5562***     -119.0775***
                                                                                     (1.5937)         (1.0800)
                     Hispanic                                                      -61.6905***      -59.2893***
                                                                                     (1.3974)         (1.1233)
                     Asian                                                          35.2788***       12.9240***
                                                                                     (2.8863)         (1.9985)
                     Native                                                        -55.5515***      -45.2149***
                                                                                     (3.5267)         (3.3133)
                     Male                                                           38.1513***       36.9588***
                                                                                     (0.8258)         (0.7965)
                     Days Since SNAP
                     Days since SNAP * Income < 60k                -0.3549***       -0.2309***       -0.2072***
                                                                    (0.0877)         (0.0716)         (0.0555)
                     Days since SNAP                                 -0.0552          -0.0227          0.0251
                                                                    (0.0557)         (0.0491)         (0.0414)
                     Income < 60k                                 -64.6833***      -43.2339***      -26.7080***
                                                                    (2.0147)         (1.5713)         (1.2108)
                     Black                                                        -141.6427***     -119.1100***
                                                                                     (1.5956)         (1.0812)
                     Hispanic                                                      -61.7022***      -59.2997***
                                                                                     (1.3944)         (1.1228)
                     Asian                                                          35.2376***       12.8950***
                                                                                     (2.8859)         (1.9979)
                     Native                                                        -55.5487***      -45.2170***
                                                                                     (3.5235)         (3.3119)
                     Male                                                           38.1494***       36.9535***
                                                                                     (0.8259)         (0.7968)
                     Observations                                     420,881         420,881          420,881
                     State-by-DOM Fixed Effects                        Yes             Yes                 Yes
                     Cohort Fixed Effects                              Yes             Yes                 Yes
                     Test Fixed Effects                                Yes             Yes                 Yes
                     Controls                                          No              Yes                 Yes
                     School Fixed Effects                              No              No                  Yes

Notes: Estimates are based on data from The College Board on SAT scores from 2009­2014 cohorts. We estimate Equation (2)
with controls including indicator variables for race, ethnicity, and gender. The outcome variable is composite SAT score.
Standard errors are clustered on the state-by-disbursement day-of-month-by-cohort level.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                 29
                       Table 3: Effects of SNAP Timing on SAT and College Outcomes


                                         SAT Score     No College    Start 2 Yr   Start 4 Yr   Grad Rate    Avg SAT      Selective    Flagship
 Scarcity Indicator
  15 days since SNAP * Income < 60k       -5.7611***     -0.0017     0.0089***     -0.0072**   -0.3527***   -2.8144***   -0.0093***    -0.0051**
                                           (1.2327)     (0.0025)      (0.0031)      (0.0033)    (0.1161)     (0.7088)     (0.0035)      (0.0022)
  15 days since SNAP                        -0.5697    0.0040**        0.0027      -0.0067**     -0.0817     -1.0901*      -0.0013       0.0007
                                           (1.0952)     (0.0019)      (0.0026)      (0.0031)    (0.0920)     (0.5719)     (0.0028)      (0.0019)
 Income < 60k                            -26.6516***   0.0383***     0.0257***    -0.0640***   -1.1371***   -6.1809***   -0.0505***   -0.0158***
                                           (1.0646)     (0.0020)      (0.0025)      (0.0028)    (0.0840)     (0.4956)     (0.0028)      (0.0018)
 Days Since SNAP
 Days since SNAP * Income < 60k           -0.2072***     -0.0001     0.0003**       -0.0002     -0.0095*     -0.0749**    -0.0003*      -0.0001
                                           (0.0555)     (0.0001)      (0.0001)     (0.0002)     (0.0052)      (0.0309)    (0.0002)     (0.0001)
 Days since SNAP                            0.0251       0.0001        0.0001      -0.0002*      -0.0037      -0.0398*     -0.0001      0.0000
                                           (0.0414)     (0.0001)      (0.0001)     (0.0001)     (0.0040)      (0.0233)    (0.0001)     (0.0001)
 Income < 60k                            -26.7080***   0.0383***     0.0261***    -0.0644***   -1.1925***   -6.6378***   -0.0510***   -0.0166***
                                           (1.2108)     (0.0023)      (0.0029)     (0.0031)     (0.0981)      (0.5746)    (0.0032)     (0.0020)
 Observations                               420,881     420,881       420,881       420,881      420,881       420,881     420,881      420,881
 Controls                                    Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
 State-by-DOM Fixed Effects                  Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
 Cohort Fixed Effects                        Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
 Test Fixed Effects                          Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
 School Fixed Effects                        Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes


Notes: Estimates are based on data from The College Board on SAT scores and National Student Clearinghouse data on college
attendance from 2009­2014 cohorts. We estimate Equation (2) with controls including indicator variables for race, ethnicity,
and gender. We also include a binary indicator for whether a student attended college in Columns 5­8. Graduation rate and
average SAT scores are missing for some students who do attend college, and we include a binary indicator for those outcomes
when relevant. Standard errors are clustered on the state-by-disbursement day-of-month-by-cohort level.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                    30
                                                       Table 4: Effects of SNAP Timing in Low-Income Communities


                                                               SAT Score       No College     Start 2-Year      Start 4-Year   Grad. Rate    Avg SAT      Selective    Flagship
       Low-Income Schools
        15 days since SNAP * Low income school                 -8.5738***      0.0118***         0.0041         -0.0159***     -0.4857***    -3.4642***   -0.0142***     -0.0036
                                                                (2.2612)        (0.0036)        (0.0037)         (0.0046)       (0.1627)      (1.0963)     (0.0041)     (0.0026)
        15 days since SNAP                                      -2.1243*         0.0016         0.0075**        -0.0091***       -0.1468     -2.1228***     -0.0018      -0.0010
                                                                (1.2045)        (0.0019)        (0.0030)         (0.0034)       (0.0892)      (0.6351)     (0.0027)     (0.0018)
       Low income school                                      -45.0186***      0.0331***        0.0070**        -0.0400***     -2.1324***   -11.1913***   -0.0422***   -0.0199***
                                                                (1.7049)        (0.0027)        (0.0028)         (0.0038)       (0.1243)      (0.7481)     (0.0030)     (0.0022)
       High SNAP Usage Zip Codes
        15 days since SNAP * High SNAP zipcode                 -4.1927***      0.0068***          -0.0039         -0.0029      -0.5916***   -3.3453***    -0.0094***    -0.0049*
                                                                 (1.6194)       (0.0023)         (0.0033)        (0.0037)       (0.1418)     (1.0017)      (0.0035)     (0.0025)
        15 days since SNAP                                      -2.9071**        0.0022         0.0099***       -0.0121***       -0.0688    -1.8642***      -0.0022      -0.0003
                                                                 (1.2992)       (0.0020)         (0.0032)        (0.0036)       (0.0947)     (0.6713)      (0.0028)     (0.0020)
       SNAP zipcode                                           -29.9762***      0.0231***        0.0180***       -0.0411***     -1.1557***   -8.4042***    -0.0337***   -0.0178***
                                                                 (1.2286)       (0.0018)         (0.0025)        (0.0028)       (0.1102)     (0.7587)      (0.0030)     (0.0021)
       Low-Income Zip Codes
31




        15 days since SNAP * Low income zip                      -0.2286        0.0058**          -0.0018         -0.0040        -0.2574*     -1.1760      -0.0069*      -0.0017
                                                                (1.5254)        (0.0023)         (0.0033)        (0.0036)        (0.1328)    (0.9099)      (0.0036)     (0.0027)
        15 days since SNAP                                     -4.3529***        0.0028         0.0092***       -0.0119***      -0.1913**   -2.6562***      -0.0033      -0.0015
                                                                (1.3445)        (0.0020)         (0.0033)        (0.0037)        (0.0957)    (0.6791)      (0.0029)     (0.0020)
       Low income zip                                         -32.5955***      0.0244***        0.0148***       -0.0393***     -1.1713***   -9.3830***    -0.0352***   -0.0196***
                                                                (1.1257)        (0.0019)         (0.0024)        (0.0026)        (0.1016)    (0.6768)      (0.0029)     (0.0023)
       Observations                                              420,881         420,881         420,881          420,881         420,881     420,881       420,881      420,881
       Controls                                                    Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
       State-by-DOM Fixed Effects                                  Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
       Cohort Fixed Effects                                        Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
       Test Fixed Effects                                          Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
       School Fixed Effects                                        No              No              No               No            No           No            No           No

     Notes: Estimates are based on data from The College Board on SAT scores and National Student Clearinghouse data on college attendance from 2009­2014 cohorts. Zip
     code-level data on SNAP participation and median family income are from the 2012 American Community Survey. We estimate Equation (2) with controls including indicator
     variables for race, ethnicity, and gender. We also include a binary indicator for whether a student attended college in Columns 5­8. Graduation rate and average SAT scores are
     missing for some students who do attend college, and we include a binary indicator for those outcomes when relevant. "Low-Income Schools" includes schools with a majority
     of students reporting a household income lower than $60,000. "High SNAP Usage Zip Codes" includes zip codes with over 15 percent of households participating in SNAP.
     "Low-Income Zip Codes" include zip codes with median income below $60,000. Standard errors are clustered on the state-by-disbursement day-of-month-by-cohort level.
     *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.
Table 5: Effects of SNAP Timing on SAT Scores and College Attendance, by Zip Code SNAP
Participation


                                                                         % Total Pop.   % Children
                                                                            SNAP          SNAP
                             SAT Score
                              15 days since SNAP * Zip Charactersistic   -59.6668***    -104.2869***
                                                                           (6.6201)       (10.4334)
                              15 days since SNAP                           2.3717*        2.5403**
                                                                           (1.2073)        (1.1945)
                             No College
                              15 days since SNAP * Zip Charactersistic    0.0719***      0.1101***
                                                                           (0.0129)       (0.0195)
                              15 days since SNAP                            -0.0029        -0.0023
                                                                           (0.0020)       (0.0019)
                             Start 2-Year
                              15 days since SNAP * Zip Charactersistic    0.0572***      0.1071***
                                                                           (0.0167)       (0.0274)
                              15 days since SNAP                            0.0011         0.0006
                                                                           (0.0030)       (0.0030)
                             Start 4-Year
                              15 days since SNAP * Zip Charactersistic    -0.1290***     -0.2173***
                                                                           (0.0187)       (0.0303)
                              15 days since SNAP                            0.0017         0.0017
                                                                           (0.0034)       (0.0034)
                             College Graduation Rate
                              15 days since SNAP * Zip Charactersistic    -4.5524***     -7.3179***
                                                                           (0.5037)       (0.7734)
                              15 days since SNAP                           0.1779**        0.1580*
                                                                           (0.0867)       (0.0859)
                             College Average SAT
                              15 days since SNAP * Zip Charactersistic   -27.3478***    -42.0741***
                                                                           (3.4728)       (5.1204)
                              15 days since SNAP                            0.2034         -0.0131
                                                                           (0.5954)       (0.5800)
                             Selective
                              15 days since SNAP * Zip Charactersistic    -0.1531***     -0.2601***
                                                                           (0.0168)       (0.0272)
                              15 days since SNAP                          0.0084***      0.0085***
                                                                           (0.0029)       (0.0029)
                             Flagship
                              15 days since SNAP * Zip Charactersistic    -0.0641***     -0.1058***
                                                                           (0.0113)       (0.0176)
                              15 days since SNAP                           0.0043**       0.0041**
                                                                           (0.0021)       (0.0020)
                             Observations                                  420,881        420,881

                             Controls                                        Yes            Yes
                             State-by-DOM Fixed Effects                      Yes            Yes
                             Cohort Fixed Effects                            Yes            Yes
                             Test Fixed Effects                              Yes            Yes
                             School Fixed Effects                            Yes            Yes


Notes: Estimates are based on data from The College Board on SAT scores and National Student Clearinghouse data on college
attendance from 2009­2014 cohorts. Zip code-level data on SNAP participation are from the 2012 American Community Survey.
We estimate Equation (2) substituting the indicator that a student is low income with the listed continuous measure. Controls
include indicator variables for race, ethnicity, and gender. We also include a binary indicator for whether a student attended
college in relevant specifications. Graduation rate and average SAT scores are missing for some students who do attend college,
and we include a binary indicator for those outcomes when relevant. Standard errors are clustered on the state-by-disbursement
day-of-month-by-cohort level.


                                                              32
                                           Table 6: Effects of SNAP Timing on SAT Score, by Combined Income Measures



                                            Inc < 60k    Inc < 40k     Waiver     Low-Inc Sch    Inc < 60k      Inc < 40k    Inc < 60k     Inc < 40k      Waiver       Inc < 60k     Inc < 40k
                                                                                                     *              *            *             *             *             *             *
                                                                                                   Waiver         Waiver    Low-Inc Sch   Low-Inc Sch   Low-Inc Sch      Waiver       Waiver
                                                                                                                                                                           *             *
                                                                                                                                                                      Low-Inc Sch   Low-Inc Sch
      Scarcity Indicator
       15 days since SNAP * Measure(s)      -5.7611***   -5.2159***   -3.3175**    -8.5738***    -3.6331**      -3.6938**   -10.5312***   -10.7809***   -8.1737***    -7.8776***    -9.0535***
                                             (1.2327)     (1.3407)     (1.5573)     (2.2612)      (1.5148)       (1.5932)     (2.5011)      (2.6616)     (2.5722)      (2.5084)      (2.5755)
       15 days since SNAP                     -0.5697      -1.6217    -2.3132**     -2.1243*     -2.3527**      -2.4425**    -2.6305**     -3.1148***   -3.4868***    -3.5954***    -3.6501***
                                             (1.0952)     (1.0289)     (1.0481)     (1.2045)      (1.0445)       (1.0320)     (1.1877)      (1.1713)     (1.2156)      (1.2131)      (1.2069)
      Days Since SNAP
      Days since SNAP * Measure(s)          -0.2072***   -0.1827***     -0.0883    -0.2982***      -0.1019      -0.1176*    -0.3616***    -0.3662***     -0.2551**     -0.2444**    -0.3068***
                                             (0.0555)     (0.0599)     (0.0674)     (0.0975)      (0.0663)      (0.0711)     (0.1085)      (0.1168)       (0.1113)      (0.1080)      (0.1124)
      Days since SNAP                         0.0251       -0.0164      -0.0445      -0.0407       -0.0456       -0.0461      -0.0621      -0.0805*      -0.0953**     -0.0991**     -0.0988**
                                             (0.0414)     (0.0374)     (0.0387)     (0.0446)      (0.0384)      (0.0378)     (0.0437)      (0.0433)       (0.0454)      (0.0454)      (0.0453)
      Observations                            420,881      420,881     420,881       420,881      420,881        420,881      420,881       420,881       420,881       420,881       420,881
      State-by-DOM Fixed Effects                Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
      Cohort Fixed Effects                      Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
      Test Fixed Effects                        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
      Controls                                  Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
      School Fixed Effects                      Yes          Yes          Yes          No            Yes           Yes          No            No             No            No            No
33




     Notes: Estimates are based on data from The College Board on SAT scores from 2009­2014 cohorts. We estimate Equation (2) with controls including indicator variables for
     race, ethnicity, and gender. Each column corresponds to a different measure of low-income status that is interacted with the scarcity indicator. "Low-Income Schools" includes
     schools with a majority of students reporting a household income lower than $60,000. The outcome variable is composite SAT score. Standard errors are clustered on the
     state-by-disbursement day-of-month-by-cohort level.
     *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.
                              Table 7: Effects of SNAP Timing on College Attendance Outcomes, by Combined Income Measures


                                                                              SAT Score    No College   Start 2-Year   Start 4-Year   Grad. Rate   Avg SAT      Selective    Flagship
               Waiver
                15 days since SNAP * Waiver                                   -3.3175**      -0.0034       -0.0014       0.0048       -0.5181***   -4.0767***     -0.0046    -0.0064**
                                                                               (1.5573)     (0.0036)      (0.0038)      (0.0045)       (0.1279)      (0.8156)    (0.0038)     (0.0026)
                15 days since SNAP                                            -2.3132**    0.0040**      0.0064**      -0.0104***      -0.1314*    -1.4920***    -0.0042*      -0.0002
                                                                               (1.0481)     (0.0019)      (0.0027)      (0.0031)       (0.0791)      (0.5068)    (0.0025)     (0.0017)
               Waiver on SAT                                                 -31.1823***   0.0325***     0.0117***     -0.0442***     -0.3733***    -1.6190**   -0.0288***      0.0009
                                                                               (1.2350)     (0.0030)      (0.0035)      (0.0038)       (0.1022)      (0.6268)    (0.0032)     (0.0023)
               Waiver*Income < 60k
                15 days since SNAP * Waiver * Inc < 60k                       -3.6331**      -0.0038       0.0009        0.0029       -0.5260***   -3.8565***     -0.0058    -0.0067**
                                                                               (1.5148)     (0.0039)      (0.0041)      (0.0048)        (0.1352)    (0.8248)     (0.0042)     (0.0028)
                15 days since SNAP                                            -2.3527**     0.0040**      0.0060**     -0.0100***       -0.1402*   -1.6018***     -0.0041      -0.0003
                                                                               (1.0445)     (0.0019)      (0.0027)      (0.0031)        (0.0786)    (0.5022)     (0.0025)     (0.0017)
               Waiver * Inc < 60k                                            -30.4738***   0.0361***     0.0108***     -0.0470***      -0.2460**     -0.6748    -0.0265***     0.0022
                                                                               (1.2179)     (0.0031)      (0.0035)      (0.0039)        (0.1063)    (0.6247)     (0.0034)     (0.0023)
               Waiver*Income < 60k*Low-Income School
34




                15 days since SNAP * Waiver * Inc < 60k * Low-inc School      -7.8776***      0.0013       0.0054        -0.0068      -0.6454***   -4.2070***    -0.0111*    -0.0093***
                                                                               (2.5084)     (0.0049)      (0.0047)      (0.0060)        (0.2334)    (1.3903)     (0.0056)     (0.0035)
                15 days since SNAP                                            -3.5954***    0.0044**     0.0080***     -0.0124***      -0.2081**   -2.5888***     -0.0043      -0.0010
                                                                               (1.2131)     (0.0020)      (0.0030)      (0.0034)        (0.0870)    (0.6252)     (0.0026)     (0.0017)
               Waiver * Inc < 60k * Low-income School                        -59.2681***   0.0525***     0.0073**      -0.0598***     -1.3429***   -5.8678***   -0.0461***     0.0030
                                                                               (2.0722)     (0.0038)      (0.0037)      (0.0049)        (0.1848)    (1.0074)     (0.0043)     (0.0030)
               Observations                                                     420,881      420,881      420,881        420,881        420,881      420,881      420,881      420,881
               Controls                                                          Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
               State-by-DOM Fixed Effects                                        Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
               Cohort Fixed Effects                                              Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
               Test Fixed Effects                                                Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes


     Notes: Estimates are based on data from The College Board on SAT scores and National Student Clearinghouse data on college attendance from 2009­2014 cohorts. We
     estimate Equation (2) with controls including indicator variables for race, ethnicity, and gender. School fixed effects are used in the first two panels, but not the third (with
     "Low-income School"). We also include a binary indicator for whether a student attended college in Columns 5­8. Graduation rate and average SAT scores are missing for
     some students who do attend college, and we include a binary indicator for those outcomes when relevant. "Low-Income Schools" includes schools with a majority of students
     reporting a household income lower than $60,000. Standard errors are clustered on the state-by-disbursement day-of-month-by-cohort level.
     *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.
                              Table 8: The Effect of SNAP Timing on SAT-Taking


                                                            All        Low-Income    High SNAP      Low-Income
                                                         Students        School          Zip           Zip
                    Ever Took SAT
                    SNAP Scarce % Main 4 Exams            -0.0236        -0.0396        -0.0142         -0.0195
                                                         (0.0224)       (0.0389)       (0.0244)        (0.0246)
                    Observations                         1149469        288,596        431,878         592,828

                    Controls                                Yes           Yes            Yes               Yes
                    State-by-DOM Fixed Effects              Yes           Yes            Yes               Yes
                    Cohort Fixed Effects                    Yes           Yes            Yes               Yes
                    School Fixed Effects                    Yes           Yes            Yes               Yes

Notes: Estimates are based on data from The College Board on PSAT and SAT scores from 2009­2014 cohorts. Zip code-level
data on SNAP participation and median family income are from the 2012 American Community Survey. The sample includes
only students that took the PSAT. Controls include indicator variables for race, ethnicity, and gender. "Low-Income Schools"
includes schools with a majority of students reporting a household income lower than $60,000. "High SNAP Usage Zip Codes"
includes zip codes with over 15 percent of households participating in SNAP. "Low-Income Zip Codes" include zip codes with
median incomes below $60,000. Standard errors are clustered on the state-by-disbursement day-of-month-by-cohort level.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                  35
                  Figure 1: Effects of SNAP Timing on SAT Score by Family Income




Notes: Data on SAT scores and family incomes are from The College Board. The vertical line, drawn at $60,000,
denotes an approximate household income cutoff for SNAP eligibility. Coefficients and their respective 95% confidence
intervals are generated from a regression estimated using OLS, as specified in Equation (2), interacting whether a
student is "SNAP scarce," i.e. within 15­31 days of potential SNAP receipt based on their last name, with household
income bins. Standard errors are clustered at the state-by-disbursement day-of-month-by-cohort level.




                                                         36
         Figure 2: Effects of SNAP Timing on SAT Score Ranges for Low-Income Students




Notes: Data on SAT scores are from The College Board. Coefficients and their respective 90% and 95% confidence
intervals are generated from 10 separate regressions estimated for low-income students using OLS, as specified in
Equation (1), using an indicator that a student's score falls within a 100 point range as the outcome variable. The
main variable of interest is whether a student is "SNAP scarce," i.e. within 15­31 days of potential SNAP receipt,
based on their last name.




                                                        37
                             Figure 3: Effects of SNAP Timing by Subgroups

                        (a) SAT Score                                        (b) No College




                       (c) Start 2 Year                                      (d) Start 4 Year




Notes: Estimates are based on data from The College Board on SAT scores and National Student Clearinghouse data
on college attendance from 2009­2014 cohorts. We estimate 2 regressions (per outcome) that include interactions of
race/gender with the variable of interest (low - income  SN AP scarce) as well as the "low-income" indicator. For each
subgroup, we report the coefficient for said group (e.g. "female"), the coefficient for low-income individuals in that
group (e.g. "female*low-income") and the treatment effect for that group (e.g. "female*low-income*SNAP scarce").
Bars are used to indicate the cumulative effect of the three coefficients per group so that the point estimate markers
represent the combined effects of each variable as they accumulate. The rightmost point estimate for each group
presents the total impact of being a member of that group, being low-income and experiencing scarcity combined
relative to a white (or male) student who is high-income and not in the "SNAP scarce" range.




                                                         38
Appendix

For Online Publication




                         39
                                                         Table A1: State Issuance Schedules, by State


      State                              Letter Groups                                 Issuance Days       Require SAT?        Require ACT?        Require PSAT?
      Arizona                A-B, C-D, E-F, G-H, I-J, K-L, M-N, O-P                         1-13                No                  No                   No
                                    Q-R, S-T, U-V, W-X, Y-Z                                  1-13
      DC                 A-B, C, D-F, G-H, I-K, L-M, N-Q, R-S, T-V, W-Z                     1-10          Yes (as of 2014)            No                  No
      Indiana            A-B, C-D, E-G, H-I, J-L, M-N, O-R, S, T-V, W-Z                     1-10                No                    No                  No
      Iowa               A-B, C-D, E-G, H-I, J-L, M-O, P-R, S, T-V, W-Z                     1-10                No                    No                  No
      Kansas              A-B, C-D, E-G, H-J, K-L, M, N-R, S, T-V, W-Z                      1-10                No                    No                  No
      Maryland           A-B, C-D, E-G, H-I, J-L, M-O, P-R, S, T-V, W-Z                     6-15                No                    No                  No
      Utah                               A-G, H-O, P-Z                                    5, 11, 15             No                    Yes                 No
      West Virginia       B & X-Z, C & F, H & N & V, I & M & O & U,                          1-9                No                    No                  No
                         Q & S & A & W, J-K & P, D-E & R, G & L & T

     Notes: Data on SNAP issuance schedules is from the USDA. Data on ACT and SAT requirements is from Education Commission of the States. See https://www.ecs.org/
     state-information-request-use-of-act-sat-and-psat-for-high-school-testing-as-required-by-essa/ for more information.
40
                    Table A2: Effects of SNAP Timing on Math and Verbal SAT Scores


                                                               SAT Math                                    SAT Verbal

 Scarcity Indicator
  15 days since SNAP * Income < 60k            -4.6913***      -2.7722***     -2.3038***      -6.1212***    -4.2227***    -3.4572***
                                                 (0.9867)       (0.8051)       (0.6426)        (1.1130)       (0.9070)      (0.7065)
  15 days since SNAP                            -1.8300**       -1.3638*        -0.8203         -0.4815        -0.0960       0.2506
                                                 (0.8380)       (0.6962)       (0.6023)        (0.7722)       (0.6693)      (0.5790)
 Income < 60k                                 -32.8900***     -21.1358***    -13.3045***     -31.1066***   -21.6874***   -13.3471***
                                                 (0.8354)       (0.6656)       (0.5350)        (1.0094)       (0.7884)      (0.6239)
 Black                                                        -75.4233***    -62.5138***                   -66.1329***   -56.5637***
                                                                (0.9000)       (0.5770)                       (0.7466)      (0.5996)
 Hispanic                                                     -30.4508***    -29.2666***                   -31.2397***   -30.0227***
                                                                (0.6982)       (0.6158)                       (0.7788)      (0.6150)
 Asian                                                         40.1073***     27.8270***                    -4.8284***   -14.9030***
                                                                (1.8252)       (1.3465)                       (1.2651)      (0.9559)
 Native                                                       -27.4003***    -22.9394***                   -28.1512***   -22.2755***
                                                                (1.8188)       (1.7477)                       (2.0661)      (1.9211)
 Male                                                          33.4130***     32.8011***                     4.7383***     4.1577***
                                                                (0.4063)       (0.3975)                       (0.4710)      (0.4532)
 Days Since SNAP
 Days since SNAP * Income < 60k                -0.1518***       -0.0881**     -0.0822***      -0.2031***    -0.1429***    -0.1250***
                                                (0.0431)         (0.0361)      (0.0296)        (0.0487)       (0.0401)      (0.0319)
 Days since SNAP                                -0.0518*          -0.0357       -0.0092         -0.0033        0.0130        0.0343
                                                (0.0302)         (0.0268)      (0.0232)        (0.0288)       (0.0258)      (0.0223)
 Income < 60k                                 -33.2248***     -21.3549***    -13.3387***     -31.4584***   -21.8790***   -13.3693***
                                                (0.9580)         (0.7688)      (0.6221)        (1.1333)       (0.8863)      (0.7022)
 Black                                                        -75.4619***    -62.5276***                   -66.1808***   -56.5823***
                                                                 (0.9012)      (0.5775)                       (0.7470)      (0.6002)
 Hispanic                                                     -30.4566***    -29.2711***                   -31.2456***   -30.0286***
                                                                 (0.6967)      (0.6156)                       (0.7774)      (0.6148)
 Asian                                                         40.0918***     27.8167***                    -4.8542***   -14.9216***
                                                                 (1.8256)      (1.3465)                       (1.2643)      (0.9557)
 Native                                                       -27.3974***    -22.9386***                   -28.1513***   -22.2784***
                                                                 (1.8176)      (1.7471)                       (2.0644)      (1.9203)
 Male                                                          33.4119***     32.7985***                     4.7376***     4.1550***
                                                                 (0.4063)      (0.3976)                       (0.4710)      (0.4534)
 Observations                                    420,881         420,881        420,881        420,881        420,881       420,881
 State-by-DOM Fixed Effects                        Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes
 Cohort Fixed Effects                              Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes
 Test Fixed Effects                                Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes
 Controls                                          No             No              Yes            No           No            Yes
 School Fixed Effects                              No             Yes             Yes            No           Yes           Yes

Notes: Estimates are based on data from The College Board on SAT scores from 2009­2014 cohorts. We estimate Equation (2)
with controls including indicator variables for race, ethnicity, and gender. Standard errors are clustered on the state-by-
disbursement day-of-month-by-cohort level.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                 41
                                Table A3: Summary Statistics By Income Level


                                         All Students           Low Income         Not Low Income
                                        Mean       St.Dev.          Mean                  Mean              Difference

   Student Characteristics
   SAT Score                            994.6        192.4           929.9                1034.3              104.4***
   SAT Math                             499.9        105.4           466.1                520.7               54.6***
   SAT Verbal                           494.7        102.8           463.8                513.6               49.9***
   Took >1 SAT                           0.47         0.50           0.36                  0.53               0.17***
   Black                                 0.15         0.36            0.23                 0.10               -0.13***
   Hispanic                             0.089         0.29           0.14                 0.056              -0.088***
   Asian                                0.051         0.22           0.057                0.048             -0.0094***
   Male                                  0.47         0.50            0.43                 0.50               0.072***

   College Outcomes
   No College                           0.13         0.33            0.18                 0.098              -0.079***
   Attend 2 Yr College                  0.21         0.41            0.25                 0.18               -0.072***
   Attend 4 Yr College                  0.66         0.47            0.57                 0.72                0.15***

   College Characteristics
   Barrons Top 4            0.58                      0.49           0.47                  0.65               0.18***
   Flagship                 0.15                     0.36            0.11                  0.17              0.061***
   College 6 Yr. Grad Rate  57.2                     18.6            51.6                  59.8              8.27***
   College Avg. SAT        1090.6                    123.3          1055.0                1107.6              52.6***
   Observations                       420,881                      160,089               260,792

Notes: Data span 2009­2014 cohorts and include the following states: Arizona, District of Columbia, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas,
Maryland, Utah, and West Virginia. Data on SAT scores are from The College Board. Data on college attendance are from
the National Student Clearinghouse. Data on college characteristics are from IPEDS and are only reported for students who
attend college, so the number of observations reported is not accurate for those measures in this table. Students are considered
low-income if they report that their family income is below $60,000 on the SAT survey.




                                                              42
Table A4: Alternative Specifications: Effects of SNAP Timing on SAT Scores and College Outcomes


                                                (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)
    SAT Score
     15 days since SNAP * Income < 60k      -5.7611***   -6.7948***    -5.2406***   -6.4389***   -4.9208***   -5.7611***   -5.7611**
                                             (1.2327)     (1.3813)      (1.2427)     (1.3897)     (1.1813)     (1.6897)     (2.1072)
    No College
     15 days since SNAP * Income < 60k        -0.0017      0.0002        0.0007       0.0030       -0.0024      -0.0017      -0.0017
                                             (0.0025)     (0.0025)      (0.0027)     (0.0027)     (0.0025)     (0.0029)     (0.0020)
    Start 2-Year
     15 days since SNAP * Income < 60k       0.0089***   0.0112***       0.0045     0.0069**     0.0073**     0.0089**     0.0089**
                                              (0.0031)    (0.0033)      (0.0031)    (0.0033)     (0.0030)     (0.0034)     (0.0038)
    Start 4-Year
     15 days since SNAP * Income < 60k       -0.0072**   -0.0114***      -0.0053    -0.0100***     -0.0049     -0.0072*    -0.0072**
                                              (0.0033)    (0.0035)      (0.0034)     (0.0035)     (0.0033)     (0.0041)     (0.0029)
    College Graduation Rate
     15 days since SNAP * Income < 60k      -0.3527***   -0.4237***      -0.2058    -0.2823**    -0.2736**    -0.3527**    -0.3527***
                                             (0.1161)     (0.1249)      (0.1281)     (0.1401)     (0.1131)     (0.1357)     (0.0878)
    College Average SAT
     15 days since SNAP * Income < 60k      -2.8144***   -3.1083***     -1.3324*     -1.5726*    -2.3410***   -2.8144***   -2.8144**
                                             (0.7088)     (0.7739)      (0.7907)     (0.8830)     (0.6762)     (1.0438)     (0.9763)
    Selective
     15 days since SNAP * Income < 60k      -0.0093***   -0.0120***    -0.0071**    -0.0101***    -0.0067*    -0.0093**    -0.0093***
                                             (0.0035)     (0.0037)      (0.0035)     (0.0038)     (0.0035)     (0.0039)     (0.0018)
    Flagship
     15 days since SNAP * Income < 60k       -0.0051**   -0.0053**       -0.0033      -0.0034     -0.0036*    -0.0051**    -0.0051***
                                              (0.0022)    (0.0022)      (0.0022)     (0.0023)     (0.0021)     (0.0025)     (0.0009)
    Observations                              420,881     420,537       388,422      388,076       420,881     420,881       420,881

    Controls                                   Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
    State-by-DOM Fixed Effects                 Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
    Cohort Fixed Effects                       Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
    School Fixed Effects                       Yes           No          Yes           No          Yes           Yes          Yes
    Zip Fixed Effects                           No          Yes           No          Yes           No           No           No
    Test Fixed Effects                         Yes          Yes           No           No          Yes           Yes          Yes
    Opportunity Fixed Effects                   No           No          Yes          Yes           No           No           No
    Income Bin Controls                         No           No           No           No          Yes           No           No
    Cluster                                    SDC          SDC          SDC          SDC          SDC           SC            S


Notes: Estimates are based on data from The College Board on SAT scores and National Student Clearinghouse data on college
attendance from 2009­2014. We estimate Equation (2) with controls including indicator variables for race, ethnicity, and gender.
Income bin controls include indicator variables for household income bins as reported on the SAT survey by students. Standard
errors are clustered on either the state-by-disbursement day-by-cohort level (SDC), state-by-cohort (SC) or state (S) level as
indicated.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                  43
Table A5: Effects of SNAP Timing on SAT Scores and College Attendance, by Demographic Sub-
groups


                                                             SAT Score     No College    Start 2-Year      Start 4-Year
                 Interacting Race with Treatment
                 Low Inc.*Scarce*White                          -1.0190       -0.0045      0.0128***        -0.0082**
                                                               (1.4444)      (0.0029)       (0.0036)         (0.0038)
                 Low Inc.*Scarce*Black                          -3.4598       0.0058      -0.0244***       0.0186***
                                                               (2.1327)      (0.0055)       (0.0062)         (0.0067)
                 Low Inc.*Scarce*Hispanic                     -7.8358***      0.0016      0.0197***         -0.0213**
                                                               (2.7475)      (0.0066)       (0.0076)         (0.0088)
                 Low Inc.*Scarce*Asian                       -23.3729***      -0.0035      0.0494***       -0.0458***
                                                               (4.8490)      (0.0083)       (0.0104)         (0.0113)
                 Low Inc.*Scarce*Native

                 Observations                                  404,420       404,420        404,420          404,420
                 Interacting Gender with Treatment
                 Low Inc.*Scarce*Male                        -8.6613***       -0.0003      0.0095**         -0.0092**
                                                              (1.7294)       (0.0035)      (0.0041)          (0.0044)
                 Low Inc.*Scarce*Female                      -3.6186***       -0.0028      0.0085**           -0.0057
                                                              (1.3619)       (0.0030)      (0.0036)          (0.0040)
                 Observations                                  420,881       420,881        420,881          420,881

                 Controls                                        Yes           Yes            Yes              Yes
                 State-by-DOM Fixed Effects                      Yes           Yes            Yes              Yes
                 Cohort Fixed Effects                            Yes           Yes            Yes              Yes
                 Test Fixed Effects                              Yes           Yes            Yes              Yes
                 School Fixed Effects                            Yes           Yes            Yes              Yes

Notes: Estimates are based on data from The College Board on SAT scores and National Student Clearinghouse data on college
attendance from 2009­2014 cohorts. We estimate an extension of Equation (2) that includes interactions of race/gender with
the variable of interest (low - income  SN AP scarce) as well as the "low-income" indicator. For each subgroup, we report
the coefficient for the treatment effect for that group (e.g. "female*low-income*SNAP scarce"). We estimate 2 regressions per
outcome: one for race and one for gender. In the race regressions, we only include students who indicated that they are white,
black, Hispanic, or Asian. Standard errors are clustered on the state-by-disbursement day-of-month-by-cohort level.
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the ten, five, and one percent levels, respectively.




                                                                 44
                           Figure A1: Number of Students by Days Since SAT




Notes: Figures are based on data from The College Board on SAT scores from 2009­2014 cohorts. We calculate the
"Days Since SNAP" for all students taking into account their test date and state schedule. The figure plots the raw
number of students for each number of days since possible disbursement.




                                                        45
         Figure A2: Effects of SNAP Timing on SAT Scores, by Various Poverty Measures

       (a)    SAT Total - Reported Income   (b)   SAT Math - Reported Income   (c)   SAT Verbal - Reported Income




        (d)    SAT Total - School Income     (e)   SAT Math - School Income     (f)   SAT Verbal - School Income




        (g)    SAT Total- Zipcode SNAP      (h)    SAT Math - Zipcode SNAP      (i)   SAT Verbal - Zipcode SNAP




        (j)   SAT Total - Zipcode Income    (k)    SAT Math - Zipcode Income   (l)    SAT Verbal - Zipcode Income




Notes: Data on SAT scores are from The College Board, and Zipcode attributes are from the American Community
Survey. Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals are generated by estimating Equation (2), interacting whether a
student is "SNAP scarce," with income measure bins. The top row corresponds to reported income. Each bin in the
second row indicates that at least half of the students report an income below a given threshold, but less than half
indicate income below a previous threshold. The third row pertains to SNAP usage by families in the student's home
zip code, and the last row is by median family income. Standard errors are clustered at the state-by-disbursement
day-of-month-by-cohort level.

                                                            46
                    Figure A3: Effects of SNAP Timing by Days Since Disbursement

                        (a) SAT Score                                         (b) No College




                       (c) Start 2 Year                                      (d) Start 4 Year




Notes: Figures are based on data from The College Board on SAT scores and National Student Clearinghouse data
on college attendance from 2009­2014 cohorts. Each figure plots day-level means of residuals for days over the SNAP
benefit month (after differencing out state-by-day-of-month, cohort, test, and school fixed effects and race and gender
effects) with quadratic fits of each of the outcomes listed. Means for low-income students are represented by squares,
while means for other students are represented by circles. We present both the linear coefficient and quadratic
coefficient and their corresponding standard errors in parenthesis from a quadratic analogue of Equation 2.




                                                          47
        Figure A4: Effects of SNAP Timing on SAT Scores, Dropping Each State and Exam

                                             (a) Dropping Each State




                                             (b) Dropping Each Exam




Notes: Figures are based on data from The College Board on SAT scores from 2009­2014 cohorts. Each figure displays
the main results where we estimate Equation (2) with controls including indicator variables for race, ethnicity, and
gender. The variable of interest is SN APicst  lowincomeicst . In Panel (a), we drop each state, and in Panel (b),
we drop each exam. The outcome variable is composite SAT score. Standard errors are clustered on the state-by-
disbursement day-of-month-by-cohort level.




                                                        48
     Figure A5: Effects of SNAP Timing on College Attendance, by Various Poverty Measures

         (a)    No College - Reported Income   (b)   Start 2 Yr - Reported Income   (c)   Start 4 Yr - Reported Income




          (d)    No College - School Income     (e)   Start 2 Yr - School Income     (f)   Start 4 Yr - School Income




          (g)    No College - Zipcode SNAP     (h)    Start 2 Yr - Zipcode SNAP      (i)   Start 4 Yr - Zipcode SNAP




          (j)   No College - Zipcode Income    (k)    Start 2 Yr - Zipcode Income   (l)    Start 4 Yr - Zipcode Income




Notes: Data on SAT scores are from The College Board, and Zipcode attributes are from the American Community
Survey. Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals are generated by estimating Equation (2), interacting whether a
student is "SNAP scarce," with income measure bins. The top row corresponds to reported income. Each bin in the
second row indicates that at least half of the students report an income below a given threshold, but less than half
indicate income below a previous threshold. The third row pertains to SNAP usage by families in the student's home
zip code, and the last row is by median family income. Standard errors are clustered at the state-by-disbursement
day-of-month-by-cohort level.



                                                                49
                     Figure A6: Effects of SNAP Timing by High School Seniority

                       (a) SAT Score                                       (b) No College




                      (c) Start 2 Year                                    (d) Start 4 Year




Notes: Estimates are based on data from The College Board on SAT scores and National Student Clearinghouse data
on college attendance from 2009­2014 cohorts. We estimate an extension of Equation (2) that includes interactions
of indicators for junior and senior students with the variable of interest (low - income  SN AP scarce) as well as
the "low-income" indicator. For each subgroup, we report the coefficient for the treatment effect for that group
("group*low-income*SNAP scarce"). Standard errors are clustered on the state-by-disbursement day-of-month-by-
cohort level.




                                                       50
