                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 GENDER DIFFERENCES IN (SOME) FORMATIVE INPUTS TO CHILD DEVELOPMENT

                                         Michael Baker

                                      Working Paper 28382
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28382


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2021




This paper was prepared for the 2019-20 Werner Sichel Lecture Series at Western Michigan
University. I thank Boriana Miloucheva for outstanding research assistance, and Doug Almond
and Janet Currie for useful suggestions. The analysis of mother's health and parenting post birth
reported in the paper are a byproduct of previous research collaborations with Kevin Milligan. I
thank him for his permission to present these results here. I gratefully acknowledge the research
support of a Canada Research Chair at the University of Toronto. Some of the analysis for this
paper was conducted at the Toronto Region Statistics Canada Research Data Centre, which is part
of the Canadian Research Data Centre Network (CRDCN). The services and activities provided
by the CRDCN are made possible by the financial or in-kind support of the SSHRC, the CIHR,
the CFI, Statistics Canada and participating universities whose support is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed in this paper do not necessarily represent the CRDCN's or
its partners, nor those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Michael Baker. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Gender Differences in (some) Formative Inputs to Child Development
Michael Baker
NBER Working Paper No. 28382
January 2021
JEL No. I14,J16

                                          ABSTRACT

While there is a large literature on gender differences in important childhood developmental
inputs in developing countries, the evidence for developed countries is relatively limited. I
investigate gender differences in some of these inputs in the US and Canada. In the US very low
birthweight males face excess mortality compared to their female counterparts. I provide
evidence that the previously documented increase in mortality with the withdrawal of critical care
at the Very Low Birth Weight (VLBW) threshold is primarily for boys. The fact that the critical
care of both boys and girls changes discretely at this threshold suggests a possible misallocation
of scarce hospital resources. In the US first born girls are breastfed longer than first born males,
but the difference is so small that it is unlikely to have any consequence. Finally, mothers in the
US and Canada are more likely to experience depression post birth when the first born child is a
boy. Perhaps related, the parenting of first born boys in Canada in the first years of life is more
likely to be confrontational.


Michael Baker
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
CANADA
and NBER
baker@chass.utoronto.ca
Introduction

           It is now well documented that females and males face different socio-economic

trajectories over the life cycle. These differences span work and pay, health, living

arrangements, and human capital investments. The reasons why may include discrimination,

individual choice, environmental factors and biology. While the relationships among

explanations and outcomes are in some cases reasonably straight forward--mothers and fathers

clearly experience the birth of a child differently in part due to biology--the relative

contributions of the various explanations to less deterministic outcomes are typically not as clear.

           In sorting among the alternatives researchers typically focus on a part of the life cycle

that they think critical to lifetime outcomes. The fetal origins hypothesis (Barker 1990) calls our

attention to the early years of life and the prenatal period, and much of social science research on

inequality is now focused on this interval.1 However, for the study of gender differences

research also reveals that later life events, for example the birth of a first child (e.g., Angelov et

al. 2016, Kleven et al. 2018), can significantly change important economic and social choices.

           Much of the previous research on early life environmental factors, thought important to

child development and adult outcomes, stratifies the data by socio economic status. In turn this

research has revealed that changes in the early life circumstances (i.e., these inputs) can have

significant effects on lifetime outcomes, especially for disadvantaged children. Prominent here,

for example, is the evaluation of RCTs such as the Perry Preschool Project (e.g., Heckman and

Karapakula 2019).




1
    See Almond et al. (2018) for a recent review of the economic literature.


                                                                                                         2
        While there is now a sizable literature on how these inputs vary by gender in certain

developing countries,2 there is less direct evidence on any corresponding differences in

developed countries.3 There are previous reports that males receive more total time from their

parents as a result of extra inputs from their fathers (e.g., Lundberg et al. 2007 and Yeung et al.

2001), and that family structure might vary by the gender of children (e.g., Lundberg and Rose

2003). Lundberg (2005) and Raley and Bianchi (2006) provide reviews of the literature.

        In this paper I investigate differences in a selection of these inputs by gender: medical

care after birth, breastfeeding, maternal mental health post birth and parenting. The

circumstances of birth, for example low birth weight, are known correlates of adult outcomes.

While the claimed benefits of breastfeeding probably exceed those rigorously documented,

evidence from RCT investigation indicates there are advantages to children from this source of

nutrition. Finally, parenting and parental time inputs are widely cited as an important

developmental input. For example, some of the benefits of the Perry Preschool intervention have

been attributed to its effects on home environment and parent/child attachments (e.g., Heckman

and Karapakula 2019).

        The analysis reveals differences in both maternal mental health post birth and early

parent/child interactions when the first born child is a boy rather than a girl, which are consistent

with boys experiencing a less nurturing and move aversive homelife. There are small gender

differences in the periods first born children are breastfed, but previous evidence on the impact

of breastfeeding suggests these would have little consequence. Finally, while lower birthweight




2
  Much of this research investigates these differences within populations in which there is preference for male
offspring. See, for example, Das Gupta (1987), Pande (2003) and Barcellos, Carvalho, and Lleras-Muney (2014) on
nutrition, Ganatra and Hirve (1994) and Borooah (2004) on healthcare and vaccination rates.
3
  There is a distinction here between gender differences in the provision of an input and gender differences in the
effect of a given input. A developing literature investigates this latter issue (e.g., Bertrand and Pan 2013).


                                                                                                                  3
boys receive more hospital care than lower birthweight girls, the impact of variation in this care

around the Very Low Birth Weight (VLBW) threshold by sex suggests that the survival and

development of low birthweight children might be improved by reallocating even more care to

boys.

Do Females and Males Enter the Labour Market Equally Skilled?

        Individuals' lifetime income trajectories depend in part on the skills and aptitudes they

bring to the labour market. There is now a large literature, much of it outside economics, that

has investigated gender differences in these skills. This research has generated both popular

(e.g., Gray 1992, Fine 2010) and academic debate (e.g., Hyde 2005, Spelke 2005) debate.

        Economic research has focused on gender differences in competitiveness (e.g., Niederle

and Vesterlund 2007), people (versus things) skills (e.g., Lordan and Pischke 2018) or more

generally interpersonal skills (e.g., Cortes et al 2018), risk preferences (e.g., Borghans et al.

2009) and willingness to work long hours (e.g., Goldin 2014). These are thought to help account

for the considerable gender based occupational segregation in the labour market (e.g., Blau et al.

2013) and gender differences in within occupation success. However, direct evaluations of the

relationship between the degree of occupational segregation and gender differences in these or

other skills are relatively rare (e.g., Baker and Cornelson 2018).

        If the gender differences in these skills are important for labour market success, then it is

more than an academic question to discover their source. Often this inquiry is cast as a duel

between biology and the environment, although research on genetics tells us that this dichotomy

is problematic due to the impact of environment on gene expression. However, it retains its

allure likely because it appears to present a division between factors thought to be immutable or

hardwired (biology) and those (environmental) that can be remediated if necessary.




                                                                                                     4
       The focus here is in differences in environmental factors that girls and boys experience as

they grow up. The analysis does not presume that these factors are the most important, nor

definitively connects any environmental differences to specific adult outcomes. Rather the

objective is to help fill in missing evidence to help target future investigation.

Should Gender Differences in Environmental Inputs Matter

       Whether to expect that any found gender difference in an environmental developmental

input is consequential is complicated by the fact that males and females simultaneously differ in

other ways that may mediate the effect of that input. For example, first born females in Canada,

the UK and the US receive more reading time with their parents than first born males starting at

very young ages (e.g., Baker and Milligan 2016). This might be consequential, and contribute to

the sometimes cited, but also disputed, female advantage in verbal skills (Hyde 2014), if a "unit"

of reading has the same developmental effect on boys and girls. But, for example, if boys are

more receptive to reading than females, then the gender difference in this input might not matter.

       One reason the impact of an input might differ by gender is genetic. For example, some

recent research argues that the relationship between stress and consequent depression is in part

mediated by genetic vulnerability that in turn appears to differ by gender (Salk and Hyde 2012).

Therefore, a given amount of stress might create a different level of depression in females and

males, or alternatively different amounts of stress would be required to result in the same level of

depression.

       As a result, it is not possible to interpret the gender differences documented here as

important to gender differences in the skills and aptitudes that males and females develop in their

lives without additional assumptions or evidence.




                                                                                                    5
Data and Empirical Framework

         The following analysis makes use of a variety of data sources which survey the

conditions of young children in the U.S and in Canada. For the investigation of medical care

after birth I make use of the US National Centre for Health Statistics (NCHS) public use birth

cohort linked birth/infant death files for the years 1983-1991 and 1995-2010.4 These data, for

the population of births, provide a variety of measures of mortality and the cause of death for

infants who die within the first year, as well as birth certificate information such as birthweight

and characteristics of the mother. I also use hospital discharge data for 1995-20055 for Arizona,

Maryland, New York and New Jersey distributed by the Heathcare Cost and Utilization Project

(HCUP). Information provided for each recorded birth includes birthweight, length of hospital

stay and hospital charges.

         The analysis of sex differences in breastfeeding makes use of the National Immunization

Survey (NIS) for the years 2010 through 2018. The NIS is nationally representative of the

American public and is conducted annually, primarily to survey the vaccination of young

children and teenagers in the US. I use data from the survey of children aged 19 through 35

months (NIS-Child). Included in the questionnaire are questions about whether, and how long,

each child was breastfed. Due to the ages of the surveyed children, breastfeeding may still be

ongoing. To address this issue, I examine milestones of breastfeeding in the first year--

initiation, breastfed at least 3 months etc.--and the number of days of the first year of life the

child was breastfed, which is coded 365 for those breastfed 12 months or longer.




4
  These files are not available for the years 1992-1994.
5
  The data from 1997 for Arizona is omitted from the analysis. Average birthweight calculated from these data for
this state displays a sharp downward spike of over 400 grams in this year. This is due to a spike in the proportion of
births with recorded birthweight of zero and roughly 200 grams


                                                                                                                     6
         Finally estimates of sex differences in mothers' mental health post birth and parenting

behaviour are based on the Canadian National Longitudinal Survey of Children and Youth

(NLSCY) and the US Early Childhood Longitudinal Survey-Birth Cohort (ECLS-B). The

NLSCY is a nationally representative survey of Canadian children conducted biennially between

1994/95 and 2008/09. A new cohort of children aged 0 and 1 entered the survey each wave and

were followed until age 4/5.6 The ECLS-B is a nationally representative survey of children born

in 2001, and followed subsequently through multiple waves (e.g., age 9 months, 2 years...).

         In much of the analysis I sample first born children if possible. The assumption that the

sex of the child is randomly assigned is most tenable for first born children. The sex of

subsequent children may not be random if the probability of higher order births is related to the

sex of realized births. Furthermore, the parity of the birth may affect the parental inputs a child

receives (e.g., Price 2008), so holding parity constant in any gender comparisons is important.

However, the sex of the first born child may be related to some important environmental factors

such as whether the father of the child is present in the household.7 This said, in some analyses I

consider the sample of all children or explicitly compare the results for the first born and all

children samples, where the behaviour under study is likely to be less sensitive to parity (e.g.,

hospital provided care directly post birth) or the comparison reveals interesting differences.

Medical Care After Birth

         Girls and boys face different medical challenges immediately post birth. I begin by

documenting a number of these differences. In figure 1 is evidence of sex differences in one year

mortality rates from the NCHS data for the years 1983-1991 and 1995-2010. In the top panel I


6
 An "original" cohort of children surveyed in the first wave and followed throughout the waves.
7
 Both Lundberg and Rose (2002) and Dahl and Moretti (2008) present evidence that a first born female raises the
probability of an absent father. Baker and Milligan (2016) find no evidence of this effect in some of the data sets
examined here.


                                                                                                                      7
present the one year mortality rates for all girls and boys. The rates for both sexes have been

trending downwards over time, with more pronounced declines in the 1980s. There is also a

persistent gap between the rates for males and females, which has narrowed somewhat over the

period. In the bottom panel is the corresponding statistics for the sample of low birth weight

(LBW) births defined by birthweight less than 2500 grams. The same patterns are present here

with the gender gap declining from over 4 deaths per hundred in the 1980s to under 2 by 2010.

In both graphs girls have lower mortality rates than males in all years.8

           In table 1 I present the causes of death in the first year, by sex, for the full (top panel) and

LBW (bottom panel) samples, conditioning on death in this period. The cause of death

classifications were changed starting 1990, so here I restrict the sample to 1990-1991 and 1995-

2010. In the full sample, the larger gender differences are for congenital malformations (higher

for females), Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (higher for males) and deaths associated with the

respiratory system (again higher for males). Different in the sample of LBW births is the gender

differences in conditions from the perinatal period and deaths associated with the circulatory

system, both higher for males.

           At least some of these sex differences in morbidities may be responsive to more intensive

medical care. A reason why there may be an interaction between sex differences in early life

ailments and corresponding differences in medical care is that some of the important indicators

for more intensive medical care--low and very low birth weight--do not distinguish by sex.

This is perhaps surprising because females are on average of smaller stature than males

throughout their lives. They are of lower average birthweight and (in the U.S.) attain an adult




8
    The corresponding graphs for 28 day mortality (not shown) exhibit very similar patterns.


                                                                                                          8
height almost 4 inches lower than males (e.g., Baker and Cornelson 2019). There is, therefore,

some intuition for using different cutoffs to indicate birth weights of concern for girls and boys.

           Information on gender differences in average birthweights is provided in figure 2. Here I

graph the average birthweight by birth percentile for girls and boys. Boys' average birthweight

is higher than girls' starting at roughly third percentile. Interestingly, the first and second

percentiles of birthweight, and the average birthweights within these percentiles, are almost

identical for boys and girls in these data. However, the outcomes of children in these lower

percentiles differ markedly by sex. In figure 3 I graph the one year mortality rate of girls and

boys in their respective first 10 percentiles of birthweight. The mortality rate for boys is elevated

relative to the rate for girls over the first 3-4 percentiles. The fourth percentile of birthweight is

2211 g for boys and 2170 g for girls. Therefore, it is at the percentiles of birthweight in which

girls' and boys' average birthweights are roughly similar that we observe the excess mortality for

males. The graph for 28 day mortality (not shown) tells a very similar story.

           Low birth weight can have both health and socio economic repercussions. While the

research on the associations of low birthweight is extensive, there appears to be few studies of

either of these classes of outcomes that make a distinction by sex. An exception is Stevenson et

al. (2001) who report that boys who are very low birth weight faced higher rates of mortality and

a number of morbidities.9

           The preceding evidence suggests that very low birth weight boys should receive higher

levels of critical care than their very low birth weight female counterparts. This is easily

checked in the data. The excess mortality of boys at these weights also suggests that this care

might be more consequential to their survival. To investigate this possibility I examine how



9
    See also Ernst et al. (2020).


                                                                                                         9
gender differences in mortality in the lower birthweight percentiles interact with the VLBW

threshold (birthweight <1500 grams) as an indicator for more intensive medical care. Almond et

al. (2010) take this methodological tack to demonstrate the returns to marginal medical care,

comparing the mortality of babies with birth weight just above and just below the VLBW

cutoff.10 They find an increase in mortality for babies marginally heavier than the cutoff, which

they interpret as a result of specialized care which is withdrawn as birthweight passes through

the VLBW cutoff. They also demonstrate that care, captured by data on hospital costs and length

of stay in the hospital, changes discontinuously at the VLBW cutoff supporting this

interpretation of the results.

           The intuition for the investigation here is that because the VLBW cutoff does not vary by

sex, but the underlying risk of mortality of low birth weight children does, there should be

corresponding differences in the impact of the variation medical care across the VLBW

threshold. A difference in the impact of this care by sex might indicate a misallocation of

resources through which care is provided children who do not need it at the expense to children

who do, or need it more.

           I note there has been some debate in this literature over the robustness of the main results

in Almond et al. (2010) to the treatment of births exactly at the VLBW cutoff (Barreca et al.

2011, Almond et al. 2011). I abstract from these issues, reporting alternative treatments of these

observations, with an eye to whether they affect inference on any gender gap in the effectiveness

of this specialized care.

           I follow the lead of these articles estimating the equation:

      !" =  + ! + !  (1500 - ! ) + (1 - ! )  (1500 - ! ) +  + !



10
     See also Barreca et al. (2011), Almond et al. (2011), Bharadwaj et al (2013) and Daysal et al. (forthcoming).


                                                                                                                     10
by OLS, where y is some outcome for child i born in year t, VLBW is a 0/1 indicator that the

child's weight is less than 1500 grams, ! is the child's weight in grams, and X is a set of control

variables, which for the analysis of mortality in the first year include fixed effects for year of

birth, mother's and father's five year age groups, race and whether the mother was born out of

state, and controls for the child's gestational age and plurality.11 I restrict the sample to children

with weight within 85 grams of the 1500 gram cutoff. Following developments in this research,

I estimate models that retain children with weights equal to 1500 grams in the sample, and also

so called donut estimators that omit these and surrounding observations. I present both robust

standard errors and standard errors clustered at the gram level.

         As overview, the graphs of the one year and 28 day mortality rates of boys and girls, by

one ounce (28 grams) weight bins in the vicinity of the VLBW threshold are reported in figures 4

and 5. In the top panel of each figure I include 1500 gram birthweights in the first bin above the

threshold, while in the lower panel I omit these births to provide some intuition for how the

donut estimates might differ from the full sample estimates.

         In the top panel there is evidence of elevated mortality rates in the first bin above the

threshold, potentially signaling that the withdrawal of care at the threshold is affecting the

survival of these marginally heavier births. There is also a distinct difference between boys and

girls as the uptick for boys is larger in both absolute and proportional terms, especially for one

year mortality. This is consistent with the intuition that the withdrawal of care at the threshold

may be more consequential for boys than for girls. In the bottom panel the upticks are smaller

for boys and disappear for girls, removing the 1500 gram births from the sample. The

diminution of the upticks is expected given the evidence in Barreca et al. (2011) that mortality at


11
  Here I use births of all pluralities to maximize sample size. Also, I am not aware of evidence that hospital
personnel administer care differently according to the plurality of the birth.


                                                                                                                 11
exactly 1500 grams is elevated compared to mortality at surrounding birthweights. The

difference in the effect of this change in sample by sex suggests that the donut estimators are less

likely to provide evidence that the cut off of critical care at the 1500 gram threshold has an effect

on the mortality of females.

         This inference is formalized in table 2, where I present estimates for VBLW, of , from

equation (1) for one year mortality rates. In the first row I present the estimate retaining babies

weighing 1500 grams in the sample, to match the sample selection in Almond et al. (2010).

Note, however, that the sample here is not strictly comparable to the one in this previous study as

I use data from an additional 8 years (2003-2010). The pooled estimate in the first column for

this longer period is marginally smaller than the estimate in Almond et al (2010).12 The

estimates in the succeeding columns indicate that once the sample is split by gender, it is males

that drive the pooled result. The estimate for males is more than twice as large as the estimate

for females. It is almost 18 percent of the mean mortality rate for boys in the sample bins above

the threshold. The estimate for girls is 8 percent of the mortality rate above the threshold. Also,

the estimate for boys is statistically significant at conventional levels, while the estimate for girls

is not. Finally, in estimate in the fourth column reveals that this sex difference is marginally

statistically significant at conventional levels.13

         In the subsequent rows I present estimates from the donut estimator following the sample

deletions in Barreca et al. (2011). Omitting observations at 1500 grams, the estimates of VLBW

fall by roughly 50 percent. This is consistent with the findings in Barreca et al. (2011). Only the

estimate for males is statistically significant and the estimate for females is now quite small.


12
  The corresponding estimate in Almond et al (2010) is -0.0072 (0.0022).
13
  The estimate of the difference is from the pooled regression with a full set of interactions between a dummy
variable for sex and all other control variables. The reported statistic is for the estimate of the interaction with the
VLBW dummy variable.


                                                                                                                           12
Additional omissions of births within one or two grams of 1500 grams from the sample, lead to

the same conclusion. Given the standard errors the sex differences in these samples are no

longer statistically significant, although this conclusion is tempered by both the individual

estimates by sex and the evidence in figure 4. Note that when births within 3 grams of 1500

grams are omitted the estimate for males is halved again and is no longer statistically significant.

As noted by both Barreca et al. (2011) and Almond et al. (2011) this donut omits births at 1503

grams, which is at a spike in reported weights as it corresponds to 53 ounces.

        A corresponding analysis of the 28 day mortality rate is presented in table 3. The

message here is very similar to that in the preceding table with some important exceptions. First,

even when the sample omission is extended to births of weights 1497 grams through 1503 grams,

the estimate of VLBW for males remains statistically significant and is 10 percent of the sample

mean mortality rate. Second, the gender differences are more consistently statistically

significant.

        This evidence supports the initial intuition to investigate the impact of the VLBW cutoff

on mortality by gender. The VLBW cutoff is far more meaningful for males than for females, as

judged by their mortality in the first year. While this is interesting in its own right, it does not

necessarily imply a misallocation of hospital critical care resources. It may be that medical staff

already know the more critical consequences of the VLBW cutoff for males and so the threshold

has less impact on the medical care for females. Alternatively, the threshold may lead to a

discrete increase in the care of females that consumes resources which might otherwise be

devoted to low birthweight males.

        In figures 6 and 7 I present the birthweight profiles of two measures of care, total hospital

charges and length of stay, from the HCUP data. Again, in the top panel I include 1500 gram




                                                                                                       13
births in the first bin above the threshold, while in the lower panel I omit these births from the

sample. In both figures there is evidence that boys receive more care than girls, conditional on

birthweight, by these measures, likely reflective of the greater risks of mortality boys face at

lighter weights. In the top panels there is a clear, discrete decline in these two measures of care

at the threshold, which is modestly larger for males. Omitting the 1500 gram births does not

materially affect this inference--the drop-offs in care for both girls and boys remain. The

omission of the 1500 gram births has less consequence here because, as noted by Almond et al.

(2011), the provision of care to 1500 g and marginally heavier babies does not differ

substantially.

        In tables 4 and 5 I present the corresponding regression estimates. The standard errors

are relatively large for this analysis, reflecting in part the restricted sample of states. For hospital

costs (table 4) there is discrete increase in costs for both girls and boys at the VLBW threshold,

congruent with the evidence in figure 6. Only the estimate for girls is statistically significant,

however, and it is almost 50 percent larger than the estimate for boys.14 Omitting observations at

and around the threshold, the estimate for girls mostly maintains its magnitude, and to a lesser

extent its statistical significance, while the estimate for boys attenuates. The corresponding

estimates for hospital length of stay are reported in table 5. In the full sample the estimates

indicate a discrete increase in stay for both sexes at the threshold, but here it is the estimate for

boys that is larger and statistically significant. Again, in the donut estimates the estimates for

girls mostly maintain their magnitude while the estimates for boys attenuate. The estimates for




14
   The pooled estimate is smaller than the comparable estimate in Almond et al. (2010), 9065 (2297). Different here
is the inclusion for all years between 1995 and 2005 for the four states (except 1997 for AZ), the omission of 2006,
and the omission of the 1991-2002 data for California. One consequence of these differences is that the pooled
sample used here is roughly one-third smaller than the sample in Almond et al. (2010).


                                                                                                                 14
these measures of care appear more sensitive to the sample omissions of the donut estimators

than the estimates for mortality.

           The preceding evidence supports the intuitive hypothesis that the impact of variation in

critical care around the VLBW threshold differs by sex. Boys exhibit higher mortality rates than

girls in the first percentiles of birthweight and are more affected by this variation in care than

girls. However, the VLBW threshold makes no accommodation by sex, and the HCUP data

suggests that critical care varies around the threshold for both girls and boys. While lower

birthweight boys receive more care conditional on birthweight than girls, the efficacy of the care

provided to girls is challenged, at least by the measures of first year mortality. If hospital care is

a scarce resource, these results suggests that there may be overall improvement in child survival

and health if a lower VLBW threshold for females freed up care for boys marginally above the

current unisex threshold. Furthermore, the evidence in Bharawaj et al. (2013) and Daysal et al.

(forthcoming) suggests that a reallocation of this care may have longer term payoffs for the

educational attainment of these children, and positive spillover effects for their siblings and their

parents. These findings underline gender differences in the contemporaneous consequences of

being born with low birthweight, which may in turn lead to corresponding differences in the long

run outcomes. As noted above few studies of the long run consequences of LBW have made a

distinction by sex.

Breastfeeding

           While breastfeeding is widely counselled for newborns (e.g., World Health

Organization15), the claimed benefits of this practice typically exceed the support of the existing

research. Some of the best evidence of positive impacts of breastfeeding come from the


15
     See https://www.who.int/health-topics/breastfeeding#tab=tab_1 accessed March 2, 2020.



                                                                                                      15
Promotion of Breastfeeding Intervention Trial (PROBIT) RCT in Belarus which randomly

allocated lactation support across hospitals. This support had a positive impact on breastfeeding

incidence and duration, and therefore provides a basis to examine the possible impacts of

breastfeeding free of confounding factors. The children who were treated by this RCT have been

followed over time (e.g., Yang et al. 2018) and have revealed that the treatment led to lower rates

of gastrointestinal infections and eczema (up to the teenage years) and a modest positive impact

on IQ at age 6, which appears to have faded out by the teenage years. Many of the other claimed

positive impacts of breastfeeding have been harder to substantiate (e.g., Baker and Milligan

2008) outside of correlational analysis.

        To investigate any differences in breastfeeding practices by child gender I select cases in

the NIS-Child in which the mother is the respondent, and the child is the first born. Summary

statistics for this sample are reported in table 5. I also report the statistics for the larger sample

of all children, and the marginally smaller sample which has non missing values for the

regression analysis, to make clear any impact of sample restrictions. The incidence of

breastfeeding is very similar for girls and boys in each sample, at 81 percent. There are sex

differences in the unconditional duration of breastfeeding in the first year favoring girls of 1 to 2

days across samples, smallest in the sample for the regression analysis. While girls are more

likely to reach each breastfeeding milestone in each sample, it is the difference in the proportions

reaching at least 12 months which is largest both in absolute and relative value. It is roughly 1.3

percentage points and statistically significant at the 0.01 level in each sample.

        To refine this inference, in table 6 I report estimates for a dummy variable for boys from

a linear regression of the various measures of breastfeeding indicated in the top row of the table,

on this dummy variable and additional controls for household income below the poverty line,




                                                                                                         16
whether the mother is married, whether the household has ever received WIC benefits, and fixed

effects for the child's and mother's ages, the mother's education, the child's race and the number

of children in the household. The control factors could vary systematically between boys and

girls if, for example, the sex of the first born has an impact on family structure.

          The estimates are slightly larger than the differences in the table of means, but largely

confirm the inference. The difference in incidence between the sexes is very small. Boys are

breastfed over the first year less than girls, the difference here approaching 3 days, although not

statistically significant at conventional levels. Again, the most substantial gender difference in

milestones is at 12 months. It should be noted that the estimates from the larger sample of all

children (not reported) are very similar to the ones reported in table 6, except all gender

differences in duration are statistically significant at the 5 percent level. For example, the

difference in breastfeeding duration in the first year favors girls by 3.34 days (standard error

1.318).

          The message of this analysis is that while there are differences in breastfeeding duration

among American girls and boys favoring girls, they are quite small. As a point of reference, in

the PROBIT study the differences in breastfeeding between the treatment and control groups,

which underly the reported positive impacts of this practice, are of an order of magnitude greater

than the gender differences reported here. For example (Yang et al. 2018) the treatment/control

difference in reporting 6 or more months of breastfeeding is 11.2 percentage points, or 31

percent of the control group mean.

Parenting and Parental Time Inputs

          The quality and type of parental/child interactions are thought to be key inputs to child

development (e.g., Heckman and Mosso 2014, Kahil 2015). More authoritative (versus




                                                                                                      17
authoritarian), sensitive and interactive parenting practices promote development and vary across

families stratified by SES. This latter point may account for the evidence that the benefits of

ECE appear to accumulate to disadvantaged children, and the universal ECE is sometimes found

to have negative impacts on children from more affluent families (e.g., Baker et al. 2008, 2019

and Fort et al. 2020).

           Any sex differences in parenting might result from factors on either the child or parent

side. For example, boys might be more difficult to parent leading to different discipline and

control strategies. However, it is also possible that the birth of a boy or girl differently affects

the mental state of a parent, perhaps due to preferences for a child of a particular sex, which in

turn affects parent/child interactions.

           The analysis begins with an examination of mothers' mental state after the birth of a

child. Two studies (de Tychey et al. 2007, Myers and Johns 2019) of small samples of mothers

in France and the UK found associations between postpartum depression and the birth of a male

child. The suspected mechanisms in these studies are cultural preferences for babies of a specific

gender and mothers' greater inflammatory response to the male fetus. Perhaps supportive of the

former hypothesis are studies reporting that postpartum depression is related to the birth of a

female child in India, Nigeria, Turkey and China, countries where arguably son preference is

more common.16

           Regarding sex preference in North America, it is generally maintained that couples prefer

a child of each gender (e.g., Angrist and Evans 1998 for the United States and McDougall,

DeWit, and Ebanks 1999 for Canada), although there is some evidence for son preference in

certain immigrant communities.17 Sex preference in this research is typically investigated by


16
     See Patel et al. (2014), Adewuya et al. (2005), Ekuklu et al. (2004) and Xie et al. (2007).
17
     See, for example, Abrevaya (2009) and Almond et al. (2013).


                                                                                                       18
relating fertility decisions to the sex composition of previously born children (e.g., a second child

more likely if the first born is male versus female). Baker and Milligan (2016) take a different

approach examining parental views at the time of conception of whether a pregnancy was

wanted, or at the right time, solicited after the birth has taken place.18 Interestingly, in the US

mothers are more likely to view the pregnancy as unwanted when the child is a male.19

         Maternal depression is potentially important for the quality of child/parent interactions.

Depressed mothers can be either more withdrawn or more hostile and intrusive, either of which

can undermine the preferred "serve and return" interaction thought important to brain

development. Exposure to depressed caregivers has been associated with higher levels of stress

and lower cognition in children (e.g., Liu et al. 2017, Madigan et al. 2018). Finally, there is

evidence that maternal stress transmitted to the child post birth through breast milk can

negatively impact behavior (Glynn et al. 2008).

         I begin by examining the relationship between the incidence of postpartum depression

and postpartum problems and the sex of the first born in nationally representative samples of

U.S. (the ECLS-B) and Canadian (the NLSCY) children. I estimate linear regressions of

indicators of maternal depression on a dummy variable for males, and controls for geography,

child's age and mother's age, education, foreign birth and ethnicity, which differ marginally by

sample.20 The estimates of the dummy variable for boys are presented in table 7.21


18
   The respondent is asked to think back to the time just before the pregnancy in answering, but the question is asked
after the child has been born.
19
   This result is obtained when the question is asked when the child is age 2 or younger. If the question is asked
when the child is ages 3 through 5, the overall incidence of unwanted pregnancy is considerably lower and if
anything the pregnancy is more likely viewed as unwanted if the child is female.
20
   Control variables for the ECLS-B regressions are age (single month), birth state, mother's age (single year),
education, foreign birth and indicators for whether the mother is black or Hispanic. Control variables for the
NLSCY regressions are child's age effects (single month), mother's age effects (single year), mother's education (4
categories), mother's foreign birth, dummy variables for province, urban size (5 categories) and year of birth.
21
   The estimates of these post partum outcomes and the following estimates for parenting practices, first appeared in
Baker and Milligan (2011).


                                                                                                                   19
         The results from the ECLS-B are in the first panel and are from the wave when the child

is 9 months old. In the first three rows are the estimates for 0/1 indicators of whether the

mothers reported being depressed, sad, blue either moderately or most of the time over the past

week.22 In the fourth row is the result for a 0/1 indicator that the mother had consulted with a

health care professional about their emotional or psychological state. For each outcome the mean

is higher if the first born child is male. For depression, the difference at 2½ percentage points is

statistically significant and just over 40 percent of the mean for a female child. In the last

column is the estimate conditional on the controls which make little difference to the estimated

gender differences or their statistical significance.

         In the second panel are results for mothers in Canada. This switch in country helps

calibrate some subsequent analysis of gender differences in parenting, which is possible with the

NLSCY. While clearly cross country institutional and cultural differences can confound the

US/Canada comparisons, Canada and the US are generally considered reasonably similar for

these purposes compared to other possible comparisons.

         There is clear evidence that mothers of first born boys in Canada are also more likely to

experience postpartum depression and post-partum problems.23 The differences are quite

substantial--two and half percentage points for postpartum depression and over 6 percentage

points for postpartum problems. Again, the inference from the conditional differences is very

similar to that from the unconditional differences.

         The results in table 7 support the previous research, based on more select samples, that

mother's face a heightened risk of post birth depression when their child is a boy. I next


22
   The variables are formed from the survey variables that record responses on a 4 point scale ranging from rarely of
never (<1 day per week) to most or all of the time (5-7 days per week).
23
   Post-partum problems include post-partum haemorrhage, post-partum infection, post-partum depression for more
than 14 days and post-partum hypertension.


                                                                                                                  20
examine how childhood parenting practices vary by gender. While I cannot causally connect any

differences in parenting to the preceding results on depression, as noted previous research

suggests that maternal depression can spill over into parent/child interactions.

           The NLSCY provides parenting scales based on the responses of the person most

knowledgeable about the child (in the vast majority of cases the child's mother) to a series of

questions about how they relate with their child. The scales attempt to capture positivity,

hostility, consistency and adversity in the parent/child relationship. In each case a higher score

means more of the indicated parenting dimension. Each scale is built up from the responses to a

series of questions tailored to the age of the child.24 I also examine the responses to a question

whether the respondent considers the child "difficult" for his or her age, a higher score indicating

more difficult.25

           The estimates for first born children aged 0-1 in table 8 indicate that boys receive more

hostile parenting, and that boys of this age are also more likely to be viewed as difficult by their

parent. At ages 3-5, the largest estimates suggest boys receive more hostile and aversive

parenting, although only the estimate for aversive parenting is statistically significant. Overall

the message here is that the interactions between the parent and the first born boy are more

confrontational.

           These results suggest that first born males in the Canada spend their first years in a

somewhat different parental environment than their female counterparts. The results are

consistent with boys simply being harder to parent, and so require different parenting strategies.

However, the results are also consistent with boys and girls posing similar challenges, but some




24
     These scales have been used previously in studies of child development (e.g., Baker et al. 2008).
25
     The parents are asked to rate the "difficulty" of child on a scale from very easy to highly difficult to deal with.


                                                                                                                           21
mothers meeting these challenges differently according to the sex of their child, due to the

association of a male birth with their mental health.

Conclusions

       Childhood environmental influences are viewed as an important, although not the sole,

determinant of adult social and economic outcomes. Much of the previous research on

childhood environment in developed countries has looked for differences in childhood

environments by socioeconomic indicators. This is an important distinction in the data as any

intergenerational persistence in childhood environments can feed directly into corresponding

persistence in adult outcomes, and thereby undermine social mobility and opportunity.

       Relatively understudied in this research is another dimension of inequality--gender.

While gender differences in socioeconomic outcomes are persistent over time, much of the

research on its causes focuses on adulthood factors such as discrimination, family/work balance

and employment decisions. However, there is intuition for gender differences in childhood

environment to matter to adult outcomes, given that research has documented that corresponding

differences in environment by family income or parents' educations have such effects.

       Previous research has shown that there are gender differences in the amount of time

children spend with their parents. For example, Baker and Milligan (2016) show that parents

spend more time in teaching activities with their first born daughters than their first born sons,

starting at very young ages, in Canada, the UK and the US. In the paper I extend this evidence to

environmental factors including medical care after birth, breastfeeding, mothers' mental health

and parenting practices.

       Lower birthweight boys in the US receive more care immediately after birth than their

female counterparts, as measured by hospital costs and hospital length of stay. This likely




                                                                                                     22
reflects the higher risk of mortality these boys face relative to girls. However, variation in this

care around the VLBW threshold reveals that while it has a tangible impact on the one year and

28 day mortality of boys, it has a much smaller to no effect on the mortality of girls. This

suggests a possible misallocation of resources. Sex specific thresholds for VLBW might result

in greater aggregate return to critical care for these children. These findings also suggest that the

consequences of low birth weight for longer term outcomes may differ by sex, a topic which has

received little attention the literature.

        Breastfeeding is widely counselled for children as a source of nutrition in the first year of

life. I find sex differences in this nutritional input in the US favour girls. However, the

differences are small, and, based on the guidance of previous research on the benefits of

breastfeeding, unlikely to have a substantive impact on longer run gender differences in

outcomes.

        I also examine measures of the interactions between parents and their young children in

Canada. Measures of parenting practice reveal that first born boys experience more

confrontational, hostile and aversive parenting than first born girls, on average. Perhaps

connected is that mothers in the US and Canada are more likely to report postpartum depression

after the (first) birth of a boy. This latter result, from nationally representative data, supports

previous findings from small selected samples.

        The results in the paper paint a picture of male disadvantage in these selected outcomes.

They are consistent with a social extension of the "fragile male" hypothesis (e.g., Kraemer

2000), which is more typically posed as a conjecture about males' relative genetic fragility.

        This analysis covers a small selection of the wide array of environmental factors which

previous research indicates are important to adult outcomes. Clearly taking a gender lens to the




                                                                                                      23
study of these inputs is needed to understand if sex differences in childhood environmental

inputs are potentially important. However, equally essential is applying this same lens to the

causal study of the relationship between these inputs and adult socio-economic status.




                                                                                                 24
References

Abrevaya, Jason. (2009) "Are There Missing Girls in the United States? Evidence from Birth
Data." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1(2) 1­34.

Adewuya, Abiodun O., Fatoye, Femi O., Ola, Bola A., Ijaodola, Omowumi R., Ibigbami, Stella-
Maris O., (2005) Sociodemographic and obstetric risk factors for postpartum depressive
symptoms in Nigerian women. Journal of Psychiatric Practice 11(5), 353­358.

Almond, Douglas, Joseph J. Doyle Jr., Amanda E. Kowalski, and Heidi Williams. (2010)
"Estimating Marginal Returns to Medical Care: Evidence from At-risk Newborns" Quarterly
Journal of Economics. 125(2) 591-634.

Almond, Douglas, Joseph J. Doyle Jr., Amanda E. Kowalski, and Heidi Williams (2011) "The
Role of Hospital Heterogeneity in Measuring marginal Returns to Medical Care: A Reply to
Barreca, Guidi, Lindo, and Waddell" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(4) 2125-2131.

Almond, Douglas, Currie, Janet and Valentina Duque (2018) "Childhood Circumstances and
Adult Outcomes: Act II," Journal of Economic Literature, 56(4), 1360-1446.

Almond, Douglas, Lena Edlund, and Kevin Milligan. (2013) "Son Preference and the Persistence
of Culture: Evidence from South and East Asian Immigrants to Canada." Population and
Development Review 39 (1): 75­95.

Angelov, Nilolay, Johansson, Per and Erica Lindahl, (2016) "Parenthood and the Gender Gap in
Pay." Journal of Labor Economics, 34(3) 545-579

Angrist, J., and W. N. Evans. (1998) "Children and Their Parents' Labor Supply: Evidence from
Exogenous Variation in Family Size." American Economic Review. 88(3): 450­77.

Barcellos, Silvia Helena, Carvalho, Leandro S. and Adriana Lleras-Muney. (2014) "Child
Gender and Parental Investments in India: Are Boys and Girls Treated Differently?" American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics 6 (1): 157­89.

Barreca, Alan, Melanie Guidi, Jason Lindo, and Glen Waddell (2011) "Saving Babies?
Revisiting the Effect of the Very Low Birth Weight Classification," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 126(4) 2117-2123.

Baker, Michael and Kirsten Cornelson (2018) "Gender Based Occupational Segregation and Sex
Differences in Sensory, Motor and Spatial Aptitudes" Demography, 55(5) 1749-1775.

Baker, Michael and Kirsten Cornelson (2019) "The Tall and the Short of the Returns to Height"
NBER Working Paper #26325

Baker, Michael, and Kevin Milligan. (2008) "Maternal Employment, Breastfeeding and Health:
Evidence from Maternity Leave Mandates", Journal of Health Economics, 27, 871-887.



                                                                                              25
Baker, Michael, and Kevin Milligan (2011) "Sex Differences in the Care of Young Children in
Canada and the US", Working paper, University of British Columbia and University of Toronto.

Baker, Michael, and Kevin Milligan. (2016) "Boy-Girl Differences in Parental Time
Investments: Evidence from Three Countries." Journal of Human Capital 10 (4): 399­ 441.

Baker, Michael, Jonathan Gruber, and Kevin Milligan. (2008) "Universal Child Care, Maternal
Labor Supply, and Family Well-Being." Journal of Political Economy 116 (4): 709­ 45.

Baker, Michael, Jonathan Gruber, and Kevin Milligan. (2019) The Long-Run Impacts of a
Universal Child Care Program" American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 11(3) 1-26.

Barker, David J. (1990) "The Fetal and Infant Origins of Adult Disease." BMJ , 301(6761):
1111.

Bertrand, Marianne and Jessica Pan (2013) "The Trouble with Boys: Social Influences and the
Gender Gap in Disruptive Behavior" American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5( 1 ) 32-
64

Bharawaj, Prashant, Loken, Katrine V. and Christopher Neilson (2013) "Early Life Health
Interventions and Academic Achievement" American Economic Review 2013, 103(5): 1862­
1891

Blau, Francine. D., Brummund, Peter and Albert Yung-Hsu Liu (2013). "Trends in occupational
segregation by gender 1970­2009: Adjusting for the impact of changes in the occupational
coding system" Demography, 50, 471­492.

Borghans, Lex, Golsteyn, Bart H. H., Heckman, James J. and Huub Meijers, (2009) "Gender
Differences in Risk Aversion and Ambiguity Aversion," Journal of the European Economic
Association, 7(2-3), 649-658

Borooah, Vani K. (2004) "Gender Bias among Children in India in Their Diet and Immunization
against Disease." Social Science and Medicine 58 (9): 1719­31.

Cortes, Guido Matias, Nir Jaimovich, and Henry Siu, (2018) "The end of men and the rise of
women in the high-skilled labor market," Working Paper 24274, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA

Dahl, Gordon B., and Enrico Moretti. (2008) "The Demand for Sons." Review of Economic
Studies 75 (4): 1085­1120

Das Gupta, Monica (1987) "Selective Discrimination against Female Children in Rural Punjab,
India." Population and Development Review 13 (1): 77­100.




                                                                                            26
De Tychey, Claude, Briançon, Serge, Lighessolo, Joselle, Spitz, Elisabeth, Kabuth, Bernard, De
Luigi, Vallerie, Messembourg, Catherine, Girvan, Françoise, Rosati, Aurore, Thockler, Audrey
and Stephanie Vincent (2007) Quality of life, postnatal depression and baby gender. Journal of
Clinical Nursing 17 (3), 312­332.

Daysal, N. Meltem, Simonsen, Marianne, Trandafir and Sanni Breining (Forthcoming)
"Spillover Effects of Early-Life Medical Interventions" Review of Economics and Statistics.

Ekuklu, Galip, Tokuc, Burcu, Eskiocak, Muzaffer, Berberoglu, Ufuk and Ahmet Saltik (2004).
Prevalence of postpartum depression in Edirne, Turkey, and related factors. Journal of
Reproductive Medicine 49 (11), 908­914.

Ernst, Mareike, Reiner, Iris, Fieß, Achim, Tibubos, Ana N., Schulz, Andreas,
Burghardt, Juliane, Klein, Eva M., Brähler, Elmar, Wild, Philipp S., Münzel, Thomas,
König, Jochem, Lackner, Karl J., Pfeiffer, Norbert, Michal, Matthias, Wiltink, Jörg and Manfred
E. Beutel (2020) "Sex-dependent associations of low birth weight and suicidal ideation in
adulthood: a community-based cohort study" Scientific Reports 10, 12969.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-69961-5

Fort, Margherita, Ichino, Andrea and Giulio Zanella (2020) "Cognitive and Noncognitive Costs
of Day Care at Age 0­2 for Children in Advantaged Families" Journal of Political Economy
128(1), 158-205

Ganatra, B., and S. Hirve (1994) "Male Bias in Health Care Utilization for Under-Fives in a
Rural Community in Western India." Bulletin of the World Health Organization. 72 (1): 101­4.

Glynn, Laura M., Davis Elysia P., Schetter Christine D., Chicz-Demet Aleksandra, Hobel Calvin
J. and Curt A. Sandman (2007), "Postnatal maternal cortisol levels predict temperament in
healthy breastfed infants." Early Human Development 83(10) 675-81.

Heckman, James J. and Ganesh Karapakula (2019) "The Perry Preschoolers at Late Midlife: A
Study in Design-Specific Inference" NBER Working Paper No. 25888

James J. Heckman & Stefano Mosso (2014) "The Economics of Human Development and Social
Mobility," Annual Review of Economics, Annual Reviews, 6(1), 689-733

Hyde, Janet. S. (2014). Gender similarities and differences. Annual Review of Psychology, 65,
373-398.

Kleven, Henrik Jacobsen, Landais, Camille and Jakob Egholt Søgaard, (2018) "Children and
Gender Inequality: Evidence from Denmark." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
11(4), 181-209.

Kraemer, Sebastian (2000) "The Fragile Male" BMJ, 321, 1609-1612.




                                                                                                27
Liu, Y., Kaaya, S., Chai, J., McCoy, D. C., Surkan, P., Black, M. M., Sutter-Dallay, A.L.,
Verdoux, H. & Smith-Fawzi, M. C. (2017). Maternal depressive symptoms and early childhood
cognitive development: A meta-analysis. Psychological Medicine, 47(4), 680-689.

Lordan, Grace and Jorn-Steffen Pischke, 2018 "Does Rosie like riveting? Male and female
occupational choices," Working Paper, London School of Economics and Political Science.

Lundberg, Shelly (2005) "Sons, Daughters and Parental Behavior." Oxford Economic Papers 21
(3): 340­56.

Lundberg, Shelly, and Elaina Rose (2002) "The Effects of Sons and Daughters on Men's Labor
Supply and Wages." Review of Economics and Statistics 84 (2): 251­68.

Lundberg, Shelly, and Elaina Rose (2003) "Child Gender and the Transition to Marriage"
Demography 40(2) 333-349

Lundberg, Shelly, Pabilonia, Sabrina W. and Jennifer Ward-Batts. (2007) "Time Allocation of
Parents and Investments in Sons and Daughters." Working paper, Dept. Econ., Univ.
Washington.

Madigan, Sheri, Hannah Oatley, Nicole Racine, R.M. Pasco Fearon, Lea Schumacher, Emis
Akbari, Jessica E. Cooke, George M. Tarabulsy (2018) "A Meta-Analysis of Maternal Prenatal
Depression and Anxiety on Child Socioemotional Development", Journal of the American
Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 57(9) 645-657

McDougall, Janette, DeWit, David J. and G. Edward Ebanks. (1999) "Parental Preferences for
Sex of Children in Canada." Sex Roles 41 (7­8): 615­26.

Myers, Sarah and Sarah E. Johns, (2019) "Male infants and birth complications are associated
with increased incidence of postnatal depression", Social Science & Medicine, 220 56-64

Niederle, Muriel and Lise Vesterlund (2007) "Do women shy away from competition? Do men
compete too much?," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122 (3), 1067­1101.

Pande, Rohini P. (2003) "Selective Gender Differences in Childhood Nutrition and
Immunization in Rural India: The Role of Siblings." Demography 40 (3): 395­418.

Patel, Vikram, Rodrigues, Merlyn and Nandita DeSouza (2014) "Gender, poverty, and postnatal
depression: a study of mothers in Goa, India" American Journal of Psychiatry 159 (1), 43­47.

Price, Joseph, (2008) "Parent-Child Quality Time: Does Birth Order Matter?" Journal of Human
Resources 43 240-265

Raley, Sara, and Suzanne Bianchi (2006) "Sons, Daughters, and Family Processes: Does Gender
of Children Matter?" Annual Review of Sociology 32:401­21.




                                                                                               28
Stevenson, D. K., Tyson, J. E., Korones, S. B., Bauer, C. R., Stoll, B. J., Papile, L. A., Verter, J.,
Fanaroff, A. A., Oh, W., Ehrenkranz, R. A., Shankaran, S., Donovan, E. F., Wright, L. L., and
J.A.Lemons, J. A. (2000). "Sex differences in outcomes of very low birthweight infants: the
newborn male disadvantage" Archives of disease in childhood-fetal and neonatal edition , 83(3)
F182­F185.

Xie, Ri-hua., He, Guoping, Liu, Aizhong, Bradwejn, Jacques, Walker, Mark and Shi Wu Wen, ,
(2007) "Fetal gender and postpartum depression in a cohort of Chinese women" Social Science
& Medicine 65 (4), 680­684.

Yang, Suengmi, Martin Richard M., Oken, Emily, Hameza, Mikhail, Doniger, Glen, Amit,
Shimon, Patel, Rita, Thompson, Jennifer, Rifas-Shiman, Sheryl L. Vilchuck, Bogdanovish,
Natalia, and Michael S. Kramer (2018) "Breastfeeding during infancy and neurocognitive
function in adolescence: 16-year follow-up of the PROBIT cluster-randomized trial". PLOS
Medicine 15(4): e1002554. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1002554

Yeung,Wei-Jun. J., Sandberg, John F., Davis-Kean, Pamela and Sandra L. Hofferth (2001)
"Children's Time with Fathers in Intact Families." Journal of Marriage and Family 63 (1): 136­
54.




                                                                                                    29
Table 1: Causes of death in the First Year of Life, 1990-1991 and 1995-2010, US

                             All Births (N=575173)                   LBW Births (N=383445)
                     Girls            Boys       Difference   Girls          Boys       Difference
 Infectious and     0.0259            0.026         -0.0001   0.022         0.0221        -0.0001
 Parasitic                                         (0.0004)                              (0.0005)
 Neoplasms          0.0082           0.0067      0.0016***    0.0058        0.0041      0.0016***
                                                   (0.0002)                              (0.0002)
 Diseases of the    0.0162           0.0169      -0.0007**    0.0099        0.0102        -0.0003
 blood                                             (0.0003)                              (0.0003)
 Endocrine          0.0149           0.0144          0.0005    0.013        0.0123       0.0007**
                                                   (0.0003)                              (0.0004)
 Nervous            0.0323           0.0318          0.0005   0.0367        0.0368        -0.0000
 system                                            (0.0005)                              (0.0006)
 Ear and            0.0001           0.0001         -0.0000   0.0000        0.0000        -0.0000
 mastoid                                           (0.0000)                              (0.0000)
 process
 Circulatory        0.0383          0.0401      -0.0018***    0.0397        0.0442      -0.0046***
 system                                           (0.0005)                                (0.0007)
 Respiratory        0.0433          0.0492      -0.0058***    0.0301        0.0319      -0.0017***
 system                                           (0.0006)                                (0.0006)
 Digestive          0.0136          0.0148      -0.0012***    0.0122        0.014       -0.0018***
 system                                           (0.0003)                                (0.0004)
 Genitourinary      0.0099          0.0102         -0.0003    0.0087        0.009         -0.0003
 system                                           (0.0003)                                (0.0003)
 Conditions         0.3432          0.3447         -0.0015    0.4619        0.4818      -0.0199***
 from perinatal                                   (0.0013)                                (0.0016)
 period
 Congenital         0.1525          0.1327       0.0197***    0.1405        0.1155       0.0250***
 malformations                                    (0.0009)                                (0.0011)
 SIDS               0.0797          0.0887      -0.0091***    0.028         0.0283        -0.0002
                                                  (0.0007)                               (0.00005)
 All other          0.0004          0.0006       -0.0001**    0.0003        0.0005      -0.0002***
 diseases                                         (0.0001)                                (0.0001)
 External           0.2216          0.2233        -0.0017     0.1912        0.1894         0.0018
 Causes                                           (0.0011)                                (0.0013)

Notes: Author's calculations from NCHS public use birth cohort linked birth/infant death files.
Reported statistics are conditional on death in the first year for the indicated samples. One star
indicates significance at the 10 percent level; two stars for 5 percent; three stars for 1 percent.




                                                                                                      30
Table 2: Changes in One Year Mortality at the VLBW Threshold, by Sex, 1983-2010, US

 Sample               Pooled               Girls                Boys             Difference
 Omission
 None                -0.0057              -0.0032              -0.0081              0.0049
                   (0.0015)***           (0.0020)           (0.0023)***            (0.0030)
                    [0.0033]*            [0.0031]            [0.0040]**           (0.0025)*
 1500g                -0.0026             -0.0007              -0.0044              0.0037
                     (0.0015)*           (0.0020)             (0.0023)*            (0.0031)
                    [0.0013]**           [0.0018]            [0.0017]**            (0.0024)
 1500g +/-1g          -0.0028             -0.0009              -0.0047              0.0038
                     (0.0015)*           (0.0020)            (0.0023)**            (0.0031)
                    [0.0013]**           [0.0018]           [0.0017]***            (0.0024)
 1500g +/-2g          -0.0021             -0.0002              -0.0040              0.0038
                     (0.0016)            (0.0021)             (0.0023)*            (0.0031)
                     [0.0013]            [0.0017]            [0.0018]**            (0.0024)
 1500g +/-3g          -0.0008             0.0006               -0.0022              0.0028
                     (0.0018)            (0.0025)             (0.0027)             (0.0037)
                     [0.0015]            [0.0025]             [0.0019]             (0.0033)


Notes: Author's calculations from NCHS public use birth cohort linked birth/infant death files.
In the first row that sample sizes are 344793 for the pooled sample, 172103 for the sample of
girls and 172690 for the sample of boys. In subsequent row births with the indicated weight are
omitted from the sample. The reported statistics in the first three rows are estimates of a dummy
variable for birthweight below the VLBW threshold following (1). The statistic reported in the
fourth row is the estimate of the interaction between sex and VLBW from a pooled regression
with a full set of interactions between the control variables and sex. Controls variables include
fixed effects for year of birth, mother's and father's five year age groups, race and whether the
mother was born out of state, and controls for the child's gestational age and plurality, as well as
separate linear trends in birthweight above and below the threshold. Robust standard errors in
parenthesis. Standard errors clustered at the gram level in square brackets. One star indicates
significance at the 10 percent level; two stars for 5 percent; three stars for 1 percent.




                                                                                                  31
Table 3: Changes in 28 Day Mortality at the VLBW Threshold, by Sex, 1983-2010, US

 Sample              Pooled               Girls               Boys             Difference
 Omission
 None                -0.0057             -0.0036              -0.0078             0.0042
                  (0.0013)***          (0.0017)**          (0.0019)***          (0.0026)*
                   [0.0027]**           [0.0023]            [0.0035]**         (0.0021)**
 1500g               -0.0033             -0.0017              -0.0047             0.0030
                   (0.0013)**           (0.0017)            (0.0019)**           (0.0026)
                  [0.0011]***           [0.0014]           [0.0013]***          (0.0015)*
 1500g +/-1g        -0.0034              -0.0018              -0.0049            0.0032
                  (0.0013)***           (0.0017)            (0.0019)**          (0.0026)
                  [0.0011]***           [0.0014]           [0.0013]***         (0.0016)**
 1500g +/-2g         -0.0028             -0.0013              -0.0043             0.0030
                   (0.0013)**           (0.0017)            (0.0020)**           (0.0026)
                  [0.0010]***           [0.0014]           [0.0012]***          (0.0016)*
 1500g +/-3g         -0.0021             -0.0003             -0.0039              0.0036
                    (0.0016)            (0.0021)            (0.0023)*            (0.0031)
                    [0.0013]            [0.0021]           [0.0016]**            (0.0026)


Notes: Author's calculations from NCHS public use birth cohort linked birth/infant death files.
In the first row that sample sizes are 344793 for the pooled sample, 172103 for the girls sample
and 172690 for the boys sample. In subsequent row births with the indicated weight are omitted
from the sample. The reported statistics are estimates of a dummy variable for birthweight
below the VLBW threshold following (1). The statistic reported in the fourth row is the estimate
of the interaction between sex and VLBW from a pooled regression with a full set of interactions
between the control variables and sex. Controls variables include fixed effects for year of birth,
mother's and father's five year age groups, race and whether the mother was born out of state,
and controls for the child's gestational age and plurality, as well as separate linear trends in
birthweight above and below the threshold. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. Standard
errors clustered at the gram level in square brackets. One star indicates significance at the 10
percent level; two stars for 5 percent; three stars for 1 percent.




                                                                                               32
Table 4: Changes in Hospital Costs at the VLBW Threshold, by Sex, 1995-2005, US

 Sample               Pooled               Girls                Boys             Difference
 Omission
 None                 5353                 6224                 4258                1966
                    (2114)**             (2769)**              (3204)              (4230)
                     [3527]               [3919]               [4578]              [4829]
 1500g                4736                  7161                2044                5117
                    (2185)**             (2805)**              (3367)              (4377)
                     [3930]               [4271]*              [4833]              [4683]
 1500g +/-1g           4243                6730                 1455                5275
                     (2224)*             (2859)**              (3421)              (4453)
                      [3996]              [4333]               [4923]              [4782]
 1500g +/-2g           3206                6824                -807.3                7631
                      (2217)             (2927)**              (3338)              (4435)*
                      [4088]              [4480]               [4871]               [4673]
 1500g +/-3g            611                4364                 -3428                7792
                      (2326)              (3060)               (3510)              (4651)*
                      [3497]              [4036]               [4588]               [5090]


Notes: Author's calculations from HCUP data. In the first row that sample sizes are 20423 for
the pooled sample, 10199 for the sample of girls and 10224 for the sample of boys. In
subsequent row births with the indicated weight are omitted from the sample. The reported
statistics are estimates of a dummy variable for birthweight below the VLBW threshold
following (1). The statistic reported in the fourth row is the estimate of the interaction between
sex and VLBW from a pooled regression with a full set of interactions between the control
variables and sex. Controls variables include fixed effects for year of birth, state, controls for
mothers' race, twin and multiple births, c-sections, and preterm births, as well as separate linear
trends in birthweight above and below the threshold. Robust standard errors in parenthesis.
Standard errors clustered at the gram level in square brackets. One star indicates significance at
the 10 percent level; two stars for 5 percent; three stars for 1 percent.




                                                                                                  33
Table 5: Changes in Hospital Length of Stay at the VLBW Threshold, by Sex, 1995-2005,
US


 Sample               Pooled               Girls                Boys             Difference
 Omission
 None                 1.083                0.772                1.345               -0.572
                    (0.506)**             (0.688)             (0.744)*             (1.012)
                     [0.747]              [0.788]              [1.047]             [1.119]
 1500g                 0.979               1.098               0.827                0.271
                     (0.524)*             (0.696)             (0.787)              (1.049)
                      [0.840]             [0.825]             [1.078]              [0.951]
 1500g +/-1g          0.703                0.829               0.536                0.293
                     (0.553)              (0.709)             (0.798)              (1.066)
                     [0.811]              [0.771]             [1.074]              [0.956]
 1500g +/-2g          0.434                0.804               0.003                0.801
                     (0.533)              (0.722)             (0.785)              (1.066)
                     [0.825]              [0.795]             [1.048]              [0.904]
 1500g +/-3g          -0.085               0.397               -0.601               0.997
                     (0.556)              (0.753)             (0.818)              (1.110)
                     [0.723]              [0.755]             [0.943]              [0.929]


Notes: Author's calculations from HCUP data. In the first row that sample sizes are 20502 for
the pooled sample, 10234 for the sample of girls and 10268 for the sample of boys. In
subsequent row births with the indicated weight are omitted from the sample. The reported
statistics are estimates of a dummy variable for birthweight below the VLBW threshold
following (1). The statistic reported in the fourth row is the estimate of the interaction between
sex and VLBW from a pooled regression with a full set of interactions between the control
variables and sex. Controls variables include fixed effects for year of birth, state, controls for
mothers' race, twin and multiple births, c-sections, and preterm births, as well as separate linear
trends in birthweight above and below the threshold. Robust standard errors in parenthesis.
Standard errors clustered at the gram level in square brackets. One star indicates significance at
the 10 percent level; two stars for 5 percent; three stars for 1 percent.




                                                                                                  34
Table 5: Sample Characteristics of the NIS-Child Breastfeeding Survey, 2010-2018, US


                                     Mother respondent       Mother respondent-first      Mother respondent-first
                                                                      born                born-regression sample
                                  Girls         Boys           Girls         Boys           Girls         Boys
 Ever breastfed                   0.811         0.814          0.818         0.817          0.818         0.819
 Duration in first year          180.13        178.11         172.70        170.55         172.05        170.83
 Breastfed >3 months              0.656         0.652          0.636         0.632          0.636         0.632
 Breastfed >6 months              0.430         0.423          0.402         0.401          0.403         0.402
 Breastfed >12 months             0.292         0.279          0.267         0.254          0.267         0.254
 N                                      159,169                      60,308                       56,574

Author's calculations from NHIS-Child. All statistics calculated using sample weights.



Table 6 Sex Differences in Breastfeeding Milestones, First Born Children, 2010-2018, US

                     Ever Breastfed         Duration first     Breastfed >3       Breastfed >6        Breastfed >12
                                                year             months             months               months
 Boy                        -0.003             -2.908             -0.009             -0.006             -0.017**
                           (0.006)            (2.104)            (0.007)            (0.007)              (0.007)
 Poverty Cutoff           -0.036***             -2.067             -0.017               -0.004           -0.016*
                            (0.009)            (3.190)            (0.011)              (0.011)           (0.010)
 Married                  0.070***            35.580***          0.106***              0.102***         0.084***
                           (0.008)             (3.886)            (0.010)               (0.010)          (0.009)
 WIC Benefits             -0.056***          -39.440***         -0.101***          -0.129***            -0.087***
                            (0.008)            (3.088)            (0.010)            (0.011)              (0.010)


Author's calculation from NHIS-Child using sample weights. N=56,574. Each column is from a
separate linear regression of the indicated dependent variable, on the reported independent
variables plus controls for mother's and child's age, mother's education, child's race and number
of children in the household. Robust standard errors in parentheses. One star indicates
significance at the 10 percent level; two stars for 5 percent; three stars for 1 percent




                                                                                                                    35
Table 7: Child Mother's Health Post Birth by the Sex of their First Born Child, US and
Canada

                                 N       Males    Females        Difference         Conditional
                                                                                    Difference
                                                  ECLS-B: 9 months
 Depressed                      3450     0.087     0.062      0.025***                0.024**
                                                               (0.009)                (0.011)
 Sad                            3450     0.083     0.072           0.011                0.008
                                                                  (0.009)              (0.012)
 Blue                           3450     0.069     0.063           0.007                0.007
                                                                  (0.008)              (0.011)
 Talked to Doctor about         3500     0.115     0.107           0.008                0.007
 Emotional/Psychological                                          (0.011)              (0.014)
 State
                                                 NLSCY Ages 0 and 1
 Postpartum depression          4754     0.139      0.115          0.024*              0.028**
                                                                   (0.013)             (0.013)

 Postpartum problems            4723     0.280      0.216         0.064***            0.067***
                                                                   (0.022)             (0.021)

 Mother's self reported         7016     0.180      0.165           0.015               0.016
 depression                                                        (0.012)             (0.012)


Notes: Author's calculations from ECLS-B and NLSCY. Sample sizes from the ECLS-B are
rounded to the nearest 50 observations. The reported regression estimates are the estimated
parameter on a 0/1 indicator that the child is male. Control variables for the ECLS-B regressions
are age (single month), birth state, mother's age (single year), education, foreign birth and
indicators for whether the mother is black or Hispanic. Control variables for the NLSCY
regressions are child's age effects (single month), mother's age effects (single year), mother's
education (4 categories), mother's foreign birth, dummy variables for province, urban size (5
categories) and year of birth. Robust standard errors in parentheses. One star indicates
significance at the 10 percent level; two stars for 5 percent; three stars for 1 percent




                                                                                                 36
Table 8: Parenting/Child interactions by the Sex of the First Born Child, Canada

                                N      Males    Females        Difference            Conditional
                                                                                     Difference
 Positive: Age 0-1             4900   18.072    18.123            -0.050               -0.056
                                                                 (0.090)              (0.084)
 Hostile: Age 0-1              4904    2.177     2.011          0.166**               0.188***
                                                                (0.068)                (0.060)
 Child is Difficult for age:   6024    2.226     2.080          0.146***              0.140***
 Age 0-2                                                         (0.049)               (0.046)
 Positive: Age 3-5             6847   16.425    16.355            0.070                 0.062
                                                                 (0.093)               (0.082)
 Hostile: Age 3-5              6692    8.706     8.500            0.206                 0.217
                                                                 (0.141)               (0.135)
 Consistent: Age 3-5           6565   15.502    15.397            0.105                 0.080
                                                                 (0.122)               (0.113)
 Averse: Age: 3-5              6812    4.062     3.912           0.150*               0.162**
                                                                 (0.083)              (0.080)

Notes: Author's calculations from NLSCY data. In the regression results the reported statistics
are the estimated parameter on a 0/1 indicator that the child is male. Control variables for the
Conditional Difference are child's age effects (single month), mother's age effects (single year),
mother's education (4 categories), mother's foreign birth, dummy variables for province, urban
size (5 categories) and year of birth. Robust standard errors in parentheses. One star indicates
significance at the 10 percent level; two stars for 5 percent; three stars for 1 percent




                                                                                                 37
Figure 1: Trends in One Year Mortality of Children , by Sex, US 1983-2010

All Births
               1400     1200
 1 Year Deaths per 100,000
   800       1000
               600




                               1980   1990    2000      2010        2020
                                              Year




LBW Births
                14000
                 10000 12000
   1 Year Deaths per 100,000
 6000    8000   4000




                               1980   1990      2000         2010     2020
                                                Year

                                             Girl      Boy




Notes: Author's calculations from NCHS public use birth cohort linked birth/infant death files.




                                                                                                  38
Figure 2: Average Birthweight by Sex, by Percentile, US 1983-2010
                5000
  Average Birthweight (grams)
   2000       3000
                1000     4000




                                0   20   40                60         80   100
                                              Percentile

                                              Girl              Boy



Notes: Author's calculations from NCHS public use birth cohort linked birth/infant death files.




                                                                                                  39
Figure 3: One year Infant Mortality by Sex, by Percentile, Bottom 10 percentiles, US 1983-
2010            60000
  1 Year Mortality Per 100,000
     20000      0   40000




                                 0   2   4                6         8        10
                                             Percentile

                                             Girl             Boy



Notes: Author's calculations from NCHS public use birth cohort linked birth/infant death files.




                                                                                                  40
Figure 4: One Year Mortality by Sex Around the VLBW Threshold, US 1983-2010

Full Sample
         .07  .06
 Mortality Rate
         .05
         .04




                     1400   1450        1500      1550    1600
                                   Birthweight

Omit 1500 gram Births
         .07   .06
   Mortality Rate
 .05     .04




                     1400   1450        1500      1550    1600
                                   Birthweight

                                   Girl     Boy




Notes: Author's calculations from NCHS public use birth cohort linked birth/infant death files.
Median birthweight by one ounce (28g) bins radiating away from the 1500g threshold. Top
panel--1500g births included in the first bin above threshold. Bottom panel--1500g births
omitted. Plotted at median birthweight in each bin.




                                                                                                  41
Figure 5: 28 Day Mortality by Sex Around the VLBW Threshold, US 1983-2010

Full Sample
               .05      .045
  28 Day Mortality Rate
    .035      .04
               .03
               .025




                               1400   1450         1500      1550    1600
                                              Birthweight

Omit 1500 gram Births
              .05    .045
 28 Day Mortality Rate
    .035    .04
              .03
              .025




                               1400   1450        1500      1550    1600
                                             Birthweight

                                             Girl     Boy



Notes: Author's calculations from NCHS public use birth cohort linked birth/infant death files.
Median birthweight by one ounce (28g) bins radiating away from the 1500g threshold. Top
panel--1500g births included in the first bin above threshold. Bottom panel--1500g births
omitted. Plotted at median birthweight in each bin.




                                                                                                  42
Figure 6: Hospital Charges by Sex Around the VLBW Threshold

Full Sample
               90000
 Mean Total Charges (2005 $)
     70000     6000080000




                               1400   1450       1500         1550    1600
                                             Birthweight

Omit 1500 gram Births
               90000
 Mean Total Charges (2005 $)
      70000        80000
               60000




                               1400   1450       1500        1550    1600
                                             Birthweight

                                             Boy      Girl




Notes: Author's calculations from HCUP data for births in Arizona, Maryland, New York and
New Jersey, 1995-2005. Median birthweight by one ounce (28g) bins radiating away from the
1500g threshold. v Top panel--1500g births included in the first bin above threshold. Bottom
panel--1500g births omitted. Plotted at median birthweight in each bin.



                                                                                               43
Figure 7: Hospital Length of Stay by Sex Around the VLBW Threshold

Full Sample
            30       28
 Mean Length of Stay
         26 24
            22




                          1400   1450       1500        1550   1600
                                        Birthweight

Omit 1500 gram Births
            30       28
  Mean Length of Stay
 24       2622




                          1400   1450       1500        1550   1600
                                        Birthweight

                                        Boy      Girl



Notes: Author's calculations from HCUP data for births in Arizona, Maryland, New York and
New Jersey, 1995-2005. Birthweight grouped into one ounce (28g) bins radiating away from the
1500g threshold. Top panel--1500g births included in the first bin above threshold. Bottom
panel--1500g births omitted. Plotted at median birthweight in each bin.




                                                                                          44
