                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      IS AUTOMATIC ENROLLMENT CONSISTENT WITH A LIFE CYCLE MODEL?

                                           Jason Scott
                                         John B. Shoven
                                           Sita Slavov
                                         John G. Watson

                                       Working Paper 28396
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28396


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2021




We thank Bill Gale and participants at the 2020 Working Longer and Retirement Conference for
helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w28396.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Jason Scott, John B. Shoven, Sita Slavov, and John G. Watson. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Is Automatic Enrollment Consistent with a Life Cycle Model?
Jason Scott, John B. Shoven, Sita Slavov, and John G. Watson
NBER Working Paper No. 28396
January 2021
JEL No. D14,D15,J26

                                         ABSTRACT

We examine optimal retirement saving for young adults in a life cycle model. We find that for
liquidity-constrained young adults who anticipate significant earnings growth, optimal retirement
saving is zero. Specifically, we find that with a plausible wage profile for college-educated
workers, retirement saving does not begin until the late 30s or early 40s, even with standard
employer matching. In fact, inducing workers in their mid 20s to participate in a retirement plan
requires employer match rates of more than 1000 percent. In contrast, workers facing a flat wage
profile begin saving much earlier in life. We also find that participating may be optimal for
younger workers facing steeper wage profiles if they anticipate switching jobs and cashing out
after 1-2 years. Our results suggest that automatically enrolling workers, regardless of age or
anticipated future earnings, in defined contribution plans is not consistent with optimizing
behavior in a life cycle model.

Jason Scott                                     Sita Slavov
J S Consulting                                  Schar School of Policy and Government
57 Fairview Plz                                 George Mason University
Los Gatos, CA 95030                             3351 Fairfax Drive, MS 3B1
jscott457@yahoo.com                             Arlington, VA 22201
                                                and NBER
John B. Shoven                                  sslavov@gmu.edu
Department of Economics
Stanford University                             John G. Watson
Landau Economics Building                       Stanford University
579 Jane Stanford Way                           725 Magnolia Street
Stanford, CA 94305                              Menlo Park, CA 94025
and NBER                                        jgwatson@stanford.edu
shoven@stanford.edu
   I.      Introduction

   Young adults are less likely than other age groups to participate in employer-sponsored

defined contribution plans like 401(k)s, and those who do participate choose lower contribution

rates than older workers (Vanguard 2020). Moreover, when they switch jobs, young workers

are more likely than other age groups to cash out of their 401(k) plans (Munnell and Webb

2015). Such leakages from retirement accounts are widely viewed as a problem (Tergesen 2017;

VanDerhei 2019). More broadly, there has been widespread concern about the adequacy of

retirement saving (see, for example, Gomes, Hoyem, Hu and Ravina 2018). Explanations for why

individuals may fail to save adequately for retirement have drawn on behavioral economics

(Attanasio and Weber 2010 provide a review), and solutions to this problem have generally

focused on boosting saving at all stages of the life cycle. For example, the number of 401(k)

plans with automatic enrollment has tripled since 2007 (Vanguard 2020). Automatic enrollment

greatly boosts participation rates in 401(k)s, with a particularly pronounced effect among young

adults (Madrian and Shea 2001).

   In this paper, we examine the extent to which young workers' reluctance to participate in

defined contribution plans ­ even with generous employer matching ­ can be explained within

a life-cycle model with rational, optimizing behavior. We find that a standard life cycle model

predicts zero or low retirement saving at younger ages under a variety of plausible conditions.

In particular, there are three factors that can rationalize zero retirement saving for workers in

their 20s, even with generous employer matches. First, in the presence of borrowing

constraints, a relatively steep earnings profile (typical of higher-income workers) can make zero

saving at younger ages optimal. Second, near-zero real interest rates (which have prevailed for
the past decade) lower the cost of current consumption relative to future consumption, making

a consumption profile that declines with age optimal and leading to lower saving for plausible

parameter values. Finally, as our previous research has shown (Scott, Shoven, Slavov and

Watson 2020), a high Social Security replacement rate (typical of lower income workers) can

rationalize lower saving at all ages.

   We explore the contribution of the first two factors to rationalizing low saving among

college educated younger workers. Our findings suggest that if the real interest rate is 3

percent, the same as the subjective rate of time preference, and the earnings profile is flat,

retirement saving begins immediately upon commencing work. That is, under these

assumptions, young workers save for retirement in a standard life cycle model. When the real

interest rate is zero percent (in line with recent experience), and the earnings profile is flat, the

onset of saving is delayed to age 30 with a typical employer match, and 38 without. That

change reflects the desirability of a declining consumption profile due to the fact that the

subjective rate of time preference exceeds the real interest rate. A more realistic earnings

profile ­ in which earnings for young and middle-aged workers rise with age ­ delays the onset

of saving regardless of whether interest rates are high or low. With a 3 percent interest rate,

saving for retirement commences at age 37 with an employer match and 40 without; with a

zero percent interest rate, saving for retirement commences at age 41 with an employer match

and 44 without. This shift ­ even at a higher interest rate ­ reflects the upward sloping earnings

profile combined with a borrowing constraint. The individual would like to borrow against

future wages to finance steady consumption but is unable to do so; thus, consumption tracks

earnings initially and retirement saving begins later in life. The lower interest rate pushes the
onset of saving even further into the future as the ideal consumption path is now downward

sloping.

   Our findings have implications for the design of automatic enrollment features in defined

contribution retirement plans. These features are introduced with the idea that they will nudge

workers to participate in the plan. It is assumed that enrolling is in the participant's self-interest

(particularly for plans with matching contributions) and that failure to enroll reflects a non-

optimizing mistake. However, optimality is often defined by a standard life-cycle model with

rational behavior. If one's labor market earnings at age 25 are only 42 percent of peak earnings

at age 45 or 50 (typical for college graduates), not saving for retirement in the early years of

one's career may be completely optimal and rational in a life-cycle model. In such a model, life

cycle considerations lead one to a consumption profile that is smoother than the earnings

profile and saving for retirement when income is temporarily low could be suboptimal. If a life

cycle model represents optimal behavior, then automatic enrollment that applies to workers of

all ages could be nudging young people to make ­ rather than avoid ­ a mistake. Related work

by Harris, Troske, and Yelowitz (2018) examines the optimality of retirement saving for

individuals with high levels of credit card debt.

   Our life cycle model is the simple, standard framework that economists use to address

saving and wealth accumulation over a lifetime. Additional institutional richness could overturn

the conclusion that the typical college graduate would optimally not start saving for retirement

until their late 30s or early 40s. After presenting the model and results, we provide a discussion

of additional considerations that could alter the conclusions. But our findings from the simple
model can contribute to examination and exploration of the logic and design of automatic

enrollment.



   II.     Model

           a. Basic Problem

   We begin with a standard life cycle model in which an individual who begins working life at

time 0 and live for up to  years. Labor is supplied inelastically through an exogenous

retirement age, at which point Social Security is claimed. Each period, the individual has the

opportunity to save a in a tax-deferred employer-sponsored retirement account (with an

employer match) and in a taxable brokerage account. The individual solves the following

problem:

                                                  

                                      = max   ( )
                                     
                                                  =0


                                     subject to

                                                 B
                                     +1 = +1 ( +  )


                                              D
                                  +1 = +1 ( +  +  )


                                       =  - (B  D
                                              +  )


                                               0

                                               


                                               0


                                            D
                                              
Here,  represents consumption in period  and  is a discount factor that incorporates both a

pure rate of time preference and a survival probability.  is income, including labor and Social

Security income.      
                  and  , respectively, are assets in the brokerage account and tax-deferred

                           
retirement account. +1 and +1 , respectively, are the gross returns on the brokerage

account and the tax-deferred retirement account. We allow for the differences in the interest

rate on saving and borrowing, as discussed below. B    D
                                                   and  , respectively, are contributions to


the brokerage account and the tax-deferred retirement account. Employer contributions to the

retirement account are denoted  . Assets in the brokerage account cannot fall below a

borrowing limit,  . The upper and lower bounds on D
                                                   , contributions to the retirement


account, are used to enforce contribution limits and required minimum distributions, as

described below.



           b. Borrowing costs

       In the taxable account, the interest rates for borrowing and saving may be different. We

model this by splitting an account's value into positive and negative parts and then applying the

correct rate to each part. For example, let   0 be the positive part and   0 be the

negative part, then

                                          
                                        +  =  - 

                                     ,     ,
                                +1 = +1  - +1 

The non-negative parts  and  must obey the complementarity condition   = 0. That is,

only one of the parts may be positive. If the interest rate on borrowing is greater than the

interest rate on saving, we can reasonably expect that complementarity will hold ­ i.e., there
will be no arbitrage opportunities where the individual can borrow at a lower rate and invest

the borrowed funds to earn a higher return. When we solve the problem, we replace the

complementarity conditions with simple non-negativity constraints ( ,   0), optimize, and

verify that complementarity holds for the result.



             c. Limits on Tax-Deferred Transactions

          There are limits on the contributions an employee may make to a tax-deferred account.

Also, there are Required Minimum Distributions (RMDs) that a retiree must take when she

reaches age 72. An employee's yearly contribution (withdrawal) to (from) her tax-deferred

account is D
            . In order to easily distinguish between a contribution and a withdrawal, we split


D                                                                                     
 into positive and negative parts, where   0 is the positive part or contribution and  


0 is the negative part or withdrawal. That is,

                                                
                                           =  -  .

                                                   
These parts must obey a complementarity condition   = 0. If we assume that an individual

may only contribute funds during her working years and may only withdraw funds during her

retirement years, then complementarity is automatically satisfied. During working years, we

require

                                              
                                           0    

where  is the contribution limit. In any year, a retiree may withdraw any amount that exceeds

the RMD, but no more than the account's value. Thus, during retirement years, withdrawals

must satisfy

                                            
                                              
where  is the RMD and requires individuals aged 72 or older to withdraw a fraction  of the

account value:

                                      0  () < 72
                                   =  
                                        ()  72



           d. Matching

       Many employers offer their employees a 401(k) match. These programs may either

partially or fully match employee contributions. The majority of employer matching programs

are summarized by a simple formula. Let  be the employer match, i.e., the actual dollar

amount contributed by an employer, and let  be the employee's salary. Recall that D
                                                                                   is the


employee contribution and  is the employee contribution limit. Then

                           = 1 min(max(0, D
                                           ) , min(2  ,  )).


Here, an employee's contribution is matched at the rate 1 up to the IRS's limit or a fraction 2

times the employee's salary, whichever is less. A commonly used partial match program

matches 50% of contributions up to 6% of salary, i.e., 1 = 0.5 and 2 = 0.06. A typical full

match program has parameters 1 = 1 and 2 = 0.04. If we add in the employer's match, the

tax-deferred account value evolves as

                                             
                                 +1 = +1 ( +  +  )




Note that for withdrawals, we have  < 0, which implies  = 0.

                                                    
       The match  is a piecewise linear function of  , the positive part of  . In particular,


                                       0  
                                            
                               ()
                                  =  1     
                                    1       
                                            
where  = min(2  ,  ). On the linear segment   [0,  ], the function rises from the

origin along the line with slope 1 . On the linear segment   [ ,  ], the function is flat and

hugs the horizontal line at height 1  .In solving the model, we do not need to explicitly

enforce the logic that controls switching between linear segments. Rather, we can obtain the

same results with the following constraints:

                                               
                                          0       
                                               1
                                             
                                               
                                          1

The first of these constraints limits the employer's match to the plan's maximum, and the

second guarantees that the employee contributes as much as the employer, but no more than

the contribution limit. Since the match is "free money," an optimization seeks as much as

possible provided that the employee contributes first. Thus, one of three bounds on  will be

                                           
binding: (1)  = 0, (2)  = 1  , or (3)  = 1  .



           e. Calibration

   We consider males and females born in 1995 who start work at age 25 and can live through

age 110. Survival probabilities come from the Social Security Administration cohort mortality

tables underlying the intermediate assumptions in the 2013 Trustees Report. The pure rate of

time preference is 3 percent. We use a utility function that exhibits constant relative risk

aversion with a coefficient of relative risk aversion equal to 3. Retirement and Social Security

claiming occur at age 67, the full retirement age for the cohort. The real interest rate on saving

in the taxable account is set to either 0 percent or 3 percent. The average combined federal and
state tax rate on wages is assumed to be 27 percent. Inflation is set to 2 percent. Contribution

limits and required minimum distributions are based on IRS rules. 1 The employer match is

assumed to bd 50 percent for up to 6 percent of wages. In our baseline analysis, borrowing is

not allowed; however, after performing our baseline analysis, we consider how borrowing

changes the results.

    We construct a stylized wage profile for a college-educated individual using data from the

Center for Economic Policy Research's Current Population Survey extract for March 2018. We

begin by computing age profiles of average wage and salary income for individuals with a

bachelor's degree. We then divide these averages by the Social Security Average Wage Index

(AWI) in 2018 ($52,145.80). Thus, we obtain snapshots of the age-wage profile, relative to the

economy-wide average wage, for our workers. We smooth these profiles by fitting a fifth-

degree polynomial to them. We simulate wages in the model by multiplying the fitted ratios in

Figure 1 by a future projection of the AWI, which is assumed to grow at 3 percent. Figure 1

shows our simulated wage profile for college-educated males; for comparison, we also include

the profile for high school educated males. Compared to the wage profile for high school

educated males, the wage profile for college-educated males grows more rapidly with age. In

reality, more highly educated workers may benefit from faster economy-wide wage growth;

that would make the wage profile for this group even steeper. College educated females have a

somewhat flatter wage profile. In the remainder of the paper, we focus on males in order to

illustrate the role that the shape of the wage profile play. Results for females are available upon



1
 See https://www.irs.gov/retirement-plans/plan-participant-employee/retirement-topics-401k-and-profit-sharing-
plan-contribution-limits and https://www.irs.gov/retirement-plans/plan-participant-employee/retirement-topics-
required-minimum-distributions-rmds.
request. Social Security benefits are calculated using the standard formula based on the highest

35 years of earnings indexed for wage growth.



   Figure 1: Simulated Wage Profiles




   III.      Results

          We begin by solving the model under the assumption of a 3 percent real interest rate

and a constant wage equal to the average lifetime wage shown in Figure 1. This solution

provides a benchmark for comparison so that we can explore the role of low interest rates and

a steep wage profile. Next, we consider lowering the interest rate to zero percent ­ in line with

recent experience ­ while keeping the wage profile flat. Then, we consider the more realistic

wage profile shown in Figure 1, combined with a 3 percent real interest rate. Finally, we
combine the wage profile shown in Figure 1 with a zero percent interest rate. For each case, we

consider an employer match of 50 percent up to 6 percent of earnings, as well as no employer

match. All dollar amounts shown in this section are in inflation-adjusted 2020 dollars.

           a. High Interest Rate, Flat Wage Profile

       Figure 2 shows the path of consumption, both with and without an employer match,

when the interest rate is 3 percent and the wage profile is flat. The path of income is also

shown as a dashed line. Consumption is slightly downward sloping through middle age and

drops off at older ages. The subjective rate of time preference equals the interest rate; thus,

the downward slope reflects mortality discounting. The figure indicates that consumption is

below income through retirement; that is, saving begins immediately upon commencing work.

An employer match shifts the consumption profile upwards at all ages, reflecting an income

effect (which dominates the substitution effect of the subsidy for saving).
Figure 2: Optimal Consumption with 3 Percent Real Interest Rate and Averaged Wage Profile




       Figure 3 shows how a zero percent real interest rate affects the path of consumption

both with and without an employer match. We continue to assume the wage profile is flat. Now

consumption has a marked downward slope, reflecting the divergence between the subjective

rate of time preference and the real interest rate (on top of mortality discounting). In this

scenario, saving does not begin immediately ­ a result that is reflected in the fact that

consumption initially tracks income. When the employer match is offered, saving begins at age

30; with no match, saving begins at age 38. Consumption with a match is initially below

consumption without a match, reflecting the substitution effect of the match. However, the

income effect ultimately dominates, and consumption is higher when the match is offered.
Figure 3: Optimal Consumption with 0 Percent Real Interest Rate and Averaged Wage Profile




       Figure 4 shows the path of consumption under the higher 3 percent real interest rate,

but when the wage profile reflects the shape shown in Figure 1. In this scenario, the individual

would ideally like to have the consumption profile shown in Figure 2; however, borrowing

constraints combined with the steep wage profile make that infeasible. Thus, consumption

initially tracks wages, and there is no retirement saving. Saving begins at age 37 with a match

and age 40 without a match. Figure 5 combines the low interest rate assumption of Figure 3

and the realistic wage profile assumption of Figure 4. In this case, saving is delayed even further

­ to age 41 with a match and age 44 without a match.
Figure 4: Optimal Consumption with 3 Percent Real Interest Rate and Simulated Wage Profile
Figure 5: Optimal Consumption with 0 Percent Real Interest Rate and Simulated Wage Profile




           b. Impact of Matching and Job Changes

       Our life cycle model predicts that young workers generally will not contribute to

employer-sponsored retirement plans even with typical levels of employer matching

contributions. Table 1 shows the age that saving begins under the four sets of assumptions

reflected in Figures 2-4. When the wage profile is flat and the interest rate is 3 percent, saving

begins at age 25 regardless of the presence of a match. Under all other sets of assumptions,

saving does not begin immediately even with a match, although a match does bring forward the
date at which saving begins. When interest rates are low and the wage profile is steep, saving

does not begin until the 40s even with a standard employer match.



Table 1: Age at Onset of Saving




       What match rates would induce younger workers to participate? Figure 6 shows the

match rate required to induce participation at each age when the interest rate is zero percent

and the wage profile has the shape shown in Figure 1. It suggests that match rates of 1000

percent or more are required to induce workers in their 20s to contribute. The required match

rate drops steadily with age. In the early 40s, it reaches 50 percent ­ at which point the stylized

worker is induced to save under the standard employer matching we use to generate Figure 5.
Figure 6: Employer Match Rates Required to Induce Nonzero Saving




       Thus far, we have assumed that our stylized worker does not have the opportunity to

cash out of the 401(k). What if the worker were offered the option to cash out with a 10

percent penalty after a specified period? Such opportunities may arise with job changes.

Indeed, the option of cashing out after a few years accelerates the onset of saving. Table 2

shows that ­ under a zero percent interest rate and realistic wage profile ­ if the worker cannot

cash out until retirement, saving does not begin until age 41 (as indicated in Figure 5). However,

if there was an opportunity to cash out after 3 years of contributions, saving would begin at age

38. An opportunity to cash out after 2 years induces the worker to start contributing at age 32,

and an opportunity to cash out in one year induces saving right away. These results highlight
the role that the illiquidity of 401(k)s plays in driving the participation decisions of younger

workers.

Table 2: Age at Onset of Saving with Cash Out Option (50 Percent Match, 10 Percent Penalty)




        To further explore the role of liquidity, we repeat our analysis under the assumption

that the individual can borrow up to one year of earnings at an interest rate that is two

percentage points higher than the rate paid on savings. Borrowing allows for increases in

consumption early in life, thereby reducing the match required to induce retirement saving.

However, with a zero percent real interest rate on savings and a realistic wage profile, the

required match is still over 400 percent at age 25. Saving for retirement begins at age 40 with

an employer match and age 51 without. We also repeat our analysis under the assumption that

the individual can borrow up to one year of earnings and begins working life with debt equal to

one year of their age 25 earnings (possibly representing student loans). In this case, the

required match to induce participation at age 25 is much higher ­ 1,649 percent. However,

beyond age 25, the results are very similar to those from the case in which borrowing is allowed

because in both cases the individual enters future years carrying similar amounts of debt. 2




2
 These two sets of results ­ with borrowing, and with initial student debt ­ are not shown but are available upon
request.
   IV.      Conclusions

         We have shown that low retirement saving among young workers ­ even with standard

employer matching ­ can be rationalized within a life-cycle model under plausible assumptions.

That is, we do not need to add behavioral features like present bias to explain this

phenomenon. Thus, policies like automatic enrollment ­ which increase 401(k) participation

rates among young workers ­ may induce choices that deviate from fully rational behavior in a

life cycle model. More generally, our model suggests that the age profile of saving can be an

important factor to take into account when designing policies that are intended to increase

retirement saving.

         Our life cycle model is a simple one in which retirement is the only reason for saving. In

reality, it may be rational for young people to save for other goals, like buying a house or taking

a vacation. We also abstract from uncertainty about future wages, which may induce

precautionary saving even at young ages. However, our general argument still applies to

retirement saving that occurs in an illiquid employer-sponsored pension account. Our model

further abstracts from children. Both men and women with college degrees are typically in their

late 20s when they first have children (Livingston 2015a,b). Because children increase

consumption needs, saving for retirement before having children may be rational ­ although

our argument would still apply to individuals in their late 20s or 30s who have had children

already. Beginning to save at younger ages may help form habits if people are not fully rational.

That is, building a habit of saving at younger ages may make saving easier during middle age

when it is most important (according to the life cycle model).
       The results of this paper have implications for the design of automatic enrollment in

defined contribution plans. Encouraging automatic enrollment across the board ­ for example,

through legislation such as the Pension Protection Act of 2006 ­ is based on the belief that non-

participants in employer-sponsored retirement plans are making a mistake. However, our

results suggest that nudging people to save for retirement at all points of their career may be

inconsistent with a life cycle model. In such a model, it is not optimal for someone whose

earnings are temporarily low, such as a college graduate at that start of their career, to save for

retirement.
Attanasio, O. P., & Weber, G., "Consumption and Saving: Models of Intertemporal Allocation

       and Their Implications for Public Policy," Journal of Economic Literature, 48(3), 2010, pp.

       693­751. https://doi.org/http://www.aeaweb.org/jel/index.php

Gomes, Francisco, Kenton Hoyem, Wei Hu and Enrichetta Ravina, "Retirement Savings

       Adequacy in United States Defined Contribution Plans, Kellogg School of Management

       Working Paper, November 2018.

Harris, Timothy F., Kenneth Troske and Aaron Yelowitz, "How Will State-Run Auto-IRAs Affect

       Workers?" Journal of Retirement, 6(2), pp. 27-33.

Livingston, Gretchen, "For most highly educated women, motherhood doesn't start until the

       30s," Pew Research Center, January 15, 2015, retrieved from

       https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/01/15/for-most-highly-educated-

       women-motherhood-doesnt-start-until-the-30s/.

Livingston, Gretchen, "College-educated men take their time becoming dads," Pew Research

       Center, June 19, 2015, retrieved from https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-

       tank/2015/06/19/college-educated-men-take-their-time-becoming-dads/.

Madrian Bridgette C., and Dennish F. Shea, "The Power of Suggestion: Intertia in 401(k)

       Participation and Savings Behavior," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4), November

       2001, pp. 1149-1187.

Munnell, Alicia H. And Anthony Webb, "The Impact of Leakages from 401(k)s and IRAs," Center

       for Retirement Research Working Paper 2015-2, February 2015.
Scott, Jason S, John B. Shoven, Sita N. Slavov and John G Watson, "Can Low Retirement Savings

       Be Rationalized?", National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 26784,

       March 2020.

Tergesen, Anne, "The Rising Retirement Perils of 401(k) `Leakage'," Wall Street Journal, April 2,

       2017.

VanDerhei, Jack, "The Impact of Auto Portability on Preserving Retirement Savings Currently

       Lost to 401(k) Cashout Leakage," Employee Benefit Research Institute Issue Brief No.

       489, August 15, 2019.

Vanguard, "How America Saves," 2020.
