                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE ECONOMIC CASE FOR GLOBAL VACCINATIONS:
 AN EPIDEMIOLOGICAL MODEL WITH INTERNATIONAL PRODUCTION NETWORKS

                                       Cem Çakmakli
                                       Selva Demiralp
                                    ebnem Kalemli-Özcan
                                       Sevcan Yeilta
                                    Muhammed A. Yildirim

                                      Working Paper 28395
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28395


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 2021, Revised April 2021




We thank Yasin imek for excellent research assistance. We would like to thank Emmanuel
Farhi, David Baqaee and Nitya Pandalai Nayar for their insightful comments. We would like to
thank Aye Nur Demiralp for the quote in the preamble. We would like to thank The Central
Bank of the Republic of Turkey for providing us access to their database. We acknowledge the
support from ICC Research Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2021 by Cem Çakmakli, Selva Demiralp, ebnem Kalemli-Özcan, Sevcan Yeilta, and
Muhammed A. Yildirim. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Economic Case for Global Vaccinations: An Epidemiological Model with International
Production Networks
Cem Çakmakli, Selva Demiralp, ebnem Kalemli-Özcan, Sevcan Yeilta, and Muhammed
A. Yildirim
NBER Working Paper No. 28395
January 2021, Revised April 2021
JEL No. F0,F15,F16,F2

                                          ABSTRACT

COVID-19 pandemic had a devastating effect on both lives and livelihoods in 2020. The arrival
of effective vaccines can be a major game changer. However, vaccines are in short supply as of
early 2021 and most of them are reserved for the advanced economies. We show that the global
GDP loss of not inoculating all the countries, relative to a counterfactual of global vaccinations,
can be higher than the cost of manufacturing and distributing vaccines globally. We use an
economic-epidemiological framework that combines a SIR model with international production
and trade networks. Based on this framework, we estimate the costs for 65 countries and 35
sectors. Our estimates suggest that up to 49 percent of the global economic costs of the pandemic
in 2021 are borne by the advanced economies even if they achieve universal vaccination in their
own countries.

Cem Çakmakli                                     Sevcan Yeilta
Koç University                                   Koç University
College of Administrative                        Department of Economics and Finance
Sciences and Economics                           Rumelifeneri Yolu 34450
Rumelifener Yolu                                 Sariyer, Istanbul
Sariyer, Istanbul                                Turkey
Turkey                                           syesiltas@ku.edu.tr
ccakmakli@ku.edu.tr
                                                 Muhammed A. Yildirim
Selva Demiralp                                   Koc University Rumelifeneri Yolu
Koç University                                   Sariyer Istanbul 34450
Rumelifeneri Yolu, Sariyer                       TURKEY
Istanbul 34450                                   yildirim@gmail.com
Turkey
sdemiralp@ku.edu.tr

ebnem Kalemli-Özcan
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
Tydings Hall 4118D
College Park, MD 20742-7211
and CEPR
and also NBER
kalemli@econ.umd.edu
                         No Man is an Island
                         "No man is an island entire of itself; every man is a piece of the continent, a part of the
                         main; if a clod be washed away by the sea, Europe is the less, as well as if a promontory
                         were, as well as any manner of thy friends or of thine own were; any man's death
                         diminishes me, because I am involved in mankind. And therefore never send to know for
                         whom the bell tolls; it tolls for thee."
                                                                                                      ­ John Donne




1   Introduction

The COVID-19 shock was unexpected and severe. The world was caught unprepared as countries

hastily put together policies to curb the spread of the virus, contain the financial panic, and offset

the economic contraction all at the same time. The entire 2020 was spent with lockdown policies

that went on and off, as the countries learned from each others' experiences. Renewed upticks in

countries through cross border travelling highlighted the limitations of country specific lockdowns

in a global pandemic. In retrospect, it became evident that a globally coordinated lockdown in

Spring and Summer of 2020 could have contained the pandemic much sooner. This would have

earned time to invest in testing and contact tracing procedures.

    Approximately one year after the outbreak, we are at the crossroads of a critical decision again,

this time with respect to global coordination of manufacturing and distribution of the vaccines

worldwide. COVAX facility, co-led by the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations and

the World Health Organization, aims to coordinate the efforts among advanced economies to collect

the necessary funding to manufacture and distribute the vaccines in an equitable way, but currently

lacks funding.

    We show that advanced economies (AEs) cannot eliminate the economic costs of the pandemic

entirely by having national access to the vaccine. The interdependencies of the economies in a glob-

alized economy implies that there can be a sizable drag on the vaccinated countries due to their

trade links with the unvaccinated countries, mainly emerging markets and developing economies

(EMDEs). We show that even if AEs eliminate the domestic costs of the pandemic thanks to the

vaccines, the costs they bear due to their international linkages would be in the range of 0.2 trillion

USD and 2.6 trillion USD, depending on the strength of trade and production linkages. Overall,


                                                       2
AEs can bear up to 49 percent of the global costs in 2021, despite the fact that they might vaccinate

a sizable part of their populations by summer 2021.1 By illustrating the sizable economic costs in

the absence of equitable vaccine distribution, we demonstrate the importance of making the vaccine

globally available, not from a moral standpoint but from an economic one. It is not an act of charity

but an act of economic rationality for the advanced economies to get involved in the efforts for an

equitable global vaccine distribution.

    In order to estimate the economic costs of COVID-19 that are solely due to international linkages,

we develop a framework that combines an epidemiological Susceptible-Infected-Recovered (SIR)

model with international trade and production network. In our earlier work, C
                                                                            ¸ akmakli et al. (2020),

we considered a similar framework focusing on how the domestic costs of the pandemic can be ampli-

fied for a given small open economy (EMDEs) due declining foreign demand and exports. Our current

work builds on this set up and adds the production and supply side, which helps us to highlight

the importance of the global trade and production networks in amplifying the costs of the pandemic

globally. A country's own pandemic not only impacts its own production and employment as a pure

domestic supply shock, but it also impacts the production of intermediate inputs imported by other

countries. In order to capture these spillovers, we incorporate the global input-output linkages be-

tween sectors. This approach allows us to estimate the cascading effect of sectoral supply shocks in

different countries via global value chains and international production network.

    We introduce the vaccine as an immediate treatment of the virus, which reverts the sectoral de-

mand and supply shocks in the vaccinated country right away. Consequently, the economic costs of

the pandemic that arise due to negative domestic sectoral demand and supply shocks disappear in

a given country, where the vaccine becomes available. However, the costs coming from the interna-

tional linkages remain as long as foreign countries are not vaccinated. The reasons for the sub-par

performance of a country with full inoculation are twofold: First, this country's exports cannot fully

recover as long as there is weak external demand from the countries that are still suffering from

the pandemic. Second, this country's imports of final and/or intermediate goods are also affected

when the supplier countries are not fully recovered from the pandemic, which in turn decreases the

country's production capacity.
    1 These numbers are far larger than the 38 billion USD cost of manufacturing 2 billion doses of vaccines to inoculate

20 percent of the world population by the end of 2021 as targeted by COVAX.


                                                           3
    Given the extensive evidence on the disproportionate intensity of the COVID-19 shock on cer-

tain sectors, we follow a granular sectoral approach. Our approach allows us to combine the sectoral

heterogeneity in infection dynamics with sectoral heterogeneity in global trade and production net-

works.2 We estimate COVID losses for 65 countries and 35 sectors, using OECD's multi-industry

multi-national input-output tables. Figures 1 and 2 show the importance of incorporating interna-

tional and inter-sectoral trade linkages in the calculation of the economic costs of the pandemic.

Figure 1 shows the trade networks. Each node represents a country. The larger the country's GDP,

the bigger the node size. The darker blue nodes are more open countries measured by the ratio of

imports and exports to GDP. In our calibration, we assume AEs have access to vaccination. These

countries are marked with a black border around their nodes. Out of 65 countries, 41 countries are

classified as AEs who have access to vaccination.3 The remaining 25 countries (including a residual

entity called the "Rest of the World") belong to the set of EMDEs who are assumed to be unvacci-

nated. The thicker is the line between any two countries, the higher is the intensity of trade between

those countries.

    These international linkages are comprised of sectoral links. Industries use inputs from a variety

of other industries. These inputs can be supplied either domestically or internationally. In Figure 2

we show a glimpse of the global inter-industry production network. In this network, each node rep-

resents an industry. The node size indicates the total intermediate input usage of the industry. The

node color shows the share of imported inputs in the industry such that the industries with darker

shades of red use more international inputs. It is clear that an industry with a relatively larger node

size and a darker color (such as "Coke an Refined Petroleum" as opposed to "Real Estate") will be

more exposed to the drag from the pandemic if its' imported inputs are obtained from unvaccinated

trade partners and if the production of these inputs require more in-person contacts, increasing the

fraction of sick workers. It is also the case that, the other industries who are not as open themselves

but connected to these open industries, such as "construction and mining" will also be indirectly

affected. The lines between the nodes show bilateral supply relationships, where the thicker lines

represent stronger relations between the two sectors that source more from each other. The directed
   2 SeeGourinchas et al. (2020) who uses heterogenetiy in sectoral shocks to identify business failures.
   3 Some countries in the AE group are essentially emerging markets. We still classify these countries, including China
and Russia, among AEs, because they have access to vaccines.




                                                           4
                                              Figure 1: International Trade Linkages

                                         BRN
                          IDN

                                                   PHL                                  CAN
        KHM
                                                                                                            MEX            CRI
                                 THA
                                                         AUS            NZL
              MYS


                                KOR                       JPN
       VNM                                                                        USA                              COL


                                                                                                    PRT                          PER
                TWN                    SGP                      CHN
                                                                                    TUN

                                                                                                            MAR                               CHL
                                  SAU
        HKG                                                                                    ESP
                     IND                                                                                                  BRA
                                                         ROW                FRA

                                ZAF
                                                                                              GBR
                                       TUR
                                                         IRL                                                                            ARG
                                                                              ITA
                                                                                                    NLD
                                                                                                                   NOR
                                                                      DEU

                                   RUS                    ISR                                         SWE
                          KAZ                                                           BEL
                                                                       CHE                                               FIN           EST
                                             MLT
                                                     LUX
                    BGR         ROU                                                                  DNK
                                                                              POL                                 ISL
                                                    AUT
                                                                                                                               LTU             LVA
                    GRC          CYP
                                                                                               CZE


                                         HRV
                                                                                    SVK
                                                     SVN              HUN




N OTES: In this network, we show a summary of international linkages. Each node corresponds to a country, with the
node sizes proportional to the GDP of the country. The node color represents the openness of the country where
openness is defined as the ratio of imports and exports to GDP. The vaccinated countries are denoted by black borders.
We show the trade linkages as lines between nodes. The line gets thicker as the ratio of trade to GDP increases. In total,
there are 65 nodes and 168 lines shown on the network. The trade values, openness calculations, and the GDP values are
all based on OECD (2020) Tables.




                                                                              5
line points from the supplier to the target industry. According to OECD (2020), the total value of

world trade was 18 trillion USD. Within this total, intermediate products constituted 10.6 trillion

USD, corresponding to 59 percent of world trade in 2015. Such a high prevalence of intermediate

products reflects increasing prominence of global value chains (The World Bank, 2020).

                                          Figure 2: Inter-industry Trade Linkages

                                                                              Electrical Eq.
                                           Fabricated Metal
                                                                                         Machinery & Eq., NEC

                                                              Basic Metals
                                                                                                          Mining (Non-Energy)
                    Other Transport Eq.


                Textiles & Apparel                                                                                          Public Works
                                          Motor Vehicles Rubber & Plastic Other Manufacturing
                                                                                        Other Non-Metal
         Paper Prod.

                                          Chem. & Pharma
Agriculture & Fishing
                                                                                                      Mining (Energy)
                    Accom. & Food Serv.                                         Construction


                                                     Wholesale & Retail
                                                                                          Coke & Ref Petrol.            Mining Support
 Wood Prod.
                          Food, Bev. & Tob.                            Transport. & Storage
                                                                                                 Real Estate
                                        Publish. & Broadcast.
                          Public Admin. & Def.          IT & Other Inf.
    Comp., Electr. & Opt.
                                                                               Health & Social Work                      Finance & Insurance
                                          Arts, Ent. & Rec.


                                                                                                      Education
                              Telecommunications
                                                               Other Business Serv.



N OTES: In this network, we show aggregated inter-industry linkages. Each node corresponds to an industry. The node
size represents the total intermediate usage of the industry. The smallest node corresponds to 184 billion USD for Mining
Support industry and the largest node corresponds to 5.9 trillion USD in Construction industry. The node color
represents the share of imported inputs in the industry. The lightest shade represents 5.9% in Real Estate industry and
the darkest shade represents 37% in the Coke & Refined Petroleum industry. We show the trade linkages from the supply
industry to the target industry with directed lines. The thickness of the lines show the strength of the relation based on:
(i) the intermediate input from the supply industry constitutes at least 10 percent of the inputs of target industry; or (ii)
the supply industry is among the top two suppliers of the target industry. In total, there are 35 nodes and 72 lines shown
on the network. Inter industry linkages are based on OECD (2020) Tables.




    Our approach is data-driven. We do not allow firms to optimize and change their positions in

global value chains in response to labor supply shocks. We assume that the COVID-19 shock is tem-

porary and maintain the assumption that prices of goods and inputs are sticky at that horizon. As

argued by Shih (2020) and Carvalho et al. (forthcoming), the time needed to rebuild these networks

is longer than the average duration of price stickiness. Furthermore, there might be a reluctance on


                                                                   6
the firms' part to rebuild their networks in response to temporary shocks. Our analysis is meant

to capture the first-round effects of an unequal vaccine distribution throughout 2021, where the

COVID-19 shock is now perceived to be temporary given the presence of the vaccines. In this sense,

our approach can be viewed as a special application of the general framework presented by Baqaee

and Farhi (2020a,b). Similar to their framework, we assume strong complementarities between in-

termediate inputs and do not allow labor adjustments within or across sectors. Both in Baqaee and

Farhi (2020b) and Guerrieri et al. (2020), these strong complementarities lead the supply shock to

generate an even larger decline in aggregate demand, where in the latter paper goods are comple-

ments in demand. Our paper is an empirical application of these models that allows amplification

of both demand and supply shocks through the global trade and production networks.4

    In order to show the key channels of our model, we consider several specifications. In the best

case that gives the lowest costs for the AEs, we solely focus on the foreign demand shocks that affect

exports. That is, if country A is fully vaccinated and wants to export to country B, which is not fully

vaccinated, the exports of country A will be lower compared to the counterfactual where country

B was also inoculated. In the worst case with the highest costs, we employ fully integrated inter-

country inter-industry input-output matrices, where inputs from different country-sectors cannot

be distributed across the sectors of country A. For example, suppose the construction industry in

country A imports steel from unvaccinated country B, and the manufacturing industry in country

A imports steel from a vaccinated country such as D. Then, when steel imports from B goes down,

construction industry cannot borrow steel from the manufacturing industry.5

    We consider these specifications under three vaccination and lockdown scenarios. In our first

and second scenarios, AEs are inoculated immediately, but the EMDEs are not. Hence the dynamics

of the pandemic in the unvaccinated EMDEs feed back into the economic recovery of the AEs. In

the second scenario we add lockdowns in EMDEs, different from the first scenario. The lockdown

decisions are endogenous to infection dynamics. A lockdown is put into place when the number
    4 In the long-run prices will rise and labor will adjust which might lead to lower estimates. See for example Bonadio
et al. (2020).
     5 We consider a hybrid case, where total inputs are imported at the country level, regardless of where they came from.

The inputs are then distributed among the domestic sectors proportional to their initial shares. This treatment is analogous
to building a country level input-output table, similar to the Bureau of Economic Analysis' practice of building the well-
established US I-O matrices. For example, the steel imports of the United States from Germany and China constitute the
total imports of steel that is distributed across US' sectors based on each industry's share of the input.



                                                             7
of severe cases exceeds the given country's ICU bed capacity.6 In the third scenario, we allow for a

gradual distribution of the vaccines in both AEs and EMDEs, keeping the endogenous lockdowns.

    In the first scenario, we find that the global aggregate GDP losses range from 2.9 to 4.3 trillion

USD, depending on our specifications described above. Out of these aggregate costs, a range of 0.5

to 1.6 trillion dollars are suffered by the AEs. Once we incorporate endogenous lockdowns in the

second scenario, the supply of inputs produced by EMDEs will decline further while their export

demand from AEs will strengthen as the lockdowns reduce the number of infections in EMDEs.

Hence, even though the costs that stem from the export channel decline, the costs that stem from

the import channel will increase. In this scenario, the overall losses range from 1.5 to 6.1 trillion

USD, with 0.2 to 2.6 trillion USD of the costs borne by the AEs. In our final scenario, the losses

are mitigated as the vaccines are also available in EMDEs. The aggregate losses in this scenario are

1.84 to 3.8 trillion USD, of which 0.4 to 1.9 trillion USD of the losses are borne by the AEs. Overall,

AEs may bear somewhere from 13 percent to 49 percent of the global losses arising from an unequal

distribution of vaccines in 2021. This range corresponds to 0.3 to 3.7 percent of their pre-pandemic

GDPs.

    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we provide an overview of the

literature. In Section 3, we present the conceptual framework. In Section 4, we describe the data and

the parameters for calibration. Section 5 presents results and includes a premier on possible global

supply chain disruptions in 2021. Section 6 concludes.



2    Literature

There is a rapidly growing literature that aims to capture the economic impact of COVID-19 crisis.

Many papers utilize SIR models or its extensions to incorporate the infection dynamics into their

analysis. However, most of this literature focuses on closed economies, excluding the international

production and trade linkages that we consider. Papers such as Stock (2020), Alvarez et al. (2020),

and Acemoglu et al. (2020) consider the trade-off between the lives and the livelihoods. They reach

the conclusion that full lockdowns during the early stages of the pandemic is the optimal policy for
    6 This
         is motivated by the observation that COVID-19 overwhelmed health systems through sharp increases in ICU
bed occupancies (Mendoza et al. (2020)).


                                                       8
advanced closed economies. Alon et al. (2020) and Alfaro et al. (2020) take a developing country

perspective, focusing on the informal sector and small firms. They reach the opposite conclusion in

terms of lockdowns, arguing that lockdowns harm the livelihoods at a greater scale in these coun-

tries.

    A separate group of papers focus on the endogenous response of demand or supply to the in-

fection rates. Papers such as Farboodi et al. (2020), Eichenbaum et al. (2020), Krueger et al. (2020),

and Eichenbaum et al. (2020) model the endogenous response of consumption or employment to the

pandemic, that is missing from the SIR models. These papers aim to capture the interplay between

infection dynamics and the determinants of demand or supply in closed economies.

    The recent empirical evidence shows the importance of both supply and demand shocks at the

sectoral level, where the size of the demand shock is more pronounced. Using granular data for

the US, Chetty et al. (2020) document a decline of 39% in consumer spending in the top-quartile of

income distribution and 13% in the bottom quartile during the first month of the pandemic. The de-

cline is heterogenous across sectors with more significant drops in industries that require in-person

contacts. The authors emphasize that the fear of contacting the disease is the main source of the

decline in spending at the initial stages of the pandemic. Similarly, using cell phone data to track

movements of individuals, Goolsbee and Syverson (2020) show that even though the consumer traf-

fic fell by 60%, only 7% could be explained by the shutdown restrictions. The authors suggest that

the changes in consumer behavior are most likely driven by the fear of infection.

    To be consistent with this evidence, we model both sectoral demand and supply shocks for an

open economy, which is missing in the above cited literature. Furthermore, these shocks are linked

to the other countries through trade and production networks. We model the epidemiological part

similar to the closed economy literature as in Acemoglu et al. (2020), Alvarez et al. (2020), Farboodi

et al. (2020), and Eichenbaum et al. (2020).7
    7 There is also a closed economy literature with rich input-output and network dynamics, similar to us, but this litera-

ture omits the epidemiology part. See Barrot et al. (2020), Bonadio et al. (2020), and Baqaee et al. (2020), Baqaee and Farhi
(2020a,b) and Guerrieri et al. (2020).




                                                             9
3    Conceptual Framework

We present an open economy framework combined with a SIR model with multiple sectors. We

then combine this model with data on international and inter-sectoral input-output linkages on 65

countries and 35 sectors, composing the global international trade and production network. We

incorporate both supply and demand shocks to the model through the epidemiological part. These

shocks directly impact exports and imports of final and intermediate goods.

    Ability to work from home, physical proximity requirements and lockdowns are all domestic

factors that pin down the sectoral supply shock in our epidemiological model. Most infection dy-

namics models, including Acemoglu et al. (2020), Alvarez et al. (2020), Farboodi et al. (2020), and

Eichenbaum et al. (2020), do not use the sectoral heterogeneity in disease dynamics. To the best of

our knowledge, Baqaee et al. (2020) is the only paper with a similar sectoral heterogeneity to us.

The novelty of our model is to introduce yet another factor that affects sectoral supply though in-

ternational linkages. For instance, the car industry requires steel, plastics, textiles, electronics, and

numerous other inputs to make its final product. Critically, many of these inputs are provided in-

ternationally. Depending on the infection rates of the country that they are imported from, they

constitute a further sectoral supply shock for our small open economy. Similarly, demand shocks

move with the infection rates. Once infections reach a certain threshold, demand stalls and remains

rather sluggish. In our model, even if the domestic infection rates are reduced, countries still suffer

from weak external demand if other countries' infection rates are not improved simultaneously.

    We calibrate our model to analyse the consequences of a hypothetical distribution of vaccination.

We assume that when AEs have access to the vaccine, local demand and supply shocks in AEs

due to high infection rates disappear. Nevertheless, AEs still suffer from the economic costs of the

pandemic as they are still affected from the foreign demand and supply shocks transmitted from

EMDEs. Specifically:

    i Exports of final goods: In EMDEs where the pandemic is still ongoing, aggregate demand will

      not fully recover. Hence, the exports of AEs would not return to pre-pandemic levels.

    ii Exports of intermediate goods: Intermediate inputs produced by the AEs would not be de-

      manded as much because of weaker overall growth in EMDEs.

                                                   10
   iii Imports of intermediate goods: Intermediate inputs produced by EMDEs for industries in AEs

       would fall short of meeting total demand in AEs as the supply in EMDEs is subject to domestic

       and international supply shocks due to the pandemic.

   iv Imports of final goods: The goods and services produced and sold by EMDEs to AEs would

       decline as well.

Figure 3: Modelling the effects of the COVID-19 shock in a multi-country multi-sector open economy
                                            Domestic and Foreign                       Output Implied
                                              Demand Change                             by Demand


           Infections
 Altered Consumer Preferences


                                                                        Domestic & Foreign                     Equilibirum
      COVID-19
                                                                        Intermediate Inputs                      Output


                                                   Teleworkable
       SIR Model with
   Industrial Heterogeneity         Lower Infection Rate
                                   Same as General Public
                                                                                          Output Implied
                              Workers                                    Labor              by Supply
                                   Higher Infection Rate
                                    Physical Proximity
                                                     On-site


N OTES: This figure presents a schematic of our model to illustrate the effects of the COVID-19 shock in a multi-country
multi-sector open economy framework. The top half of the figure represents the demand channel and the bottom half
represents the supply channel. The demand shock stems from altered consumer preferences during the pandemic.
Supply shocks can be separated into two parts: labor and intermediate inputs. The labor shock of an industry depends on
its teleworkable share and its physical proximity requirements for the workers. The intermediate inputs vary during the
pandemic as the output of these industries decline. When endogenous lockdowns are implemented, only the essential
industries remain open (see Table A.2 for the list of essential industries) and the workers in the non-essential sectors stay
at home. Thanks to strict lockdown restrictions, the infection rates are lowered for almost everyone. The lockdowns
affect the supply channel directly via workers as well as the disruptions in the global supply chain. They affect the
demand channel by mitigating the number of infected individuals, which in turn change the consumption profiles.




    Figure 3 summarizes our framework. We ponder the figure for a given industry in a country that

is exposed to COVID-19 shock. The bottom half of the figure describes the supply side and the upper

half depicts the demand side. On the supply side, the transmission dynamics of the virus would

differ depending on whether the workers are on-site or at a remote location like home. Among

the professions that need to be carried out on the work site, we assume that the viral transmission

depends on the physical proximity between the workers or between the workers and the customers.

An on-site worker could be exposed to infection either at work or outside work. Intermediate inputs,


                                                                   11
including the imported ones, directly affect supply. These imports are function of the pandemic in

the other countries. The viral transmission dynamics are also affected from the implementation of

different lockdown policies and vaccinations. We model demand as a reduced form function where

demand deviates from its normal pattern as a function of the number of infected people. Hence,

the demand profile changes depending on the infection levels in the population, which, in turn, is

mitigated by the lockdown decisions and vaccines.



3.1      The Epidemiological SIR Model

We use the main workhorse framework in many epidemiological studies, namely the Susceptible-

Infected-Recovered (SIR) model.8 Let's take a population of size N . At any given time, we can split

the population into three classes of people: Susceptible (St ), Infected ( It ) and Recovered ( Rt ) as of

time t. The susceptible group does not yet have immunity to disease, and the individuals in this

group have the possibility of getting infected. The recovered group, on the other hand, consists of

individuals who are immune to the disease. Immunity can be developed either because the individ-

ual goes through the infection or because she gets vaccinated. The SIR model builds on the simple
                                                                                    It-1
principle that a fraction of the infected individuals in the population,             N ,   can transmit the disease to

susceptible ones St-1 with an (structural) infection rate of . Therefore, the number of newly infected

individuals in the current period is St-1 ItN
                                            -1
                                               . The newly infected individuals should be deducted

from the pool of susceptible individuals in the current period. Meanwhile, in each period, a fraction

 of the infected people recovers from the disease, which in turn reduces the number of actively

infected individuals.9 To track any changes in the number of individuals in the above-mentioned

three groups, the following set of difference equations is used:

                                                                 It-1
                                             S t = -  S t -1                                                          (1)
                                                                  N
                                             Rt =  It-1                                                               (2)
                                                                It-1
                                             It = St-1               -  It-1                                          (3)
                                                                 N
      8 See
          for example Allen (2017) among others.
      9 See
          also Atkeson (2020), Bendavid and Bhattacharya (2020), Dewatripont et al. (2020), Fauci et al. (2020), Li et al.
(2020), Linton et al. (2020), and Vogel (2020) on different mortality estimates.




                                                           12
The law of motion for the number of infected individuals shows the trajectory of the pandemic at

the aggregate level. Note that, St +  Rt +  It = 0 holds at any given time, assuming that the size

of the population remains constant.

    We modify the canonical SIR model to allow for sectoral heterogeneity in terms of the size and

working conditions that can lead to distinct infection trajectories in each sector. The transmission

of the virus accelerates with close physical proximity. Hence, employees working in the industries

with higher physical proximity are infected with a higher probability. We assume that the economy

is composed of K sectors. We denote the industries by subscript i = 1, . . . , K. Each industry has Li

workers and there is also the non-working population which we denote by NNW . Each industry has

two types of workers: (i) employees who can perform their jobs remotely (i.e., teleworkable) and (ii)

employees who need to be on-site to fulfill their tasks. In each industry, we denote the number of

employees in the first group with TWi and the second group with Ni . Hence:


                                                   Li = TWi + Ni .                                   (4)


For the disease propagation, we lump the non-working population and the employees in the tele-

workable jobs together, and call them the "at-home" group. We denote the at-home group with

index i = 0. The total number of individuals in this group is, therefore,:

                                                                  K
                                            N0 = NNW +  TWi .                                        (5)
                                                                i =1


Suppose that the infection rate in the at-home group is  0 . In order to account for heterogeneous

physical proximities across industries, we compute the rate of infection for each industry i, denoted

by  i , as:

                                      i =  0 Proxi          for       i = 1, . . . , K               (6)

where Proxi is the proximity index for industry i that we obtain from O*NET database.10 It is plau-

sible to think that the decline in demand during COVID-19 in a particular industry would lead to a

decline in proximity (see Eichenbaum et al. (2020)). Nevertheless, we do not incorporate this in our

model and take the proximity rates as exogenous.
   10 https://www.onetcenter.org/database.html.   See Section 4.1 for the details on this measure.


                                                           13
    Here, Si,t , Ii,t and Ri,t denote the number of susceptible, infected and recovered individuals,

respectively, and Ni = Si,t + Ii,t + Ri,t denotes the total number of on-site individuals in industry i

and the at-home group (i = 0). Susceptible individuals in the at-home group can get infected from

the infected individuals in the entire society:

                                                                           It-1
                                             S0,t = -  0 S0,t-1                                                     (7)
                                                                            N

where It = iK
            =1 Ii,t + I0,t captures the total number of infected individuals. An on-site worker in
                                                                                                    Ii,t-1
sector i, however, could be exposed to infection either at work, at the rate of  i Si,t-1             Ni ,   or outside

work, that involves all the remaining activities ­including family life, shopping and commuting­

at the rate  0 Si,t-1 ItN
                        -1
                           . Hence, the number of susceptible individuals among the on-site workers in

industry i changes as:
                                                               Ii,t-1                I
                                    Si , t = -  i Si , t - 1          -  0 Si , t - 1 t - 1                         (8)
                                                                 Ni                    N

The recovery rate is the same for all types of infected individuals:


                                                    Ri,t =  Ii,t-1                                                  (9)


The number of infected individuals changes as the susceptible individuals get infected and some

infected individuals recover from the disease:


                                             Ii,t = -  Ri,t + Si,t                                                 (10)



    With industrial heterogeneity, we match the employment size weighted average  i 's of the in-

fected individuals to observed overall  in a country. For an on-site worker in industry i, the implied

 parameter can be approximated by (  0 +  i ).                 11   For a non-working individual, this parameter is

only  0 . Using Equation (6), we impose:

                                     K                                         K
                              N0               N                 N
                            0
                              N
                                 +  (  0 +  i ) i =  0 +  0 Proxi i = 
                                   i =1
                                               N                 N                                                 (11)
                                                           i =1

  11 A report by DISK labor union in Turkey claims a three-fold increase in infection rates among workers: http:
//disk.org.tr/2020/04/rate-of-covid-19-cases-among-workers-at-least-3-times-higher-than-average/. Here, we take a
moderate stance and set the rate to be 2 times higher on average for the workers.


                                                               14
Hence, we solve for  0 in terms of , industry size, and the proximity levels as:

                                                                             -1
                                                                                K
                                                                    Prox  N
                                                      0 =  1 +
                                                                       N
                                                                         i i
                                                                                .                                                                      (12)
                                                               i =1


Once the parameters are computed the evolution of infections in the extended multi-sector SIR

model can be written as:

                                                         It = F It-1 -  IK It-1                                                                        (13)

where It = ( I0,t , I1,t , . . . , Ii,t , . . . , IK,t ) and IK is the K dimensional identity matrix. F matrix is defined

as:
                                                                                                                                                 
            S0,t-1              S t -1                                                                  S t -1              S t -1
           0 N                 0 0,
                                  N                                    ...               ...           0 0,
                                                                                                          N                0 0,
                                                                                                                              N                     
                                                                                                                                                    
         S1,t-1            S1,t-1               S1,t-1                 S1,t-1                                                    S1,t-1             
        
         0 N           0     N      + 1          N1              0       N               ...            ...               0        N
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                    
         S                          S2,t-1                    S1,t-1            S1,t-1       S2,t-1                              S2,t-1
                                                                                                                                                    
          0 2,t-1             0                           0            + 1               0              ...               0                         
             N                        N                         N                N2            N                                   N
      F= .
                                                                                                                                                    
         .                           .
                                     .                                                       ..                                  .
                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                                    
         .                           .                                                            .                              .
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                    
         .                           .                                                                                           .
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                        ..
         .                           .                                                                       .                   .                  
         .                           .                                                                                           .                  
                                                                                                                                                    
         S K ,t -1                  S K ,t -1                                                                        S K ,t -1            S K ,t -1 
         0 N                  0        N                               ...               ...                     0      N        + K       NK



      Using these system matrices, R0 can be computed using the largest eigenvalue of the matrix

F -1 . Given the initial size of the groups based on employment numbers, the eigenvalue would

approximately correspond to the normalization present in Equation 12.



3.2     The Effects of Infection Dynamics on the Production

As shown in the lower half of Figure 3, the pandemic affects production through labor supply and

inputs. First, the labor supply declines due to those workers who get infected or put under lockdown

by the governments. Second, decreased labor force in a country's trade partners result in reduced

availability of intermediate inputs, albeit with a delay. The combined impact of the labor supply

and intermediate inputs result in a decline in production through the supply side in the short run.

      In the short run, firms have little time to adjust for the shocks. We assume a Leontief produc-

tion function to capture these short run dynamics. In this framework, countries need to combine


                                                                             15
inputs in fixed ratios to produce a single unit of output. These ratios are determined by the present

technology and the combination of inputs available in the country. All these inputs, including labor,

are assumed to be complementary to each other in the short run (see Atalay (2017) and Baqaee and

Farhi (2020a)). For instance, to produce a single unit of an automobile, after setting up its factory

for a specific type of production process, a car company requires inputs in certain ratios such as 4

workers, 100 kilograms of steel, 4 tires, 4 seats, a microprocessor, a car battery, etc. (These numbers

are for illustrative purposes). Thus, disruptions in certain countries and industries during the pan-

demic regarding the production of any of these inputs may spill over to other sectors and countries

through input linkages. This amplification mechanism allows us to estimate the full impact of the

pandemic in the worst case scenario where unvaccinated countries experience supply shocks.

   Focusing on periods of natural disasters, Barrot and Sauvagnat (2016) show that the Cobb-

Douglas production function that allows for among inputs may break down in the short run when

the existing value chain relationships make it more difficult to substitute among inputs or among

different suppliers in the short run. Furthermore in our set up of 35 industries, sectors that produce

similar products are already aggregated into a common sector. Hence, any potential substitution

among similar inputs within a given industry is implicitly present in our framework. The Leontief

production function that we utilize implies that any remaining substitution between more distant in-

dustries is not feasible and not allowed in our modelling. This argument is in line with the 66-sector

input-output model of Baqaee and Farhi (2020a,b) where the authors use an elasticity of substitu-

tion among inputs that is close to 0 following Atalay (2017). Utilizing input-output data from the

US, Atalay (2017) obtains an elasticity of input substitution that is at most 0.2. Evidence for com-

plementarity among inputs is further reinforced by Boehm et al. (2019) who focus on the Japanese

earthquake of 2011 and find a one-to-one impact in the US affiliates of the Japanese multination-

als. This implies an elasticity of substitution close to zero. Carvalho et al. (forthcoming) extend this

analysis further to investigate the propagation of the Japanese earthquake onto indirectly connected

firms. Our 65-country and 35-sector framework allows for such non-linearities as well, in order to

capture the full amplification of disruptions in supply chains. Specifically, we not only capture how

the COVID shock in one country or "sector x" spills over to another "sector y" that has an immediate

trade relationship with sector x, but we also capture how consequent changes in sector y affect other



                                                  16
sectors that it is connected through input-output linkages.

   Let's denote the set of industries that are used by industry i in country c with Sci . The industry

subscript j refers to another industry. We can write the unit output requirement in industry i in

country c in terms of its inputs as:

                                           yci = lci , {z j,ci } jSci                                (14)

where lci denotes the unit labor requirement of industry i in country c and z j,ci denotes the amount

of intermediate inputs that should be used in industry i from industry j to produce a single unit of

i. Going back to our automobile example, with 400 workers, 10 tons of steel, 400 tires, 400 seats,

100 microprocessors and 100 batteries, a car company would be able to produce 100 automobiles.

Increasing the number of tires to 500, or number of workers to 1000 would not change the number of

automobiles produced. However, in the long run, given an increase in wages, the car company may

want to readjust its manufacturing technology to require less workers. We focus on the short-run

effects, where this mechanism is absent.

   Formally, with these assumptions, we can write the output in industry i in country c as a Leontief

production function:                                                            
                                                   L
                                                       ci       Zj,ci           
                                       Yci = min            ,                                        (15)
                                                    lci         z j,ci
                                                                         jSci
                                                                                

where Lci captures the amount of labor allocated by country c to industry i and Zj,ci denotes the

amount of output of industry j used in industry i of country c. The j could capture an industry

from another country as well a domestic industry. In our car company example, one of js would

correspond to tires, that can either be supplied domestically or internationally. It is important to note

that this production function also captures the network effects. In particular, taking the minimum

in Equation 15 requires considering all inputs to the industry.

   Sectoral heterogeneity in terms of the share of teleworkable workers as well as physical proxim-

ity requirements results in differential labor shocks across sectors during the pandemic. The total

number of available workers for a given country-sector ci changes to Lci as a function of the infec-

tions as:
                                                                            Ic0
                                  Lci = ( Nci - Ici ) + TWci 1 -                                     (16)
                                                                            Nc0


                                                       17
where Nci is the number of on-site workers in industry i in country c, Ici is the number of infected

workers among on-site workers, and TWci is the number of at-home workers (i.e., those who can

work remotely) in industry i. The ratio Ic0 / Nc0 captures the fraction of individuals who are infected

in the at-home group, which includes the non-working population as well as all at-home workers

(i.e., teleworkers) in the economy.

   If there are no shocks to intermediate inputs, changes in the local labor supply will be the only

factors that lower aggregate supply during to the pandemic. This could be the case if the industries

have sufficient inventories for their intermediate inputs. Once we incorporate intermediate prod-

ucts, however, labor supply shocks in an industry affect all domestic and international sectors that

use this industry's output as their inputs. Overall changes in output in country c in industry i will

be Yci . Hence, we denote the change in the total sectoral output level with:

                                                           
                                            Zj,ci
                  ^ci  Yci = min
                                      L                    
                  Y                ci
                                      ,                             ^ ci , Z
                                                                           ^ j,ci
                                                              = min L                      .       (17)
                       Yci        Lci       Zj,ci                                   jSci
                                                    jSci
                                                           


Continuing with the example of the car manufacturer above, let's assume that the car company

produces 100 automobiles a day. Let's further assume that out of 400 workers, 50 of them got infected

and cannot report to work. Moreover, the tire company who supplies for this car company was also

affected by the pandemic and could only produce 300 tires. Suppose all the other inputs remain at

their normal levels. In this example, the automobile production decreases to 75 that day because the

binding constraint (minimum) is the available tires for production.

   The shocks propagate through input-output linkages. In our model, we assume that the pro-

duction is daily. The initial shock that an industry experiences is the labor supply shock. Later on,

this labor shock translates into an intermediate input shock for a downstream industry. We assume

that the propagation of an imported input shock is not simultaneous, assuming that it would take

some time for the disrupted input to arrive at the production location. To capture the travel time,

we use the intermediate inputs that are produced two weeks prior to the production of the final

good. From a practical point of view, incorporation of this two-week delay eliminates the estimation

of a rather complicated system of 65 countries with simultaneous trade flows. Instead, we take the

supply shock in a particular country as given and analyze its impact on the other countries rather


                                                    18
than a simultaneous feedback between the countries.




3.3     The Effects of Infection Dynamics on Demand

During the pandemic period, consumer priorities and preferences change dramatically due to many

reasons. First, there is the fear of infection which leads to voluntary social distancing. The fear of

infection is related to the number of infected individuals in the society. In order to minimize the risks

of getting infected, individuals alter their behavior and change their consumption patterns, such as

refraining from public events, restaurants or malls. These pandemic-related changes in demand

patterns affect the sectors that require closer proximity more than the others. There is also the fear

of transmitting the disease to others. Individuals may choose to minimize their social interactions

with a precautionary motive, in order to avoid infecting others inadvertently. In addition to the fear

factor, there is uncertainty about the duration of the pandemic and the related economic outlook

which affects aggregate demand. Aggregate expenditure typically declines during times of elevated

uncertainty.

      In order to capture the change in demand patterns during the pandemic, we consider two de-

mand profiles for each industry, one corresponding to normal times and the other one corresponding

to the brunt of the pandemic. We determine the demand for each industry during normal times from

the consumption data in national accounts. As for the COVID-19 period, we estimate changes in the

expenditure levels during the pandemic using credit card spending data. For the sectors where we

do not have the credit card data, we use industry reports and expert opinions.12 The progression of

the pandemic and the normalization of demand as the pandemic fades is a gradual process. In order

to capture this steady adjustment, we assume that the individuals move between these two profiles

smoothly, as a function of the number of infected individuals in the country.

      The demand structure we employ here is similar to C
                                                        ¸ akmakli et al. (2020). The demand is a func-

tion of the number of infections. The number of infections is proportional to the population of the

given country. The severity of infections is measured by the incidence rate out of 100,000 individuals
  12 Expected final demand changes and the resources we use in this estimation are presented in Table A.1 of the Ap-

pendix.



                                                        19
                                                                                                ¯
to make the numbers comparable across countries. We measure the infections as a function of I / I
      ¯ is proportional to the population.
where I

   We express the utility function of a representative agent who maximizes her utility by optimally

allocating her income on the expenditure of different goods from each industry. Following the lit-

erature, (see, for example Acemoglu et al. (2012), among others), we assume that the representative

agent has a Cobb-Douglass utility function:

                                                                       K
                                           U ( e1 , . . . , e K ) =    ei ,  i
                                                                                                    (18)
                                                                      i =1


with ei denoting the level of expenditure in industry i, and i representing the share of industry i

in total expenditure with iK
                           =1 i = 1 and 0 < i < 1 for all i = 1, . . . , K . The utility function in

Equation 18 incorporates a budget restriction which implies that the total income (w) equals total

expenditure, i.e., w = iK
                        =1 ei . With the Cobb-Douglass utility function, i determines the share of

industry i in the expenditure so that ei = i w for i = 1, . . . , n.

   During times of the pandemic, demand patterns change. For the sake of simplicity, we assume

that changes in demand come from two channels. First, the pandemic changes preferences and

priorities, which implies an adjustment in sectoral weights. Second, sectoral demand also changes

due to the income effect, which is a function of aggregate output (demand). Consequently, these two

effects lead to a change in the expenditure structure. To capture this change, we construct a ratio,
         ¯), that is directly linked to the number of active infections. This shows the expenditure in
^i ( I / I
e
                                             ¯), relative to the expenditure during normal times. During
industry i when the infection level is ( I / I

the pandemic, the expenditures change as function of infections:


                                                           ¯)  ei
                                                  ^i ( I / I
                                                  e
                                                               ei

As the demand ratio approaches 1, it signals that the number of infections decline and demand

normalizes. As the demand ratio approaches 0, it reflects that the number of infections increase
                                                                                          ^i ( I ).
and demand shrinks due to the pandemic. Using this ratio, we write the limiting cases for e
                         ¯)  0.1), e
For small I (i.e., ( I / I         ^i ( I ) = 1. Thus, for a small number of infections, demand remains

intact such that the ratio of demand during normal times equals demand during the pandemic. For


                                                          20
                                                                      ¯)  e
                                                             ^i ( I / I
large I , which corresponds to the peak of the pandemic, lim e            ¯i . If the demand for an
                                                                          I 
                                                                                       ¯i = 0. If there
industry i completely collapses during the pandemic (e.g., the airline industry), then e
                                                                        ¯i = 1. We assume that e
is no change in demand during the pandemic (e.g., food industry), then, e                      ¯i

is the utmost demand change in a particular sector that is globally valid under a fully developing
                                                                          ¯) , smoothly fluctuates
                                                                 ^i ( I / I
pandemic. In this framework, we assume that the ratio of demand, e
                                      ¯i when a very large number individuals get infected using
between 1 when nobody is infected and e

the following functional form:
                                          
                                          
                                                                             ¯)  0.1
                                          
                                          1
                                                                     if   (I/I
                                   ¯) =
                          ^i ( I / I
                          e                                                                        (19)
                                              1+( I / I ¯-0.1)
                                                                             ¯) > 0.1
                                          e¯i e         ¯-0.1)
                                              ¯i +( I / I
                                                                     if   (I/I


It is important to note that the overwhelming uncertainty about the course of the virus may suppress

economic confidence for a longer period of time. To the extent that the actual normalization is slower

than what is implied by Equation (19), we err on the conservative side by assuming a faster recovery.

   In our simulations, we let the pandemic take its course in each country separately and use the

number of infected patients in each country as the determinant of demand change in a particular

industry. Given the smooth transition function, we model the changes in the final demand levels
      ^ values.
using e

   Let's illustrate the expenditure of country m in industry i with emi . Consumers in country m

can consume both domestic and imported goods in industry i. We denote the goods coming from

industry i of country c to be consumed in country m by emi,c . Consumers in country m can consume

both domestic and imported goods in industry i. Denote goods in industry i coming from any

country c to be consumed in m by emi,c . Then:


                                                     emi =        emi,c
                                                                 c


Hence, the output of industry i of country c that is consumed as the final good globally is:


                                                     Fci =    emi,c
                                                                 m




                                                             21
                                                                            ¯m ). Hence, the final good
                                                                  ^i ( Im / I
During the pandemic, the demand for these goods will also drop by e

consumption level changes to: final good changes to:


                                                  Fci =    emi,c e         ¯m )
                                                                 ^i ( Im / I                                          (20)
                                                          m


where Fci represents the revised demand during the pandemic.

   In order to account for the total demand of each sector, we need to consider not only domes-

tic but also foreign sectoral demand. We utilize OECD Inter-Country Input-Output (ICIO) Tables,

which provides us with input demand of industry i in country c from any industry in any country.

The final demand vector has 2340 entries indexed by (c, i ), corresponding to each country-industry

combination. By dividing the rows of ICIO matrix with the total output of industry (c, i ), we obtain

the direct requirements matrix A. This matrix summarizes the usage of each intermediate input to

generate $1 worth of output. Output of each industry is either used as an intermediate input or con-

sumed as final demand. Using matrix notation, we decompose the total output into intermediate

and final usage as:

                                                        Y = AY + F                                                    (21)

Here, Y denotes the output vector and F denotes the final demand vector whose entries are Yci and

Fci respectively.13 Therefore, we can solve for the output to satisfy the final demand as:


                                                      Y = ( I - A ) -1 F                                              (22)


From this equation, we write the total output of country c as:

                                                                  n
                                                          Yc =    Yci                                                 (23)
                                                                 i =1



   Using the demand change from Equation 20 during the infection, the demand channel changes

the output as:

                                                   Y = ( I - A ) -1 F ( I ).                                          (24)
  13 With   a slight abuse of the notation, we drop the subscript to refer to vectors or matrices of the variables.




                                                               22
where Y represents the output and F ( I ) represents the vector of demand as a function of the number

of infections, I . Relative change in the output, is therefore,

                                                        -1
                                           ^ = (I - A) F ( I )
                                           Y                                                        (25)
                                                 ( I - A ) -1 F

where the fraction represents element-by-element division.



3.4      Equilibrium

In equilibrium, production declines by the largest magnitude that is implied by either the supply or

the demand sides. In other words, during the pandemic, we expect the change in the output vector

to be:
                                     ^ EQ = min Y
                                     Y          ^ Supply , Y
                                                           ^ Demand                                 (26)

                                                                                   ^ Supply and
where min represents element by element minimum function for two vectors, that is, Y
^ Demand .
Y

      The change in value-added of the output in industry i in country c under the pandemic is cal-

culated from adjusting the initial shares of value added in each industry during normal times by

output under COVID shock as:
                                                     ^ EQ
                                                VA = Y                                              (27)

Therefore, the change in GDP of the country c under the pandemic can be obtained through:


                                                   in=1 VAci VAci
                                         GDPc =                                                     (28)
                                                     in=1 VAci


      We calculate the output on a daily basis. Therefore, the yearly declines we report are the average

of all the daily declines.




                                                    23
4     Data and Calibration

4.1    Data

We use OECD ICIO Tables. As the industrial classification, OECD uses an aggregation of 2-digit ISIC

Rev 4 codes to 36 sectors. The last sector, "Private households with employed persons," does not

have any linkages with other industries. We drop that sector from our analysis when we measure

international inter-industry linkages. This leaves us with 35 sectors. Throughout our analysis, we

will make use of this classification labeled as OECD ISIC Codes.

      To calculate the industry level teleworkable share and the physical proximity measures shown

in the lower part of Figure 3, we use the occupational composition of the industries. We use the list

provided by Dingel and Neiman (2020) for the occupations which can fulfill their tasks remotely.

Dingel and Neiman (2020) use several measures from O*NET to identify which occupations are tele-

workable. For the workers that continue to perform their jobs on-site, we assume that the infection

rate depends on the physical proximity that is required in their workplace. To calculate the proxim-

ity requirements for the occupations, we use the self-reported Physical Proximity values available

in the Work Context section of the O*NET database. O*NET collects the physical proximity infor-

mation through surveys with following categories: (1) I don't work near other people (beyond 100

ft.); (2) I work with others but not closely (e.g., private office); (3) Slightly close (e.g., shared office);

(4) Moderately close (at arm's length); (5) Very close (near touching). We divide the category values

by 3 to make category (3) our benchmark. Specifically, a proximity value larger than 1 indicates a

closer proximity than the `shared office' level and a value smaller than 1 corresponds to less-dense

working conditions. We create a single physical proximity value for each occupation by comput-

ing a weighted average of the normalized category values. We calculate the proximity values at

the industry level after removing the teleworkable portion from the employees. We create a single

proximity value for each occupation by weighting the normalized score with the percentage of the

answers in each category.

      To obtain industry-level teleworkable share and proximity values, we calculate the weighted

average of the values corresponding to the occupations in each industry using the Occupational

Employment Statistics (OES) provided by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). OES data follows

                                                     24
four-digit NAICS codes to classify industries. In order to convert proximity data to OECD ISIC

codes, we make use of the correspondence table between 2017 NAICS and ISIC Revision 4 Industry

Codes, provided by the U.S. Census Bureau. We provide the teleworkable share and the proximity

index for the industries in Table A.1 of the Appendix.

      We obtain employment by sector data from OECD's Trade in employment (TiM) database Horv`
                                                                                             at

et al. (2020). For 14 countries that have missing data in TiM, we obtained the total employment from

the World Development Indicators database of the World Bank. We use the value added per em-

ployer information from the closest geographical aggregation and use this information to distribute

the employment to industries for these 14 countries.



4.2     SIR Parameters

Each of the 65 countries in our sample have a distinct experience regarding the course of the pan-

demic. In the SIR model, the two fundamental structural parameters, the resolution, and the in-

fection rates, define the pandemic's trajectory. The resolution rate is a disease-specific structural

parameter that does not vary much across the countries. According to the report by the WHO                    14 ,


the median recovery time for the mild cases is approximately two weeks. The mean recovery time

could be longer when we include severe cases. In this paper, we err on the optimistic side and set

 = 1/14  0.07 to establish a mean recovery time of 14 days. However, the infection rate might

vary across countries depending on each country's success in containing it. Furthermore, since the

onset of the pandemic, the infection rate exhibits a varying pattern over time. This time variation

arises because of the various lockdown measures adopted by the countries to reduce the transmis-

sion rate of the virus.

      For the calibration of , we make use of publicly available datasets to trace this variation across

countries and across time.15 For each country, we estimate a SIR model described in (1)-(3) using

official data to reproduce the variation in the trajectory of the pandemic across countries. In order to

capture the variation within each country over time, we extend the SIR model to allow for time vari-

ation in the infection rate, i.e.,  t . Specifically, we employ the methodology proposed in Cakmakli
  14 https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/who-china-joint-mission-on-covid-19-final-report.pdf
  15 The data is obtained from GitHub, COVID-19 Data Repository by the Center for Systems Science and Engineering
(CSSE), at Johns Hopkins University.


                                                       25
and Simsek (2020) to capture the changes in the rate of infection throughout the pandemic for the

countries in our sample. This methodology involves estimating a SIR model with time-varying pa-

rameters in a statistically coherent way to accommodate various non-pharmaceutical interventions,

including lockdowns.

   There are abundant studies that estimate the SIR model using fixed parameters (See, for example,

Wu et al. (2020); Hortac
                       ¸ su et al. (2020); Zhang et al. (2020)). In contrast, models that allow for time

variation in parameters are scarce. Kucharski et al. (2020) uses a variant of the SIR model frame-

work allowing the infection rate to follow a geometric random walk. Similarly, Yang et al. (2020),

and Fern´
        andez-Villaverde and Jones (2020) allow for time variation in the rate of infection. The

advantages of the time-varying parameters SIR model of Cakmakli and Simsek (2020) are twofold.

First, the framework is statistically consistent with the typical count data structure related to the

pandemic. This contrasts with the models that either employ least-squares or likelihood-based in-

ference using Normal distribution. Second, it is computationally easier, unlike the models that are

statistically consistent but computationally costly, such as the particle filter. Because we exploit a

wide number of countries with typically daily data, this computational efficiency is critical in our

estimation process. For each country, the data spans the period from the day the number of active

infections exceeds 1000 until the end of November 2020. Consequently, we use the parameter val-

ues, country-specific  t , and  estimated as of the end of November 2020 to simulate the pandemic's

evolution over the next year in each country. Except for Australia, New Zealand, and China, which

have been relatively successful in suppressing the infections, we imposed an R0 between 1.1 and 1.3

for all countries. These values are reported in Table A.3 of the Appendix.

   Under full lockdown, only a few industries are active. We construct the list of industries that are

closed during lockdowns based on international examples of government decrees. The list of these

sectors is given in Table A.2 of the Appendix. From these industries and using the employment data

at 4 digits, we calculated the share of each OECD ISIC industry that would remain active during the

lockdown. Finally, we calculated the share of public employees that are not affected by the lockdown

using the publicly available information.




                                                  26
4.3     Demand Shock

Turning to the demand side that is depicted in the upper half of Figure 3, we use publicly available

credit card spending data to calculate the estimated demand changes during the pandemic in each

industry. To that end, we use data from Turkey, which is a representative EMDE. We particularly

choose an EMDE to capture the demand changes during the pandemic because the demand effect is

particularly pronounced for the unvaccinated countries. The demand effect essentially disappears in

AEs once the vaccine becomes available. Nevertheless, as a robustness check, a comparison with the

US credit card data reflects that the changes in demand patterns are rather similar between EMDEs

and AEs.16 Armed with this evidence, we assume that the changes in demand arising from the "fear

factor" can be generalized around the globe.

      The list of OECD ISIC industries, and the expected changes are listed in Table A.1 of the Ap-

pendix along with explanations. The data on credit card spending is not available for the full set of

sectors. In this case, we use projections based on sectoral reports, experiences of other countries and

historical data on the specific sector as well as the whole manufacturing sector. While the aggregate

demand shock is computed as 23% when we focus only on the sectors with credit card spending

data, it is 16% when we consider the full set of sectors. Therefore, our sensitivity analysis indicate

little or no change in our qualitative findings.

                                                                                                ¯
      Demand is a function of the number of infections and this relationship is governed by the I

parameter of Equation 19 that determines the speed at which the public approaches the maxi-

mum decline in demand. We select this parameter to be country specific. In particular, we set
¯ = population/2000 to capture a relevant range for the number of infections (see below for our
I

simulations). This limit implies that the utility function returns to normal times if the number of in-

fections remain below population/20000. This approach is consistent with the levels observed dur-
   16 Considering Turkey and the US as representative EMDE    and AE countries respectively, we compare their credit card
spending data, focusing on two industry groups, namely "Accommodation," and "Gasoline Stations." We obtained the
underlying data from the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey and the Bureau of Economic Analysis that group weekly
credit card transactions into various expenditure categories. To avoid a misleading comparison between Turkey and the
US, we consider these two expenditure categories that are defined in the same manner by these agencies. To illustrate,
two weeks after Turkey and the US were hit by COVID-19 pandemic, the weekly estimates of percentage differences
from the typical spending suggest rather similar demand patterns in these countries: The corresponding declines in the
accommodation sector for the week of March 25 are 40.1% for Turkey and 43.6% for the US. In the gasoline industry, the
numbers are 81.1% decline in Turkey and 85.6% decline in the US. Thee corresponding estimates for the week of April 1
are -41.5% in Turkey and -46.8% in the US for Accommodation; -82.2% in Turkey and -85.2% in the US for the gasoline
industry respectively.


                                                           27
ing the summer of 2020, when the number of infections decreased and the consumption rebounded

back to relatively normal levels as observed from the credit-card spending data in Turkey and the

US.



4.4     Supply Shock

Recall from Equation 17 that the supply is affected from the inputs during the pandemic with the

following relationship:
                                       ^ci = min L
                                       Y         ^ ci , Z
                                                        ^ j,ci          .
                                                                 jSci

      ^ci denotes the change in supply, " " sign denotes the levels of the inputs and the output
where Y

during the course of pandemic and Sci represents the set of intermediate inputs used by industry ci.

      We consider three different specifications to incorporate the supply shock. With the help of

these alternative specifications, we highlight the importance of both labor and intermediate input

channels as well as the amplification through domestic and international sectoral linkages.

      In the first specification, we ignore potential interruptions in the delivery of intermediate inputs.

Our goal is to solely focus on the decline in the final demand of EMDEs. The export demand in

EMDEs can decline either through labor supply shocks due to infections and lockdowns or through

final demand changes. Hence, labor is the only limiting factor on the supply side. This gives us the

following relationship for the output implied by supply under the first specification:


                                                  ^ci = L
                                                  Y     ^ ci .                                         (29)



      Starting with the second specification, we incorporate the drag coming from the intermediate

inputs channel into our calculations. In specification 2, we assume that the inputs are aggregated at

the country level, wherever they come from, and then distributed to the specific industries within

the country. This is akin to building national input-output matrices, such as the U.S. input-output

matrices build by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). For instance, suppose the particular input

is steel and the country in question is Germany. We assume that the total imported steel in Germany

is distributed proportionately among the different industries in Germany, such as automotive and


                                                      28
appliance, in accordance with demand conditions. Essentially, we impose that the firms within a

country can adjust to an outside shock more easily and redistribute the inputs among themselves.

With this assumption, a fixed proportion of industry j present in country c is allocated to industry i.

We can write the fixed proportion term as:

                                                       x Yxj,ci
                                           r j,ci                                                  (30)
                                                       x k Yxj,ck

where Yxj,ci denotes the output of industry j produced in country x and exported to country c to be

used in industry i. Therefore,

                                          Zj,ci = r j,ci   Yxj,ck                                  (31)
                                                            x       k

During the pandemic, the available intermediate input from industry j in country c to be used in

industry j changes to:

                                      Zj,ci = r j,ci   Y
                                                       ^ xj Yxj,ck .                               (32)
                                                        x       k

Hence, the change in output in the second specification becomes:
                                                                                
                                                           ^ xj Yxj,ck
                                                       x k Y                    
                              ^ci = min
                              Y              ^ ci ,
                                             L                                     .               (33)
                                                       x k Yxj,ck
                                                                         jSci
                                                                                


In effect, with this specification we keep track of the changes in the level of an industry within a

country.

   In the third specification, we utilize the inter-country inter-industry matrix. Here, we assume

that supply shocks can also be specific to the importing sector. Going back to the example of German

automotive industry and appliance industry, in this specification we assume that the steel inputs

used in the automotive industry cannot be transferred to the appliance industry. Furthermore, if the

imported steel for these two industries are coming from different countries, then the heterogeneity in

the infection rates of those countries will come into picture. This specification is our most stringent

case. Specifically, a particular input imported by industry j can be put into use only by industry

i. Therefore, we can combine all the inputs that come from different countries, indexed by x, to be




                                                       29
used in industry i to obtain:

                                               Zj,ci =      Yxj,ci .                                             (34)
                                                              x

When supply shocks to intermediate inputs are industry specific, pandemic driven decline in im-

ported inputs in each industry is:

                                              Zj,ci =     Y
                                                          ^ xj Yxj,ci .                                          (35)
                                                          x

Therefore, the output in this specification can be written as:
                                                                                  
                                                             ^ xj Yxj,ci
                                                           x Y                    
                                  ^ci = min
                                  Y              ^ ci ,
                                                 L                                   .                           (36)
                                                            x Yxj,ci
                                                                           jSci
                                                                                  


In specifications 2 and 3, we use the minimum function, which is sensitive to outliers. To be on the

conservative side and prevent these outliers from driving our results, we focus on sizable inputs.

Therefore, when we calculate the minimum, we impose the following two filters: (i) Filter small

values: We do not consider an input industry in the supply side if the value of that input is less

than 10 thousand USD, daily. (ii) Filter small industries: For a given industry, we only consider

input industries that constitute at least (1/35)th of the total inputs of that industry. We choose this

threshold because we have 35 industries that are used as inputs.

   The summary of these specifications is provided in Table 1. In our empirical analysis, we use

these specifications under different vaccination scenarios to get a range of the economic impact in

the absence of equitable vaccine distribution.

                           Table 1: Alternative Supply Shock Specifications

                           Demand               Intermediate Inputs
      Specification                                                          Health Shock
                      Domestic and Foreign     Domestic and Foreign
           1                    Yes                           No             Labor

           2                    Yes                           Yes            Amplification via Domestic I-O

                                                                             Amplification via Inter-country /
           3                    Yes                           Yes
                                                                             Inter-industry I-O




                                                          30
5     Results

In this section, we report the economic costs arising from cross country heterogeneity in vaccine

availability under different scenarios. Table 2 summarizes these scenarios. In the first scenario,

we assume that the AEs are fully vaccinated but the EMDEs are not vaccinated. The pandemic

still persists in EMDEs and, yet, we do not impose any lockdowns. In scenario 2, we maintain the

same vaccine allocation as in scenario 1, but add endogenous lockdowns, which are determined

by the ICU capacities of countries. In scenario 3, we make the vaccine available in both AEs and

EMDEs, distributed in a gradual manner. We assume a relatively slower vaccine distribution in

EMDEs compared to AEs. For each of the 3 scenarios, the results are computed for all 3 specifications

explained in Section 4.4.

                                     Table 2: Vaccination Scenarios

              Scenarios             AEs                  EMDEs          Endo. Lockdowns
                  1       Immediate Vaccination      No Vaccination             No

                  2       Immediate Vaccination      No Vaccination            Yes

                  3           Fast Vaccination      Slow Vaccination           Yes




5.1     Scenario 1: Vaccination only in AEs, No Lockdowns in EMDEs

In this scenario, we assume that the pandemic is fully contained in AEs thanks to countrywide

vaccinations. In EMDEs the pandemic evolves at its natural course in the absence of any lockdown

measures and vaccines. Figure 4 displays the relative reduction in countries' annual GDPs --relative

to the counterfactual of global vaccinations-- under this scenario in percentage terms. As it is shown

by the scale on the right, larger costs are indicated by the darker shades.

      Figure 4 relays several critical messages. First, the severe domestic effects of the pandemic can

be immediately noticed for the EMDEs which correspond to darker shades of red on the map. The

overall negative drag is far more pronounced in all three specifications compared to AEs. In Morocco

and Malaysia, for example, the economic costs amount to at least 9% of the GDP in specification 1

due to higher number of infections and higher R0 in these countries (Figure 4a). The striking finding

                                                   31
                Figure 4: Relative Decline in GDPs under Scenario 1: No Lockdowns (%)

                                              (a) Specification 1 ­ Only Demand



                         $8 B
                                                           $20 B
                                                                 $34 B                                           25 - 31
                                                             $21 B                                               20 - 25
                                                                   $17 B                                         17 - 20
                                 $111 B                   $13 B                                                  14 - 17
                                                                                           $22 B $31 B           12 - 14
                                                                                                                 10 - 12
                                                                                                                 9 - 10
                                                                                                                 8-9
                                                                                                                 7-8
                                                                                                                 6-7
                                                                                                                 5-6
                                                                                                                 4.5 - 5
                                                                                                                 4 - 4.5
                                                                                                                 3.5 - 4
                                                                                                                 3 - 3.5
                                                                                                                 2.5 - 3
                                                                                                                 2 - 2.5
                                                                                                                 1.5 - 2
                                                                                                                 1 - 1.5
                                                                                                                 .5 - 1
                                                                                                $9 B             0 - .5




                                                                                                          $2 B




                                    (b) Specification 2 ­ Country Level Intermediate Inputs



                         $24 B
                                                           $46 B
                                                                 $73 B                                           25 - 31
                                                             $49 B                                               20 - 25
                                                                   $39 B                                         17 - 20
                                 $297 B                   $27 B                                                  14 - 17
                                                                                           $36 B $85 B           12 - 14
                                                                                                                 10 - 12
                                                                                                                 9 - 10
                                                                                                                 8-9
                                                                                                                 7-8
                                                                                                                 6-7
                                                                                                                 5-6
                                                                                                                 4.5 - 5
                                                                                                                 4 - 4.5
                                                                                                                 3.5 - 4
                                                                                                                 3 - 3.5
                                                                                                                 2.5 - 3
                                                                                                                 2 - 2.5
                                                                                                                 1.5 - 2
                                                                                                                 1 - 1.5
                                                                                                                 .5 - 1
                                                                                               $19 B             0 - .5




                                                                                                          $3 B




                        (c) Specification 3 ­ Country-Industry Level Intermediate Inputs



                         $36 B
                                                           $65 B
                                                                 $94 B                                           25 - 31
                                                             $66 B                                               20 - 25
                                                                   $51 B                                         17 - 20
                                 $438 B                   $37 B                                                  14 - 17
                                                                                           $46 B $125 B          12 - 14
                                                                                                                 10 - 12
                                                                                                                 9 - 10
                                                                                                                 8-9
                                                                                                                 7-8
                                                                                                                 6-7
                                                                                                                 5-6
                                                                                                                 4.5 - 5
                                                                                                                 4 - 4.5
                                                                                                                 3.5 - 4
                                                                                                                 3 - 3.5
                                                                                                                 2.5 - 3
                                                                                                                 2 - 2.5
                                                                                                                 1.5 - 2
                                                                                                                 1 - 1.5
                                                                                                                 .5 - 1
                                                                                               $26 B             0 - .5




                                                                                                          $4 B




N OTES: This figure shows the relative reductions in GDP under Scenario 1, where the unvaccinated countries do not
impose lockdowns. Vaccinated countries are highlighted with light gray borders. Shades of yellow correspond to
relatively lower costs while shades of red correspond to higher relative losses. GDP loss values are shown on the map for
a few selected countries.


                                                                   32
is the fact that AEs still suffer from the economic costs of the pandemic even if they fully contain it at

home. In specification 1, AEs are affected by the pandemic only through the decline in their exports

to EMDEs. We note that the corresponding hit on their economies is on average 1%, where the size is

proportional to the share of exports in each AE. For example, Russia as a major oil exporter is harder

hit compared to other AEs due to the decline in oil demand during the pandemic.

   When we incorporate the supply chains into our calculations, the overall costs increase dramat-

ically. As we move from specification 1 to specifications 2 and 3, we note that the overall map gets

darker, consistent with higher economic costs. In specification 2, the costs are still lower compared to

specification 3 because we allow for more flexibility in distributing the imported intermediate goods

across sectors of a given economy (Figure 4b). AEs are hit on average by %2 percent of their GDPs.

For extensively open economies that heavily rely on trade such as Ireland, this reduction in GDP

is as high as %2.5. In contrast, for relatively closed economies such as the US where the domestic

demand is the major driver of the economy, this GDP loss is around %1.4.

   In specification 3, the losses are higher because imported intermediate goods are country-sector

specific and cannot be obtained from another country-sector (Figure 4c). In this setting, the GDP

losses in AEs soar to %2.7 on average. For instance, the cost for the US is close to 438 billion USD

and the cost for China is 47 billion USD under this specification.

   The important takeaway from this analysis is that although non vaccinated EMDEs suffer the

most, AEs will bear a non-negligable cost from the pandemic so long as an equitable distribution of

the vaccines is not present. These costs are proportional to the extent of trade openness.

   We present the monetary equivalent of these aggregate GDP losses for the world and AEs in

terms 2019 USD in the first four rows of Table 3.As shown in rows 1-3, under scenario 1, costs

incurred by AEs vary from 509 billion USD to 1.6 trillion USD, where AEs might bear more than 37

percent of the global costs. Rows 5-7 show the relative declines as a percentage of GDP. Accordingly,

the world GDP declines by 4.9% and the GDP of AEs declines by 2.7%.




                                                   33
            Table 3: Total Cost for the World, AEs and EMDEs in terms of 2019 USD (billions)

                                    Scenario 1                       Scenario 2                         Scenario 3
                                       (1)                              (2)                                (3)
                         Spec. 1     Spec. 2     Spec. 3   Spec. 1    Spec. 2     Spec. 3     Spec. 1    Spec. 2     Spec. 3
                              (a)        (b)         (c)       (a)         (b)          (c)       (a)        (b)         (c)
  (1) World                2,946       3,768       4,273     1,479      4,297         6,144     1,844      3,287       3,763
  (2) AEs                    509       1,144       1,589      204       1,287         2,584      399       1,491       1,855
  (3) EMDEs                2,437       2,625       2,685     1,275      3,009         3,561     1,445      1,796       1,908
  (4) Share of AEs (%)      17.3        30.4        37.2      13.8       30.0          42.0      21.7       45.4        49.3
                                                                  Relative Declines
  (5) World                 3.81        4.87        5.53      1.91       5.56          7.94      2.38       4.25        4.87
  (6) AEs                   0.75        1.68        2.33      0.30       1.89          3.79      0.59       2.19        2.72
  (7) EMDEs                12.06       12.99       13.29      6.31      14.89         17.62      7.15       8.89        9.44

N OTES: This table presents total economic cost associated with COVID-19 pandemic for the World, AEs, and EMDEs
calculated under three scenarios. In the first scenario, we assume that the pandemic is fully contained in AEs thanks to
universal vaccinations, whereas in EMDEs the pandemic evolves at its natural course in the absence of any lockdown
restrictions and vaccines. The second scenario is similar to the first one with the exception of endogeneous lockdowns in
EMDEs that impose multiple lockdowns when the number of COVID-19 patients that require ICUs exceed the numbers
of ICUs that are reserved for COVID-19 patients. In the third scenario, AEs and EMDEs follow two different vaccination
calendars and can implement lockdowns if required. We estimate total economic cost of each of these scenarios under
three different specifications: In specification 1, the countries are affected only through the changes in final demand in
the world; In specification 2, the countries are also constrained by the supply of intermediate goods by the foreign
countries, and the substitution of intermediate goods across sectors and countries is allowed; In specification 3, the
countries are still constrained by the supply of intermediate goods by the foreign countries (as in specification 2), and the
substitution of intermediate goods is allowed only across the imported countries.




                                                             34
5.2     Scenario 2: Vaccination only in AEs, Endogeneous Lockdowns in EMDEs

The second scenario is similar to the first scenario with the exception of endogenous lockdowns in

EMDEs. In this scenario, the countries impose multiple lockdowns when the number of COVID-19

patients that require intensive case units (ICUs) exceed the number of ICUs that are reserved for

COVID-19 patients. Lockdowns result in a more substantial labor shock because only workers in

essential sectors are allowed to be on-site. Each lockdown is imposed for 14 days. During this time,

the number of COVID-19 patients decline to 36% of the number before the lockdown was imposed.

Once the lockdown is removed, we assume that it takes 90 days for the infection to reach the re-

production number prior to the lockdown. Figure 5 displays the relative reductions in countries'

annual GDPs under this scenario in percentage terms (The numerical estimates for AEs are reported

in Table A.4).

      As we move from the first scenario to the second scenario, we note that total costs decline for

specification 1 (column 1a vs. 2a in Table 3) and increase for specification 2 (column 1b vs. 2b in

Table 3). On the one hand, the lower number of infections in EMDEs improve their export demand,

contributing to lower costs (specification 1). On the other hand, the lockdowns in EMDEs limit

production and hence restrict available imports to AEs, contributing to higher costs (specification

2). Within Scenario 2, we note that the overall costs increase as we move from specification 1 to

specification 3, similar to scenario 1 as shown in Figure 4. When we move to the last specification,

AEs are also hit more fiercely like EMDEs (Figure 5c). In this case, the cost of the pandemic to the

AEs is as high as 4.1% on average, which reaches 6.5% for the most open countries such as Singapore.

In terms of 2019 USD, these costs amount to a total loss ranging from 0.2 to 2.6 trillion USD for the

AEs depending on the specification (column 2a-c, row 2). AEs bear 14% to 42% of this cost.                          17

   17 Table 3 uses a conservative setting where we filter out small industries from our calculations as explained at the end

of section 4.4. As a robustness check, if we bring these small industries back into our calculations ­i.e., consider input
industries even if their share is lower than 2.85%­ the overall costs are higher. Indeed, total global costs reach 9.2 trillion
USD under scenario 2, specification 3. AEs bear up to half of these global costs.




                                                              35
         Figure 5: Relative Decline in GDPs under Scenario 2: Endogeneous Lockdowns (%)

                                              (a) Specification 1 ­ Only Demand



                         $3 B
                                                           $8 B
                                                                $14 B                                             25 - 31
                                                             $8 B                                                 20 - 25
                                                                  $7 B                                            17 - 20
                                 $45 B                    $5 B                                                    14 - 17
                                                                                              $9 B $11 B          12 - 14
                                                                                                                  10 - 12
                                                                                                                  9 - 10
                                                                                                                  8-9
                                                                                                                  7-8
                                                                                                                  6-7
                                                                                                                  5-6
                                                                                                                  4.5 - 5
                                                                                                                  4 - 4.5
                                                                                                                  3.5 - 4
                                                                                                                  3 - 3.5
                                                                                                                  2.5 - 3
                                                                                                                  2 - 2.5
                                                                                                                  1.5 - 2
                                                                                                                  1 - 1.5
                                                                                                                  .5 - 1
                                                                                                  $4 B            0 - .5




                                                                                                           $1 B




                                    (b) Specification 2 ­ Country Level Intermediate Inputs



                         $26 B
                                                           $50 B
                                                                 $79 B                                            25 - 31
                                                             $54 B                                                20 - 25
                                                                   $43 B                                          17 - 20
                                 $342 B                   $30 B                                                   14 - 17
                                                                                          $39 B $91 B             12 - 14
                                                                                                                  10 - 12
                                                                                                                  9 - 10
                                                                                                                  8-9
                                                                                                                  7-8
                                                                                                                  6-7
                                                                                                                  5-6
                                                                                                                  4.5 - 5
                                                                                                                  4 - 4.5
                                                                                                                  3.5 - 4
                                                                                                                  3 - 3.5
                                                                                                                  2.5 - 3
                                                                                                                  2 - 2.5
                                                                                                                  1.5 - 2
                                                                                                                  1 - 1.5
                                                                                                                  .5 - 1
                                                                                                 $19 B            0 - .5




                                                                                                           $3 B




                        (c) Specification 3 ­ Country-Industry Level Intermediate Inputs



                         $61 B
                                                           $98 B
                                                                $137 B                                            25 - 31
                                                            $100 B                                                20 - 25
                                                                  $78 B                                           17 - 20
                                 $744 B                   $60 B                                                   14 - 17
                                                                                          $67 B $197 B            12 - 14
                                                                                                                  10 - 12
                                                                                                                  9 - 10
                                                                                                                  8-9
                                                                                                                  7-8
                                                                                                                  6-7
                                                                                                                  5-6
                                                                                                                  4.5 - 5
                                                                                                                  4 - 4.5
                                                                                                                  3.5 - 4
                                                                                                                  3 - 3.5
                                                                                                                  2.5 - 3
                                                                                                                  2 - 2.5
                                                                                                                  1.5 - 2
                                                                                                                  1 - 1.5
                                                                                                                  .5 - 1
                                                                                                 $37 B            0 - .5




                                                                                                           $6 B




N OTES: This figure shows the reductions in relative GDP under Scenario 2, where we model endogenous lockdowns in
unvaccinated countries. Shades of yellow correspond to relatively lower ratios and shades of red correspond to higher
relative losses. Vaccinated countries are highlighted with light gray borders. GDP loss values are shown on the map for
selected countries.


                                                                   36
5.3     Scenario 3: Gradual Vaccination in EMDEs and in AEs, Endogenous Lockdowns in
        EMDEs and AEs

The final scenario aims to replicate the actual vaccination plans in real life more closely. Under

this scenario AEs and EMDEs follow two different vaccination calendars. Specifically, AEs start

vaccination quite early with the half of the susceptible population getting vaccinated in the first 30

days and the remaining half getting vaccinated in the following 90 days. Therefore, we assume

that the vaccination of all susceptible population will be accomplished within 120 days in AEs. In

contrast, EMDEs are not able to inoculate their susceptible populations fully, but they can only

vaccinate half of it. The vaccination program starts at the same time as the AEs, but it takes a full year

to vaccinate half of the susceptible population. Furthermore, the lockdown conditions elaborated in

scenario 2 apply in scenario 3 as well. Technically, AEs can be put under lockdown in this scenario

as well as EMDEs because the vaccination is not immediate in AEs. Figure 6 displays the relative

reduction in countries' annual GDPs under this scenario in percentage terms. The numerical values

for AEs are reported in Table A.4.

      While the cost incurred by the advanced AEs is on average 2% for the second specification (Fig-

ure 6b), it increases to 3% on average under the third specification (Figure 6c). When we compare

the total economic costs in Table 3, we observe that the costs increase for both AEs and EMDEs un-

der the first specification as we move from scenario 2 to scenario 3 (column 2a vs. column 3a). This

could reflect the slower vaccination schedule in AEs which increases their domestic costs as well as

their export demand from EMDEs. As we move to the second and the third specifications, we ob-

serve a noticeable decline in the costs of EMDEs (row 3, column 3b and 3c) thanks to the availability

of vaccine in these countries. The net impact on AEs is less trivial. On the one hand, there is an

increase in their domestic costs due to the slower vaccination schedule at home. On the other hand,

the faster recovery of the EMDEs support the growth in AEs through stronger exports and provision

of intermediate goods. We note that these factors more or less offset each other for the second spec-

ification (row 2, column 2b vs. 3b). However, overall costs decline by over 700 billion USD for the

AEs under the third specification (row 2, column 2c vs. 3c). This indicates that the positive impact

coming from the faster recovery in EMDEs dominate the drag coming from slower vaccination in

AEs. That being said, total global costs are still rather sizable (column 3, row 1), suggesting that a


                                                   37
             Figure 6: Relative Decline in GDPs under Scenario 3: Gradual Vaccination (%)

                                              (a) Specification 1 ­ Only Demand



                         $5 B
                                                           $20 B
                                                                 $20 B                                           25 - 31
                                                             $23 B                                               20 - 25
                                                                   $13 B                                         17 - 20
                                 $135 B                   $13 B                                                  14 - 17
                                                                                           $11 B $15 B           12 - 14
                                                                                                                 10 - 12
                                                                                                                 9 - 10
                                                                                                                 8-9
                                                                                                                 7-8
                                                                                                                 6-7
                                                                                                                 5-6
                                                                                                                 4.5 - 5
                                                                                                                 4 - 4.5
                                                                                                                 3.5 - 4
                                                                                                                 3 - 3.5
                                                                                                                 2.5 - 3
                                                                                                                 2 - 2.5
                                                                                                                 1.5 - 2
                                                                                                                 1 - 1.5
                                                                                                                 .5 - 1
                                                                                                $5 B             0 - .5




                                                                                                          $1 B




                                    (b) Specification 2 ­ Country Level Intermediate Inputs



                         $25 B
                                                           $78 B
                                                                 $71 B                                           25 - 31
                                                             $90 B                                               20 - 25
                                                                   $46 B                                         17 - 20
                                 $568 B                   $45 B                                                  14 - 17
                                                                                           $32 B $76 B           12 - 14
                                                                                                                 10 - 12
                                                                                                                 9 - 10
                                                                                                                 8-9
                                                                                                                 7-8
                                                                                                                 6-7
                                                                                                                 5-6
                                                                                                                 4.5 - 5
                                                                                                                 4 - 4.5
                                                                                                                 3.5 - 4
                                                                                                                 3 - 3.5
                                                                                                                 2.5 - 3
                                                                                                                 2 - 2.5
                                                                                                                 1.5 - 2
                                                                                                                 1 - 1.5
                                                                                                                 .5 - 1
                                                                                               $17 B             0 - .5




                                                                                                          $3 B




                        (c) Specification 3 ­ Country-Industry Level Intermediate Inputs



                         $35 B
                                                           $92 B
                                                                $90 B                                            25 - 31
                                                            $104 B                                               20 - 25
                                                                  $57 B                                          17 - 20
                                 $671 B                   $53 B                                                  14 - 17
                                                                                           $39 B $109 B          12 - 14
                                                                                                                 10 - 12
                                                                                                                 9 - 10
                                                                                                                 8-9
                                                                                                                 7-8
                                                                                                                 6-7
                                                                                                                 5-6
                                                                                                                 4.5 - 5
                                                                                                                 4 - 4.5
                                                                                                                 3.5 - 4
                                                                                                                 3 - 3.5
                                                                                                                 2.5 - 3
                                                                                                                 2 - 2.5
                                                                                                                 1.5 - 2
                                                                                                                 1 - 1.5
                                                                                                                 .5 - 1
                                                                                               $23 B             0 - .5




                                                                                                          $4 B




N OTES: This figure shows the reductions in relative GDP under Scenario 3, where we model the gradual vaccination.
The shades of yellow correspond to relatively lower ratios and the shades of red correspond to higher relative losses.
Vaccinated countries are highlighted with light gray borders. GDP loss values are shown on the map for selected
countries.


                                                                   38
slow inoculation calendar such as the one depicted in scenario 3 is "too little, too late." Under this

relatively more realistic scenario, the total cost for the world varies between 1.8 and 3.8 trillion USD

depending on the availability of the intermediate goods. Strikingly, for the third specification, the

absolute costs for the AEs is almost as high as the costs for EMDEs (column 3c, row 2 vs. row 3).

Under all three scenarios and all three specifications, the GDP costs dwarf the 38 billion USD cost

reported by Access to COVID-19 Tools (ACT) Accelerator partnership to manufacture 2 billion doses

of vaccines to vaccine 20 percent of the global population by the end of 2021.

      We consider the framework that is depicted in Figure 6c as the most realistic case that mimics the

actual developments during the pandemic more closely. As of this writing in January 2021, there are

delays in the implementation of the vaccine in AEs while such delays are far more noticeable for the

EMDEs. Consequently, lockdowns and vaccinations are simultaneously observed both in AEs and

EMDEs at the same time. Thus, the assumptions that are valid for this scheme seem to match the

real world the best. Figure 7 filters out the costs that arise from international costs and only focuses

on the domestic costs for this baseline specification. To that end, for a given country, we assume

that the course of pandemic follows the same pattern as specification 3 of scenario 3 within the

country. Meanwhile, the rest of the world is devoid of the pandemic, and, hence, is back to normal.

We run this simulation separately for 65 countries. As expected, compared to Figure 6c, the losses

are subdued. The costs borne by the EMDEs are not significantly different from those observed in

Figure 6c because the bulk of the costs incurred by the EMDEs are domestically driven. For the

AEs, however, we observe that the domestic costs are far less important compared to those that

arise from international linkages. For the US, for example, while the domestic costs of the pandemic

are 92 billion USD, when we add the costs due to trade linkages the toll rises to 744 billion USD.

Countries like China, Australia, and New Zealand, which have the pandemic under control, have

negligible domestic costs where most of their costs shown in Figure 6c are driven by international

linkages. This figure corroborates the importance of international linkages in the disease toll.



5.4     Sectoral Heterogeneity

Recall from Figure 3 and our eloborate discussion of the model that the economic costs that we

estimate for each country are calculated at the sectoral level. Sectoral aggregates yield the country-


                                                    39
                    Figure 7: Relative Decline if GDP due to Domestic Costs (% GDP)



                         $1 B
                                                      $12 B $3 B                                              25.00 - 31.00
                                                         $15 B                                                20.00 - 25.00
                                                               $6 B                                           17.00 - 20.00
                                $92 B                 $8 B                                                    14.00 - 17.00
                                                                                          $0 B $1 B           12.00 - 14.00
                                                                                                              10.00 - 12.00
                                                                                                              9.00 - 10.00
                                                                                                              8.00 - 9.00
                                                                                                              7.00 - 8.00
                                                                                                              6.00 - 7.00
                                                                                                              5.00 - 6.00
                                                                                                              4.50 - 5.00
                                                                                                              4.00 - 4.50
                                                                                                              3.50 - 4.00
                                                                                                              3.00 - 3.50
                                                                                                              2.50 - 3.00
                                                                                                              2.00 - 2.50
                                                                                                              1.50 - 2.00
                                                                                                              1.00 - 1.50
                                                                                                              0.50 - 1.00
                                                                                             $0 B             0.00 - 0.50



                                                                                                       $0 B




N OTES: This figure illustrates the domestic shocks under specification 3 of scenario 3. Here, we eliminated all the shocks
associated with the pandemic except within a given country. We run our simulations for 65 countries separately. The
shades of yellow correspond to relatively lower ratios and the shades of red correspond to higher relative losses.
Vaccinated countries are highlighted with light gray borders. GDP loss values are shown on the map for selected
countries.



level economic costs that we reported in the previous section. In this section, we shed light onto

sectoral costs to illustrate the heterogenous impact of the pandemic on different sectors.

    Sectoral heterogeneity can be driven by demand or supply factors. On the demand side, het-

erogeneity arises due to a disproportionate decline in demand for those goods that necessitate a

violation of voluntary social distancing measures. The harder the pandemic hits a particular coun-

try, the more severe will be the decline in demand for these pandemic-sensitive sectors both for

domestic goods and for exports. In addition to exports, trade exposures further amplify sectoral

heterogeneity through supply of intermediate goods. The more severe the pandemic is, the more

difficult it is for a country to produce the intermediate goods that are imported by other countries.

    To illustrate the extent of cross-country heterogeneity in terms of sectoral economic costs, Fig-

ure 8 shows horizontal box-plots for the distribution of sectoral economic costs, measured by sector-

level output loss in percentages across AEs (Panel (a)) and EMDEs (Panel (b)) using scenario 2 spec-

ification 3. In both panels, the main box of data for each industry shows the range of the 25­75

percentiles and the vertical line in this box corresponds to the median of the given sector-level dis-

tribution. On the y-axis of both panels, the sectors are ranked according to the median output loss in

AEs. In the horizontal box-plot distribution of each industry, light blue dots mark the values that lie


                                                                 40
out of the given range. In both panels, we highlight two countries, namely the Netherlands and the

United States in (a), and Turkey and Brazil in (b). These countries are chosen based on their trade

openness to make the illustration more vivid. In addition, we show the maximum of AEs' values

from Panel (a) on Panel (b) with a black mark to highlight the scale differences.

                            Figure 8: Cross-Country Heterogeneity in terms of Sectoral Economic Costs

                                      (a) AEs                                                       (b) EMDEs
   Public Admin. & Def.                                                                                               Public Admin. & Def.
               Education                                                                                              Mining (Energy)
        Mining Support                                                                                                Mining Support
            Construction                                                                                              Telecommunications
        Mining (Energy)                                                                                               Comp., Electr. & Opt.
  Health & Social Work                                                                                                Mining (Non-Energy)
   Mining (Non-Energy)                                                                                                Machinery & Eq., NEC
             Real Estate                                                                                              Education
  Publish. & Broadcast.                                                                                               Coke & Ref Petrol.
       Arts, Ent. & Rec.                                                                                              Electrical Eq.
  Accom. & Food Serv.                                                                                                 IT & Other Inf.
           Public Works                                                                                               Other Manufacturing
   Telecommunications                                                                                                 Health & Social Work
   Finance & Insurance                                                                                                Food, Bev. & Tob.
 Machinery & Eq., NEC                                                                                                 Other Transport Eq.
          IT & Other Inf.                                                                                             Motor Vehicles
  Other Business Serv.
                                                                               TUR                                    Fabricated Metal
                                                               USA
  Comp., Electr. & Opt.                                                        BRA                                    Chem. & Pharma
     Coke & Ref Petrol.                                        NLD                                                    Rubber & Plastic
           Electrical Eq.                                                      Max AE                                 Other Business Serv.
             Paper Prod.                                                                                              Finance & Insurance
    Other Transport Eq.                                                                                               Wood Prod.
       Fabricated Metal                                                                                               Basic Metals
       Other Non-Metal                                                                                                Other Non-Metal
  Other Manufacturing                                                                                                 Paper Prod.
      Food, Bev. & Tob.                                                                                               Publish. & Broadcast.
         Motor Vehicles                                                                                               Textiles & Apparel
             Wood Prod.                                                                                               Wholesale & Retail
       Rubber & Plastic                                                                                               Construction
       Chem. & Pharma                                                                                                 Transport. & Storage
      Textiles & Apparel                                                                                              Agriculture & Fishing
  Transport. & Storage                                                                                                Public Works
            Basic Metals                                                                                              Real Estate
     Wholesale & Retail                                                                                               Arts, Ent. & Rec.
  Agriculture & Fishing                                                                                               Accom. & Food Serv.
                        0         5       10         15   20         25        60       50   40      30     20   10   0
                                           Output Loss                                        Output Loss


N OTES: For a given sector listed in the y-axis, this figure illustrates horizontal box-plots of output loss across AEs, and
EMDEs in Panel (a) and Panel (b), respectively, using scenario 2 specification 3. The sectors are ranked according to the
median of output loss in AEs in both panels. We measure the sector-level economic costs as the percentage change in
GDP of the corresponding country for a given sector during the pandemic relative to the counterfactual of global
vaccinations. Sectors are classified following the 2-digit OECD ISIC codes and their broad definitions are given in
Table A.1. In the horizontal box-plot distribution of each industry, light blue dots show the values that lie outside the
corresponding range. Specifically, a value that is smaller than the lower quartile minus 1.5 times the interquartile range
or larger than the upper quartile plus 1.5 times the interquartile range is marked by a light blue dot. In both panels, we
highlight two countries each, namely the Netherlands and the United States in (a), and Turkey and Brazil in (b). In
addition, we show the maximum of AEs' values from Panel (a) on Panel (b) with a red mark to highlight the scale
differences.




      Figure 8 illustrates the following key highlights:


   (i) In terms of the overall economic costs between AEs and EMDEs, the sectoral costs are in ac-

           cordance with the aggregated costs that we had reported at the country level. In particular,

           we observe that the sectoral costs borne by the EMDEs are significantly larger than AEs in

           each sector. The black mark in panel (b), which shows the maximum sectoral cost in AEs, is

                                                                          41
    typically lower than the average sectoral costs borne by the EMDEs.

(ii) There is substantial sectoral heterogeneity within both AEs and EMDEs.

(iii) The sectoral costs for the EMDEs are the highest for those sectors that are more severely af-

    fected from the domestic pandemic conditions such as accommodation and food services, arts

    and entertainment, or real estate (Panel (b)). The economic costs in these sectors primarily

    reflect the decline in demand due to the fear factor in these countries where the pandemic is

    not contained.

(iv) When we turn to AEs that are vaccinated at a faster pace, we observe a different sectoral

    breakdown. Because the domestic drag from the pandemic is eliminated in these countries,

    the sectors that bear the highest economic costs are those that are more exposed to trade with

    unvaccinated countries such as textiles and apparel, transportation and storage, basic metals,

    wholesale and retail or agriculture and fishing. Recall from Figure 2 that all of these sectors

    are either sizable importers of inputs (shown by the node color) or they are connected to other

    industries that are major importers of inputs, such as the thick edge connecting the mining

    sector (which is mostly based in EMDEs) to basic metal sector. Thus, our findings are strongly

    supportive of our predictions from the discussion of Figure 2.

(v) Within the hardest hit sectors for AEs, wholesale and retail or transportation and storage are

    non-tradable sectors. A closer look into wholesale and retail sector reflects that this sector uses

    oil as a major input. As shown by the darkest node in Figure 2, Coke and Refined Petroleum

    sector relies heavily on imported inputs and a fair share of these inputs come from the unvac-

    cinated countries, particularly through mining (not shown). Furthermore, there are evident

    nonlinearities detected where the oil industry is connected to chemicals and pharmaceuticals,

    which itself is one of the hardest hit sectors during the pandemic. Turning to transportation

    and storage, which is another nontradable sector, the costs borne by this sector are largely

    explained by the sizable contraction in the motor vehicles sector.

(vi) In order to give a glance about the sectoral costs with respect to trade exposure, we plot a

    couple of countries with different levels of trade openness. The idea is to visually illustrate

    whether those countries that are more open to trade suffer larger sectoral costs. Recall that

                                                 42
        the node color in Figure 1 illustrated trade openness. We observe that the countries that are

        represented by darker nodes in Figure 1 bear higher economic costs. More specifically, within

        two AEs such as the Netherlands and the US, we observe that the sectoral costs are generally

        higher in Netherlands compared to US, consistent with more trade exposure. A similar picture

        emerges when we compare the sectoral costs for two EMDE countries. Turkey is more open

        to trade relative to Brazil. Consequently, sectoral costs borne by Turkey, are generally higher

        than those of Brazil.



5.5     Global Supply Chain Disruptions: A Premier

Our worst case estimates rely on potential disruptions in the global supply chains due to ongoing

pandemic in EMDEs that disrupts production, whereas the best case estimates only require a loss to

export earnings of AEs due to slow normalization in demand in EMDEs. The intuition for amplifi-

cation that delivers the large costs in the worst case comes from the short-run fixed price framework

with complementarities in intermediate inputs and inelastic labor supply. Thus, a health shock in a

given country leads to shortages of labor and intermediate inputs, together with low demand. This

health shock is then amplified to have a cascading effect in the other countries through the global

trade and production network, disrupting global supply chains.

      Although this Leontief structure might be too stark, we believe it is a realistic setting easily

mapped to data in order to calculate the first-round effects of an inequitable vaccine distribution for

2021. A more flexible approach might be preferable theoretically, however, with the country-sector

granularity that we want to capture in the data, it would have been much harder to parameter-

ize. We opt for realism relying on the fact that the global value chains involve billions of dollars

of investment and well established supplier relationships that are hard to change in the short run.

Re-optimizing alternate trade partners is not a trivial decision given that most of the potential trade

partners are also hit by the pandemic and the vaccination schedules are far from being complete. The

feasibility of identifying alternative suppliers might be further limited due to differences in domes-

tic policies regarding travel restrictions or government guidance on lockdown requirements. With

annual exports of intermediate goods exceeding 10 trillion USD, the hefty supply chain networks




                                                   43
may not adopt to short run shocks very well, leading to supply chain disruptions.18 It is further

noted that supply chain disruptions may have a lagged effect as well, because production may not

start as smoothly after periods of lockdowns.19

    It is hard to capture these disruptions in real time data and hence we put a narrative together

combining different pieces of information. On the anectodal evidence side, there have been several

complains that exports could not be shipped to western ports in the second half of 2020.20 In 2021,

these complains increase with the normalization in demand.21,            22   More recently, there are articles

that note that the container crisis evolved into a more general problem that involves shortages of

skilled workers due to COVID-19.23 There are also articles that highlight strains in supply chains

due to the global semiconductor shortage triggered by Taiwan.           24    Overall, there have been over 30

articles in FT and NYT alone between February and April of 2021 on the disruptions in global supply

chains. Most recently, the CEOs of Maersk and Hapag-Lloyd, the two largest shipping companies,

have argued that COVID-19 related disruptions combined with the Suez Canal event cannot be

smoothed out right away and lead to disruptions in supply chains until the last quarter of 2021.25

    The real-time aggregate trade data, however, shows an improvement in world trade in early

2021.26 Such trade data combines prices, quantities, and inventories so it is hard to pin down why

it registers an improvement and why it cannot pick up the real-time supply chain disruptions on

the ground. Figure 9 shows the growth in exports and imports for the US, Euro Area, and China,

taken from CPB World Trade Monitor. We observe that China plays a leading role in trade recovery.
  18 See     https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/emerging-economies-supply-chain-resilience-by-jonathan-
woetzel-and-mekala-krishnan-2021-02?utm source=twitter&utm medium=organic-social&utm campaign=page-
posts-february21&utm post-type=link&utm format=16:9&utm creative=link-image&utm post-date=2021-02-13.
    19 See     https://www.wsj.com/articles/consumer-demand-snaps-back-factories-cant-keep-up-11614019305?mod=
searchresults pos3&page=1.
    20 See e.g. https://www.wsj.com/articles/covid-19-shipping-problems-squeeze-chinas-exporters-11609675204
    21 IHS Markit report on December 11, 2020 "Global supply chains face heavy disruption amid freight slow-

down and port gridlock", https://ihsmarkit.com/research-analysis/global-supply-chains-face-heavy-disruption-amid-
freight-slowdown-Dec20.html.
    22 The Economist article on January 23, 2021 refers to a survey of small and medium size importers where

one-third of the 77 percent of the respondents who reported supply chain disruptions raised their prices as a re-
sult. https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2021/01/21/supply-bottlenecks-are-pushing-up-costs-for-
manufacturers
    23 See e.g.    https://www.ft.com/content/ef937903-ed1d-4625-b2ba-d682318a314f or https://www.nytimes.com/
2021/03/06/business/global-shipping.html
    24 See   e.g.        https://www.ft.com/content/74038c71-f0a2-41e0-8cc3-5f61a6157931?desktop=true&segmentId=
7c8f09b9-9b61-4fbb-9430-9208a9e233c8
    25 https://www.ft.com/content/de6d56f6-699e-49ee-b71a-fac29ffb3687?desktop=true&segmentId=d8d3e364-5197-

20eb-17cf-2437841d178a#myft:notification:instant-email:content
    26 See IMF, January 2021 WEO.



                                                       44
In its latest report as of March 25, 2021, CPB notes that the world merchandise trade is driven by

China and developed Asia.                                                                                                                       27      The recovery in trade in China and developed Asia is consistent with

early and strict lockdown policies that enabled a faster economic recovery in this region. A more

modest recovery is observed in the US and the Euro area, where the export performance particularly

loses momentum through the end of our sample. The US imports pick up, mimicking the export

performance of China, which is one of the major trade partners of the US.

                               Figure 10 plots the Euro area trade volumes utilizing two different data sources: CPB and Eu-

rostat. It is striking that the two datasets for exactly the same set of countries show different trade

trends in the recent period. This is odd, given that their data source should be the same, coming

from the countries' own statistical offices. Clearly, there is a pronounced dip in trade in January

2021 in Eurostat data, but not in CPB data.                                                                                                                                                                          28


                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure 9: Changes in Trade

                                                                               (a) Growths in Exports                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (b) Growths in Imports
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                          Euro Exp Gr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Euro Imp Gr
                         40               USA Exp Gr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   USA Imp Gr
                                          China Exp Gr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 China Imp Gr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10

                         20
 Exports Yearly Growth




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Imports Yearly Growth




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0


                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -10



                         -20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -20




                         -40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -30
                               Jan19

                                       Feb19

                                               Mar19

                                                       Apr19

                                                               May19

                                                                       Jun19

                                                                                Jul19

                                                                                        Aug19

                                                                                                Sep19

                                                                                                        Oct19

                                                                                                                Nov19

                                                                                                                        Dec19

                                                                                                                                Jan20

                                                                                                                                        Feb20

                                                                                                                                                Mar20

                                                                                                                                                        Apr20

                                                                                                                                                                May20

                                                                                                                                                                        Jun20

                                                                                                                                                                                Jul20

                                                                                                                                                                                         Aug20

                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sep20

                                                                                                                                                                                                         Oct20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Nov20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Dec20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jan21




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jan19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Feb19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mar19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Apr19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            May19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jun19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jul19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Aug19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sep19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Oct19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Nov19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Dec19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jan20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Feb20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mar20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Apr20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            May20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jun20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jul20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Aug20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sep20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Oct20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Nov20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Dec20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jan21
N OTES: This figure plots the growth in exports (a) and imports (b) for the US, Euro Area, and China over the period
January 2019-January 2021. We calculate growth rates based on the seasonally adjusted volumes (2010=100) that are
obtained from CPB World Trade Monitor (See https://www.cpb.nl/en/worldtrademonitor).




                               One potential explanation for increasing trade might be inventories. A recent report highlights

the importance of inventory management during the pandemic to minimize supply chain disrup-

tions.29 Survey evidence suggests that in response to the decline in overall demand during COVID-

19, firms adjusted their inventories to support their operations in 2020.30 Figure 11 shows the two
                          27 https://www.cpb.nl/en/worldtrademonitor
                          28 For
         details, see https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/documents/2995521/11562995/6-18032021-BP-EN.pdf
                          29 For
          details on the McKinsey&Company report, see https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/operations/
our-insights/supply-chain-recovery-in-coronavirus-times-plan-for-now-and-the-future
   30 For details on the COVID-19 Survey conducted by the Institute for Supply Management (ISM), see

https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/covid-19-survey-round-3-supply-chain-disruptions-continue-globally-


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         45
                                                                         Figure 10: Discrepancies in the Trade Data

                                                                                                                        Euro Area Trade Growth
                                  10



                                   0
              Yearly Growth (%)




                                  -10



                                  -20



                                  -30              Export Growth Eurostat
                                                   Import Growth Eurostat
                                                   Export Growth CPB
                                                   Import Growth CPB
                                  -40
                                        Jan19

                                                Feb19

                                                        Mar19

                                                                Apr19

                                                                        May19

                                                                                Jun19

                                                                                        Jul19

                                                                                                Aug19

                                                                                                        Sep19

                                                                                                                Oct19

                                                                                                                          Nov19

                                                                                                                                  Dec19

                                                                                                                                          Jan20

                                                                                                                                                  Feb20

                                                                                                                                                          Mar20

                                                                                                                                                                  Apr20

                                                                                                                                                                          May20

                                                                                                                                                                                  Jun20

                                                                                                                                                                                          Jul20

                                                                                                                                                                                                  Aug20

                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sep20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Oct20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Nov20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Dec20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jan21
N OTES: This figure contrasts the growth rates in imports and exports using the data provided by Eurostat and CPB.




PMI indices i.e., Stocks of Finished Goods Index­shown in panel (a)­ and Suppliers' Delivery Times

Index­shown in panel (b)­ over the period from January 2018 to January 2021, focusing on the man-

ufacturing industry.31 The noticeable downwards trend in panel (a) throughout 2020 is consistent

with inventory adjustments during the pandemic. With the pandemic expanding into its second

year, we expect the mitigating effect of inventories to disappear. Panel (b) supports this intuition.

Specifically, we observe that although suppliers' delivery times reflected a V-pattern in the third

quarter of 2020, there is a noticeable increase in delivery times in the fourth quarter, which could

reflect supply chain disruptions that are getting more pronounced as the inventories are depleted.32

Consequently the adverse effects of disruptions in supply chains should be felt more severely in

2021, especially if vaccinations delay, pandemic remains, and the duration of lockdowns increases.33
301096403.html
   31 For the surveys produced by IHS Markit, the interpretation of the Suppliers' Delivery Times Index is such that a

reading above 50 signals shorter average lead-times, a reading below 50 signals longer average lead-times and a reading
of 50 signals no change in average lead-times.
   32 This intuition is supported in a recent article where it is noted that supply chain disruptions are getting more

pronounced in 2021 as the retail inventories are depleted during the lockdowns in 2020.https://www.ft.com/content/
926c1dbe-e679-4783-975f-430c1d451ab8
   33 Another survey that is highlighted in the Financial Times on Jan 31, 2021, reports that 77 percent of the 900

global companies indicated that they have been experiencing supply chain disruptions in the last six months, see
https://www.ft.com/content/40d23da5-c321-4b56-8ec7-551573a7a485.




                                                                                                                                  46
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Figure 11: PMI Manufacturing Data

                                                                              (a) Stocks of Finished Goods Index                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (b) Suppliers' Delivery Times Index
                                         55                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         55



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    50
 Median Stocks of Finished Goods Index




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Median Suppliers' Delivery Times Index
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    45



                                         50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         40



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    35



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    30



                                         45                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         25
                                              Jan18
                                                      Feb18
                                                              Mar18
                                                                      Apr18
                                                                              May18
                                                                                      Jun18
                                                                                              Jul18
                                                                                                      Aug18
                                                                                                              Sep18
                                                                                                                      Oct18
                                                                                                                              Nov18
                                                                                                                                      Dec18
                                                                                                                                              Jan19
                                                                                                                                                      Feb19
                                                                                                                                                              Mar19
                                                                                                                                                                      Apr19
                                                                                                                                                                              May19
                                                                                                                                                                                      Jun19
                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul19
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Aug19
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sep19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Oct19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Nov19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Dec19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Jan20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Feb20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Mar20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Apr20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              May20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jun20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Aug20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sep20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Oct20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Nov20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Dec20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Jan21




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jan18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Feb18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mar18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Apr18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         May18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jun18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jul18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Aug18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sep18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Oct18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Nov18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Dec18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jan19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Feb19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mar19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Apr19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         May19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jun19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jul19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Aug19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sep19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Oct19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Nov19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Dec19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jan20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Feb20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mar20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Apr20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         May20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jun20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jul20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Aug20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sep20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Oct20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Nov20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Dec20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jan21
N OTES: This figure plots the median values of two PMI indices i.e., Stocks of Finished Goods Index (a) and Suppliers'
Delivery Times Index (b) over the period January 2018-January 2021, focusing on the manufacturing industry. Those
indices are measured by IHS Markit. The first index that we use to proxy inventories measures the level of finished
products, which has come off the production line and is awaiting shipment/sales. The latter measures the average time
it takes for the suppliers to provide inputs to the manufacturers to use in the production process. In both panels, the
horizontal dashed line stands for the normal level of the corresponding index that is equal to 50.




                                              In order to understand the role of inventory adjustments under demand shocks (regular business

downturns) and under both demand and supply shocks (COVID-19), we undertook an empirical

analysis, using past data from January 2014 to November 2020. We estimate the following equation:




                                                                                                                      INVc,t =  +  1 Xc,t +  2 COVID19t +  3 COVID19t × Xc,t + µc +                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               c,t ,                                                                                   (37)


where INVc,t refers to stocks of finished goods (inventories), and Xc,t refers to either new orders or

backlogs of work for a given country-month pair. COVID19 is a dummy variable that equals 1 for

the period after May 2020, and 0 otherwise. µc represents country fixed effects. The data is in panel

format covering 23 countries.34

                                              Backlogs reflect the buildup of new orders that have not been completed. It reflects a workload

that is beyond the existing production capacity. During normal business cycles, both new orders

and backlogs can be interpreted as a signal for strengthening demand and may prompt businesses to

increase their production and pile up on their inventories (  1 > 0). During the pandemic, however,
   34 The countries covered in our panel data are as follows: Australia, Austria, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Czech Republic,

France, Germany, Greece, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, North Korea, Mexico, the Netherlands, Poland, Russian Federation,
Spain, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom, and the United States.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      47
there is also a supply shock. If demand starts normalizing, then the difference between demand and

supply can be met through inventories, leading to a decline in inventories, as shown in the above

figures. If this is the case, then we should expect  3 to be negative. The impact of the pandemic

on inventory behavior can change from one month to the other. Accordingly, the COVID19 dummy

can be positive or negative depending on whether it picks up the impact of demand or supply on

inventories over the course of time.
                                  Table 4: Inventory Adjustments during 2020 - I

                                                                  (1)             (2)             (3)
                                                              Inventories     Inventories     Inventories

                             1   New Ordersct                   0.11**          0.13**          0.11**
                                                                (0.05)          (0.05)          (0.05)
                             2   COVID19t                      -2.00***         7.22**           5.52
                                                                (0.46)          (3.32)          (4.26)
                             3   COVID19t x New Ordersct                        -0.18**         -0.15*
                                                                                 (0.07)         (0.08)
                                 Country FE                       No              No              Yes
                                 Observations                    1,881           1,881           1,881
                                 R-squared                       0.10            0.12            0.30

N OTES: Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered by country. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.



                                 Table 5: Inventory Adjustments during 2020 - II


                                                    (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)           (5)
                                                Inventories     Inventories     Inventories     Inventories   Inventories

            1   Backlogsct                         0.08             0.11*         0.11*            0.08          0.06
                                                  (0.05)            (0.06)        (0.06)          (0.06)        (0.06)
            2   COVID19t                         -2.07***        11.19***          9.24**         21.65          16.41
                                                  (0.47)          (3.70)           (4.21)        (27.38)        (27.94)
            3   COVID19t x Backlogsct                            -0.27***         -0.23**        -0.19***       -0.16**
                                                                  (0.07)           (0.08)         (0.06)         (0.07)
            4   Consumer Confidencect                                                             0.24*         0.28***
                                                                                                  (0.13)         (0.09)
            5   COVID19t x Consumer Conf.ct                                                        -0.14          -0.10
                                                                                                  (0.27)         (0.27)
                Country FE                          No               No             Yes             No            Yes
                Observations                       1,798            1,798          1,798           1,632         1,632
                R-squared                          0.06             0.09           0.23            0.11          0.24

N OTES: Robust standard errors in parentheses clustered by country. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




    We estimate this regression using IHS Markit PMI survey data on stocks of finished goods (in-

ventories), new orders, and backlogs of work. Table 4 shows the regression results. Columns 1 and 2


                                                               48
show the results in the absence of country fixed effects while column 3 shows the results with those

fixed effects. The results are highly significant and consistent with our expectations of inventory ad-

justments. Columns (1) and (2) show that an increase in our demand proxy, new orders is associated

with beefing up inventories (row 1). This is consistent with a pro-cyclical adjustment of inventories.

The pandemic has a net negative impact on inventories (row 2) as shown in column 1. However,

this is no longer the case once we add the interaction term, which is negative and significant (col-

umn 2). This suggests a counter-cyclical inventory adjustment (See, Bernanke and Gertler (1995))

during the pandemic period. Once demand starts to normalize, however, inventories decline. The

results are pretty similar with and without country fixed effects, as shown in column (3). This im-

plies that the results are not driven by any unobserved heterogeneity across countries in terms of

inventory adjustments.35 The net impact of COVID-19 is negative and significant, which is captured

by  2 +  3 × New Orders=-2.1, evaluated at the mean value of new orders.

    Table 5 shows the corresponding results where new orders are replaced by our second demand

proxy, backlogs. Similar to new orders, an increase in backlog is associated with beefing up invento-

ries (row 1). When there is a backlog during the pandemic, however, inventories decline to meet the

demand, consistent with our framework where firms are constrained in production due to disrup-

tions in value chains (row 3). The net impact of COVID-19 is once again negative and significant,

which is captured by  2 +  3 × Backlogs=-1.9, evaluated at the mean value of backlogs.

    In order to check whether or not backlogs are also a good proxy for demand, we add consumer

confidence index to capture the changes in demand. As shown in columns 4 and 5, the backlog

variable itself becomes insignificant (row 1) while the consumer confidence becomes significant (row

4). During COVID-19, however, supply constraints come to surface. In fact, when demand increases,

backlogs are associated with a decline in inventories, as shown by the interaction term (row 3).

    It is too early to tell what will happen during the rest of 2021. As of the time of this writing (April

2021) aggregate trade data fails to pick up the ongoing global supply chain disruptions in the global

economy, which play a key role in our 2021 estimates of the large economic effects of an inequitable

global vaccine distribution.
  35 The evidence for the negative relationship between new orders and inventories is highlighted in an article in the Wall

Street Journal on February 22, 2021: https://www.wsj.com/articles/consumer-demand-snaps-back-factories-cant-keep-
up-11614019305.



                                                           49
6    Conclusion

An equitable global distribution of vaccines is primarily an ethical and humanitarian responsibility.

Our paper makes the economic case for it by providing estimates that show that increasing the

production and supply of vaccines produces significant economic benefits for the world economy

as well and at a minimal cost. In order to fully eliminate the economic drag from the pandemic, rich

countries have strong economic incentives to get involved in efforts such as COVAX that aims to

increase the supply of vaccines to achieve an equitable global distribution, as such involvement will

deliver high returns to these countries.

    To estimate the costs of inequitable vaccine distribution, we develop a global SIR-multi-sector-

macro framework and calibrate it to 65 countries-35 sectors. We incorporate sectoral heterogeneity

in infections together with inter-industry and international trade and production linkages. Once we

account for this economic interdependence of the economies, we reveal the substantial costs, up to

3 percent of advanced countries pre-pandemic GDPs, that will be borne by the vaccinated countries

through their trade relationships with unvaccinated countries.36 Our framework captures the short

run. We find that AEs may bear somewhere from 13 percent to 49 percent of the global losses arising

from an inequitable distribution of vaccines in 2021. Globalization might have amplified the effects

of the pandemic but it is also imperative for an equitable distribution of the vaccines because this is

the only way for open economies with international linkages to have a robust recovery.

    There are substantial uncertainties ahead of us regarding the course of vaccine distribution. Our

estimates are based on the available information about the pandemic. For example, we did not in-

corporate the recent developments on the variants into our analysis. To the extent that these variants

threaten the efficacy of the current vaccines, there is even more urgency to make the existing vac-

cines globally available as soon as possible. Mutations that risk a prolonged pandemic would not
   36 These costs are an order of magnitude larger than those estimated by other studies that are in

the range of 119 to 466 billion as in https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-coronavirus-vaccine-gdp-trfn-
idUSKBN28D217, https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/act-accelerator/2020-summary-analysis-
of-ten-donor-countries-11 26 2020-v2.pdf The reason for this discrepancy is twofold. Our estimates are based on an
economic-epidemiological framework that incorporates the effects of infection dynamics through sectoral heterogeneity
in exports and imports. Second, our calibration is based on a much larger set of countries and sectors. In contrast, the
other studies' estimates only focus on the export part of trade by considering the loss in export revenue in main AEs from
low-income countries for few selected sectors. The costs that we estimate do not include the costs on human health either.
In contrast, Cutler and Summers (2020) focus entirely on health related costs and calculate the economic costs for the US
due to COVID-19 related premature death, long-term health impairment, and mental health.



                                                           50
only have further health costs but also escalate the economic costs that we estimated in our analysis.

   World Health Organization (WHO) Director Dr. Tedros Ghebreyesus and the President of the

European Commission Dr. Ursula von der Leyen noted that "None of us will be safe until everyone

is safe." Our findings extend this argument to the economies by showing that no economy fully

recovers unless every economy recovers. The sufferings from other people's losses that we high-

lighted in this paper remind us of John Donne's eloquent expression that "No man is an island."

Our findings in this paper reveal an economic counterpart to this expression where "No economy is

an island." The economic interdependencies of countries imply that the economic drag in one coun-

try has immediate grave consequences for other countries.




KOC
  ¸ UNIVERSITY, TURKEY

KOC
  ¸ UNIVERSITY, TURKEY

UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND, UNITED STATES, NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH,

UNITED STATES AND CENTER FOR ECONOMIC POLICY RESEARCH, UNITED KINGDOM

KOC
  ¸ UNIVERSITY, TURKEY

KOC
  ¸ UNIVERSITY, TURKEY AND CENTER FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT, HARVARD

UNIVERSITY, UNITED STATES




                                                 51
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Vasco M Carvalho, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, "The net-
  work origins of aggregate fluctuations," Econometrica, 2012, 80 (5), 1977­2016.

                           an Werning, and Michael D Whinston, "A Multi-Risk SIR Model with
  , Victor Chernozhukov, Iv´
  Optimally Targeted Lockdown," Working Paper 27102, National Bureau of Economic Research
  May 2020.

Alfaro, Laura, Oscar Becerra, and Marcela Eslava, "EMEs and COVID-19 Shutting Down in a World
  of Informal and Tiny Firms," Working Paper 27360, National Bureau of Economic Research June
  2020.

Allen, Linda JS, "A primer on stochastic epidemic models: Formulation, numerical simulation, and
  analysis," Infectious Disease Modelling, 2017, 2 (2), 128­142.

Alon, Titan M, Minki Kim, David Lagakos, and Mitchell VanVuren, "How Should Policy Re-
  sponses to the COVID-19 Pandemic Differ in the Developing World?," Working Paper 27273, Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

Alvarez, Fernando E, David Argente, and Francesco Lippi, "A simple planning problem for
  COVID-19 lockdown," Working Paper 26981, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

Atalay, Enghin, "How important are sectoral shocks?," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
  2017, 9 (4), 254­80.

Atkeson, Andrew, "How Deadly is COVID-19? Understanding the Difficulties with Estimation of
  its Fatality Rate," Working Paper 26965, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

Baqaee, David and Emmanuel Farhi, "Nonlinear Production Networks with an Application to the
  COVID-19 crisis," Working Paper 27281, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

  and , "Supply and Demand in Disaggregated Keynesian Economies with an Application to the
  COVID-19 crisis," Working Paper 27152, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

  , , Michael J. Mina, and James H. Stock, "Reopening Scenarios," Working Paper 27244, Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

Barrot, Jean-No¨el and Julien Sauvagnat, "Input specificity and the propagation of idiosyncratic
  shocks in production networks," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016, 131 (3), 1543­1592.

Barrot, Jean-Noel, Basile Grassi, and Julien Sauvagnat, "Sectoral effects of social distancing," 2020.
  Available at SSRN.

Bendavid, Eran and Jay Bhattacharya, "Is Coronavirus as Deadly as They Say?," Wall Street Journal,
  2020, 24.

Bernanke, Ben S and Mark Gertler, "Inside the black box: the credit channel of monetary policy
  transmission," Journal of Economic perspectives, 1995, 9 (4), 27­48.

Boehm, Christoph E, Aaron Flaaen, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar, "Input linkages and the transmis-
                                                     ¯
  sion of shocks: Firm-level evidence from the 2011 Tohoku earthquake," Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 2019, 101 (1), 60­75.

                                                 52
Bonadio, Barthelemy, Zhen Huo, Andrei A Levchenko, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar, "Global Supply
  Chains in the Pandemic," Working Paper 27224, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.
Cakmakli, Cem and Yasin Simsek, "Bridging the COVID-19 Data and the Epidemiological Model
  using Time Varying Parameter SIRD Model," Working Paper series 20-23, Rimini Centre for Eco-
  nomic Analysis July 2020.
C
¸ akmakli, Cem, Selva Demiralp, S                  ¨
                                  ¸ ebnem Kalemli-Ozcan,  Sevcan Ye¸
                                                                   silta¸
                                                                        s, and Muhammed Ali
   Yildirim, "COVID-19 and Emerging Markets: A SIR Model, Demand Shocks and Capital Flows,"
   Working Paper 27191, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.
Carvalho, Vasco M, Makoto Nirei, Yukiko Saito, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, "Supply Chain Dis-
  ruptions: Evidence from the Great East Japan Earthquake," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  forthcoming.
Chetty, Raj, John N Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, Michael Stepner, and The Opportunity In-
 sights Team, "How Did COVID-19 and Stabilization Policies Affect Spending and Employment?
 A New Real-Time Economic Tracker Based on Private Sector Data," Working Paper 27431, Na-
 tional Bureau of Economic Research 2020.
Cutler, David M and Lawrence H Summers, "The COVID-19 pandemic and the $16 trillion virus,"
 Jama, 2020, 324 (15), 1495­1496.
Dewatripont, Mathias, Michel Goldman, Eric Muraille, and Jean-Philippe Platteau, "Rapidly
 identifying workers who are immune to COVID-19 and virus-free is a priority for restarting the
 economy," Working Paper, VOX CEPR Policy Portal 2020.
Dingel, Jonathan I and Brent Neiman, "How many jobs can be done at home?," Working Paper
  26948, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.
Eichenbaum, Martin S, Sergio Rebelo, and Mathias Trabandt, "The macroeconomics of epi-
  demics," Working Paper 26882, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.
Farboodi, Maryam, Gregor Jarosch, and Robert Shimer, "Internal and external effects of social
  distancing in a pandemic," Working Paper 27059, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.
Fauci, AS, HC Lane, and RR Redfield, "COVID-19-Navigating the Uncharted.," The New England
  Journal of Medicine, 2020, 382 (13), 1268­1269.
Fern´                    ´ and Charles I Jones, "Estimating and Simulating a SIRD Model of
    andez-Villaverde, Jesus
  COVID-19 for Many Countries, States, and Cities," Working Paper 27128, National Bureau of
  Economic Research May 2020.
Goolsbee, Austan and Chad Syverson, "Fear, Lockdown, and Diversion: Comparing Drivers of
 Pandemic Economic Decline 2020," Working Paper 27432, National Bureau of Economic Research
 2020.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, S               ¨
                            ¸ ebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Veronika Penciakova, and Nicholas Sander,
 "COVID-19 and SME failures," Working Paper 27877, National Bureau of Economic Research
 2020.
                                                           an Werning, "Macroeconomic Impli-
Guerrieri, Veronica, Guido Lorenzoni, Ludwig Straub, and Iv´
 cations of COVID-19: Can Negative Supply Shocks Cause Demand Shortages?," Working Paper
 26918, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

                                              53
     csu, Ali, Jiarui Liu, and Timothy Schwieg, "Estimating the fraction of unreported infections
Horta¸
 in epidemics with a known epicenter: an application to covid-19," Technical Report, National
 Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

    at, Peter, Colin Webb, and Norihiko Yamano, "Measuring employment in global value
Horv`
 chains," 2020. https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/content/paper/00f7d7db-en.

Krueger, Dirk, Harald Uhlig, and Taojun Xie, "Macroeconomic dynamics and reallocation in an
  epidemic," CEPR COVID Economics, 2020, 1 (5), 21­55.

Kucharski, Adam J, Timothy W Russell, Charlie Diamond, Yang Liu, John Edmunds, Sebastian
 Funk, Rosalind M Eggo, Fiona Sun, Mark Jit, James D Munday, Nicholas Davies, Amy Gimma,
 Kevin van Zandvoort, Hamish Gibbs, Joel Hellewell, Christopher I Jarvis, Sam Clifford, Billy J
 Quilty, Nikos I Bosse, Sam Abbott, Petra Klepac, and Stefan Flasche, "Early dynamics of trans-
 mission and control of COVID-19: a mathematical modelling study," The Lancet Infectious Diseases,
 2020, 20 (5), 553 ­ 558.

Li, Ruiyun, Sen Pei, Bin Chen, Yimeng Song, Tao Zhang, Wan Yang, and Jeffrey Shaman, "Sub-
  stantial undocumented infection facilitates the rapid dissemination of novel coronavirus (SARS-
  CoV2)," Science, 2020.

Linton, Natalie M, Tetsuro Kobayashi, Yichi Yang, Katsuma Hayashi, Andrei R Akhmetzhanov,
  Sung mok Jung, Baoyin Yuan, Ryo Kinoshita, and Hiroshi Nishiura, "Incubation period and
  other epidemiological characteristics of 2019 novel coronavirus infections with right truncation: a
  statistical analysis of publicly available case data," Journal of Clinical Medicine, 2020, 9 (2), 538.

Mendoza, Enrique G, Eugenio I Rojas, Linda L Tesar, and Jing Zhang, "A Macroeconomic Model
 of Healthcare Saturation, Inequality and the Output-Pandemia Tradeoff," Technical Report, Na-
 tional Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

OECD, "OECD Inter-Country Input-Output (ICIO) Tables," 2020. https://www.oecd.org/sti/ind/
 inter-country-input-output-tables.htm.

Shih, Willy C., "Global Supply Chains in a Post-Pandemic World: Companies Need to Make Their
  Networks More Resilient. Here's How.," Harvard Business Review, 2020, 98 (5), 82­89.

Stock, James H, "Data gaps and the policy response to the novel coronavirus," Working Paper 26902,
  National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

The World Bank, "World Development Report 2020: Trading for Development in the Age of Global
  Value Chains," 2020. https://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/wdr2020.

Vogel, Gretchen, "New blood tests for antibodies could show true scale of coronavirus pandemic,"
  Science, March 19 2020.

Wu, Joseph T, Kathy Leung, and Gabriel M Leung, "Nowcasting and forecasting the potential
 domestic and international spread of the 2019-nCoV outbreak originating in Wuhan, China: a
 modelling study," The Lancet, 2020, 395 (10225), 689­697.

Yang, Qihui, Chunlin Yi, Aram Vajdi, Lee W Cohnstaedt, Hongyu Wu, Xiaolong Guo, and Cate-
  rina M Scoglio, "Short-term forecasts and long-term mitigation evaluations for the COVID-19
  epidemic in Hubei Province, China," medRxiv, 2020.


                                                  54
Zhang, Yuan, Chong You, Zhenghao Cai, Jiarui Sun, Wenjie Hu, and Xiao-Hua Zhou, "Prediction
  of the COVID-19 outbreak based on a realistic stochastic model," medRxiv, 2020.




                                            55
                                        APPENDIX



A     Additional Figures and Tables




List of Figures and Tables:

    · Figure A.1: The Structure of OECD Inter-Country Input-Output (ICIO) Table

    · Table A.1: Proximity Index, Teleworkable Share and Demand Changes Across Industries

    · Table A.2: List of Essential Sectors during Lockdowns

    · Table A.3: Country Settings for Various Scenarios

    · Table A.4: Relative reduction in GDP of Advanced Economies (AEs) under Scenarios 2 and 3
      (%).

    · Table A.5: ICU Bed Capacities




                                                56
                       Figure A.1: The Structure of OECD Inter-Country Input-Output Table


                                                                 Intermediate use                                   Final Demand                     Output



                                                  country 1 x industry 1 [...] country 65 x industry 36   country 1 x fd 1 [...] country 65 x fd 7

             country 1 x industry 1                                        (Z)                                              (F)                       (Y)
             country 1 x industry 2
                       ...
                       ...
            country 65 x industry 1
                       ...
            country 65 x industry 36
Value added + taxes - subsidies on intermediate                           (VA)
                   products
                   Output                                                  (Y)



N OTES: This table illustrates the structure of OECD Inter-Country Input-Output Table (ICIO), which represents the
breakdown of output corresponding to 36 industries and 65 countries, giving us a matrix of 2340×2340 entries. In any
industry-country combination, the output (Y) equals intermediate use (Z) plus final demand (F) of 36 industries in 65
countries. Industry list can be found in Table A.1. Further, in any industry-country combination, final demand sums the
following components of expenditures over 65 countries. fd1: Households Final Consumption Expenditure (HFCE); fd2:
Non-Profit Institutions Serving Households (NPISH); fd3: General Government Final Consumption (GGFC); fd4: Gross
Fixed Capital Formation (GFCF); fd5: Change in Inventories and Valuables (INVNT); fd6: Direct purchases by
non-residents (NONRES); fd7: Statistical Discrepancy (DISC).




                                                                                 57
Table A.1: P ROXIMITY I NDEX , T ELEWORKABLE S HARE                       AND    D EMAND C HANGES A CROSS I NDUS -
TRIES


   OECD ISIC     Definition                                                     Proximity   Teleworkable   Demand Changes
     Code                                                                         Index         Share         Percent

      01T03      Agriculture, forestry and fishing                                0,86          0,06            100
      05T06      Mining and extraction of energy producing products               1,08          0,32            100
      07T08      Mining and quarrying of non-energy producing products            1,06          0,14            100
        9        Mining support service activities                                1,21           0,2            100
      10T12      Food products, beverages and tobacco                             1,12          0,13            100
      13T15      Textiles, wearing apparel, leather and related products          1,09          0,2             50
        16       Wood and products of wood and cork                               1,03          0,15             90
      17T18      Paper products and printing                                      1,08          0,22             90
        19       Coke and refined petroleum products                              1,11          0,22             75
      20T21      Chemicals and pharmaceutical products                            1,06          0,25             90
        22       Rubber and plastic products                                       1,1          0,18             90
        23       Other non-metallic mineral products                              1,08          0,18             90
        24       Basic metals                                                     1,09          0,14             90
        25       Fabricated metal products                                        1,08          0,21             90
        26       Computer, electronic and optical products                        1,03          0,54            100
        27       Electrical equipment                                             1,07          0,29             90
        28       Machinery and equipment, nec                                     1,06          0,29             90
        29       Motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers                       1,09          0,19             70
        30       Other transport equipment                                        1,06          0,31             70
      31T33      Other manufacturing; repair and installation of machinery        1,07          0,32             90
                 and equipment
      35T39      Electricity, gas, water supply, sewerage, waste and remedi-      1,08          0,29            100
                 ation services
      41T43      Construction                                                     1,21          0,19            75
      45T47      Wholesale and retail trade; repair of motor vehicles             1,13          0,37            110
      49T53      Transportation and storage                                       1,18          0,21             80
      55T56      Accommodation and food services                                  1,26           0,1             25
      58T60      Publishing, audiovisual and broadcasting activities              1,11          0,69             85
        61       Telecommunications                                               1,07          0,58            100
      62T63      IT and other information services                                1,01          0,88            100
      64T66      Financial and insurance activities                               1,02          0,79            100
        68       Real estate activities                                            1,1          0,54             60
      69T82      Other business sector services                                   1,09          0,46             85
        84       Public admin. and defence; compulsory social security            1,16          0,39            125
        85       Education                                                        1,22          0,86             85
      86T88      Human health and social work                                     1,28          0,35            100
      90T96      Arts, entertainment, recreation and other service activities     1,18          0,34             25


N OTES: In this table, we present the physical proximity index, the share of teleworkable employees as well as demand
changes in a given industry, which is categorized based on OECD ISIC Codes. In comparing proximity values across
differential sectors listed in the first column, we use weighted average of occupation-specific proximity values in those
sectors. Specifically, an occupation of a given industry is assigned with a proximity value that is smaller than 1 if it has
sparse working conditions. An occupation of a given industry is assigned with a proximity value that is larger than 1 if it
requires closer proximity than the "shared office" level. We calculate the proximity values for a given industry after
removing the teleworkable share of the employees of that industry. Doing so, we follow Dingel and Neiman (2020)'s list
of teleworkable occupations to determine the share of employees that can work remotely in each industry. In the last
column, we present the demand changes at the sectoral level that we use to calculate the estimated demand change
during the pandemic in each industry. For further details on the calculation of proximity index, teleworkable shares as
well as demand changes, see C    ¸ akmakli et al. (2020).




                                                               58
                       Table A.2: L IST OF E SSENTIAL S ECTORS DURING L OCKDOWNS

            NACE Rev. 2    Definition

                 01        Crop and animal production, hunting and related service activities
                 10        Manufacture of food products
                1722       Manufacture of household and sanitary goods and of toilet requisites
                1811       Printing of newspapers
                1920       Manufacture of refined petroleum products
                 21        Manufacture of basic pharmaceutical products and pharmaceutical preparations
                 35        Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply
                 36        Water collection, treatment and supply
                463        Wholesale of food, beverages and tobacco
                4646       Wholesale of pharmaceutical goods
                4711       Retail sale in non-specialised stores with food, beverages or tobacco predominating
                472        Retail sale of food, beverages and tobacco in specialised stores
                4730       Retail sale of automotive fuel in specialised stores
                4773       Dispensing chemist in specialised stores
                4774       Retail sale of medical and orthopaedic goods in specialised stores
                4781       Retail sale via stalls and markets of food, beverages and tobacco products
                4920       Freight rail transport
                4941       Freight transport by road
                5224       Cargo handling
                 53        Postal and courier activities
                 60        Programming and broadcasting activities
                 61        Telecommunications
                639        Other information service activities
                 75        Veterinary activities
                 86        Human health activities
                 87        Residential care activities


N OTES: This table provides the list of the essential sectors that we consider for the implementation of lockdowns under
Scenario 2 & Scenario 3. The table is based on C ¸ akmakli et al. (2020) where authors use government decrees to identify
these sectors.




                                                           59
                           Table A.3: C OUNTRY S ETTINGS FOR VARIOUS S CENARIOS
          Country          ICU capacity reserved    Reproduction     GDP 2019      Share of population      Duration of       Openness
                            for Covid-19 patients      rate R0     (Billion USD)    getting vaccinated   vaccination (days)    Index

          Australia                1665                 0.7           1,393              100%               120 (30-90)          35
          Austria                  1000                 1.1             446              100%               120 (30-90)          81
          Belgium                  2756                 1.1             530              100%               120 (30-90)         164
          Canada                   2713                 1.3           1,736              100%               120 (30-90)          52
          Chile                    1383                 1.3             282              50%                   330               49
          Czechia                  4151                 1.1             247              100%               120 (30-90)         153
          Denmark                   925                 1.2             348              100%               120 (30-90)          60
          Estonia                   338                 1.2              31              100%               120 (30-90)         109
          Finland                   220                 1.1             269              100%               120 (30-90)          55
          France                   8000                 1.1           2,716              100%               120 (30-90)          45
          Germany                  28000                1.1           3,846              100%               120 (30-90)          71
          Greece                    704                 1.1             210              100%               120 (30-90)          48
          Hungary                   1094                1.1             161              100%               120 (30-90)         151
          Iceland                    163                1.1              24              100%               120 (30-90)          49
          Ireland                    248                1.1             389              100%               120 (30-90)          69
          Israel                    4900                1.3             395              100%               120 (30-90)          34
          Italy                     7700                1.1           2,001              100%               120 (30-90)          50
          Japan                     3996                1.3           5,082              100%               120 (30-90)          28
          Korea                     5481                1.3           1,642              100%               120 (30-90)          64
          Latvia                     186                1.1              34              100%               120 (30-90)         102
          Lithuania                  451                1.1              54              100%               120 (30-90)         127
          Luxembourg                  91                1.1              71              100%               120 (30-90)          57
          Mexico                    4211                1.1           1,258               50%                   330              74
          Netherlands               1161                1.1             909              100%               120 (30-90)         148
          New Zealand                585                0.7             207              100%               120 (30-90)          40
          Norway                     455                1.1             403              100%               120 (30-90)          47
          Poland                    3074                1.1             592              100%               120 (30-90)          89
          Portugal                   455                1.1             238              100%               120 (30-90)          66
          Slovakia                   570                1.1             105              100%               120 (30-90)         170
          Slovenia                   377                1.1              54              100%               120 (30-90)         166
          Spain                     4566                1.1           1,394              100%               120 (30-90)          51
          Sweden                     365                1.1             531              100%               120 (30-90)          60
          Switzerland               1012                1.1             703              100%               120 (30-90)          84
          Turkey                   16850                1.3             754               50%                   330              52
          United Kingdom            7018                1.1           2,827              100%               120 (30-90)          41
          US                       84676                1.1           21,370             100%               120 (30-90)          20
          Argentina                 8404                1.1             450               50%                   330              25
          Brazil                   43466                1.1           1,840               50%                   330              22
          Brunei                      57                1.1              13               50%                   330              90
          Bulgaria                  1347                1.1              68              100%               120 (30-90)         104
          Cambodia                   495                1.1              27               50%                   330             131
          China                    50328                0.6           14,340             100%               120 (30-90)          32
          Colombia                  5286                1.3             324               50%                   330              28
          Costa Rica                 136                1.1              62               50%                   330              45
          Croatia                    277                1.3              60               50%                   330              75
          Cyprus                     126                1.1              25              100%               120 (30-90)          51
          India                    32784                1.3            2,875              50%                   330              28
          Indonesia                 7306                1.1            1,119              50%                   330              30
          Hong Kong                  533                1.3             366              100%               120 (30-90)         304
          Kazakhstan                3943                1.1             180               50%                   330              53
          Malaysia                  1086                1.3             365               50%                   330             122
          Malta                       70                1.1              15              100%               120 (30-90)          68
          Morocco                   2100                1.3             119               50%                   330              67
          Peru                       943                1.1             227               50%                   330              40
          Philippines               2378                1.1             377               50%                   330              49
          Romania                   1500                1.1             250              100%               120 (30-90)          69
          Russia                   17500                1.1            1,700             100%               120 (30-90)          40
          Saudi Arabia              7813                1.1             793               50%                   330              52
          Singapore                  650                1.2             372              100%               120 (30-90)         202
          South Africa              2323                1.1             351               50%                   330              56
          Taiwan                    6725                1.1             611               50%                   330             101
          Thailand                  7241                1.1             544               50%                   330              89
          Tunisia                    479                1.1              39               50%                   330              94
          Vietnam                    251                1.1             262               50%                   330             198
          ROW                      57225                1.1            7,276              50%                   330              48


N OTES: This table reports the ICU capacities (see Table A.5 for details), estimated reproduction rates, GDP figures
(obtained from World Development Indicators, 2019 current dollars), shared of population getting vaccine (for scenario
3), duration of vaccination days (for scenario 3) and openness index, which is defined as the ratio of imports and exports
to GDP.

                                                                     60
Table A.4: R ELATIVE       REDUCTION IN       GDP     OF   A DVANCED E CONOMIES (AE S )            UNDER    S CENARIOS 2
AND 3 (%)


                                                 Scenario 2                        Scenario 3
                                           Spec 1 Spec 2 Spec 3              Spec 1 Spec 2 Spec 3

                  Australia                 0.27        1.35        2.64      0.37       1.23       1.63
                  Austria                   0.38        2.10        4.07      0.62       1.95       2.71
                  Belgium                   0.38        2.20        4.23      1.18       3.85       4.73
                  Canada                    0.18        1.52        3.49      0.30       1.44       2.00
                  Denmark                   0.34        1.90        3.59      0.53       1.69       2.22
                  Finland                   0.30        1.69        3.15      0.41       1.51       2.00
                  France                    0.30        2.00        3.70      0.86       3.32       3.83
                  Germany                   0.36        2.06        3.55      0.53       1.85       2.34
                  Greece                    0.42        2.25        3.87      0.73       1.85       2.35
                  Iceland                   0.56        1.60        3.21      0.53       1.42       1.94
                  Ireland                   0.46        2.65        4.53      0.73       2.56       3.10
                  Italy                     0.34        2.17        3.90      0.65       2.30       2.83
                  Japan                     0.22        1.79        3.87      0.30       1.49       2.15
                  Luxembourg                0.53        1.88        3.44      0.83       2.32       2.85
                  Netherlands               0.52        2.42        4.57      0.91       3.13       3.76
                  New Zealand               0.34        1.67        3.09      0.47       1.51       1.97
                  Norway                    0.35        1.45        2.70      0.49       1.41       1.82
                  Portugal                  0.49        2.42        4.80      0.77       2.25       3.02
                  Spain                     0.39        2.17        4.28      0.95       3.26       3.81
                  Sweden                    0.34        1.83        3.45      0.74       2.63       3.15
                  Switzerland               0.37        2.15        4.09      0.63       2.21       2.82
                  United Kingdom            0.30        1.76        3.48      0.70       2.75       3.24
                  United States             0.21        1.60        3.48      0.63       2.66       3.14

N OTES: This table displays the percentage reduction in the GDP of the corresponding AEs relative to a counterfactual of
global vaccinations. Details on the scenarios 2 and 3, as well as on the specifications 1,2 and 3 are provided in Section 4.4.




                                                               61
                                                        Table A.5: ICU B ED C APACITIES

 ISO-3   Country                ICU COVID   Reference

 AUS     Australia                 1665     https://www.mja.com.au/journal/2020/surge-capacity-australian-intensive-care-units-associated-covid-19-admissions
 AUT     Austria                   1000     https://www.covid19healthsystem.org/countries/austria/livinghit.aspx?Section=2.1%20Physical%20infrastructure&Type=Section
 BEL     Belgium                   2756     https://www.covid19healthsystem.org/countries/belgium/livinghit.aspx?Section=2.1%20Physical%20infrastructure&Type=Section
 CAN     Canada                    2713     https://www.covid19healthsystem.org/countries/canada/livinghit.aspx?Section=2.1%20Physical%20infrastructure&Type=Section
 CHL     Chile                     1383     https://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/en/data-insights/intensive-care-beds-capacity
 CZE     Czech Republic            4151     https://www.covid19healthsystem.org/countries/czechrepublic/livinghit.aspx?Section=2.1%20Physical%20infrastructure&Type=Section
 DNK     Denmark                    925     https://www.sst.dk/-/media/Nyheder/2020/ITA COVID 19 220320.ashx?la=da&hash=633349284353F4D8559B231CDA64169D327F1227
  EST    Estonia                    338     https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7472675/
  FIN    Finland                    220     https://www.covid19healthsystem.org/countries/finland/livinghit.aspx?Section=2.1%20Physical%20infrastructure&Type=Section
 FRA     France                    8000     https://www.covid19healthsystem.org/countries/france/livinghit.aspx?Section=2.1%20Physical%20infrastructure&Type=Section
 DEU     Germany                  28000     https://www.covid19healthsystem.org/countries/germany/livinghit.aspx?Section=2.1%20Physical%20infrastructure&Type=Section
 GRC     Greece                     704     https://www.covid19healthsystem.org/countries/greece/livinghit.aspx?Section=2.1%20Physical%20infrastructure&Type=Section
 HUN     Hungary                   1094     https://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/en/data-insights/intensive-care-beds-capacity
  ISL    Iceland                    163     https://europepmc.org/article/med/32796182
  IRL    Ireland                    248     https://www.thejournal.ie/icu-bed-numbers-5217685-Sep2020/
  ISR    Israel                    4900     https://www.covid19healthsystem.org/countries/israel/livinghit.aspx?Section=2.1%20Physical%20infrastructure&Type=Section
  ITA    Italy                     7700     https://apnews.com/article/international-news-virus-outbreak-italy-barcelona-france-d7a43368a17f0abaff4d563151b84127
  JPN    Japan                     3996     https://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal/Fulltext/2020/05000/Critical Care Bed Capacity in Asian Countries and.6.aspx
 KOR     Korea, Rep.               5481     https://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal/Fulltext/2020/05000/Critical Care Bed Capacity in Asian Countries and.6.aspx
 LVA     Latvia                     186     https://www.covid-19.no/critical-care-bed-numbers-in-europe
 LTU     Lithuania                  451     https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7472675/
 LUX     Luxembourg                  91     https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7472675/
 MEX     Mexico                    4211     https://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/en/data-insights/intensive-care-beds-capacity
 NLD     Netherlands               1161     https://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/en/data-insights/intensive-care-beds-capacity
 NZL     New Zealand                585     https://www.nzherald.co.nz/nz/covid-19-coronavirus-new-zealands-intensive-care-unit-capacity-revealed/GYQ2FXOYHJECZAHU2YKHXYFWXI/
 NOR     Norway                     455     https://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/en/data-insights/intensive-care-beds-capacity
 POL     Poland                    3074     https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7472675/
 PRT     Portugal                   455     https://www.covid-19.no/critical-care-bed-numbers-in-europe
 SVK     Slovak Republic            570     https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7472675/
 SVN     Slovenia                   377     https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7472675/
  ESP    Spain                     4566     https://www.covid-19.no/critical-care-bed-numbers-in-europe
 SWE     Sweden                     365     https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7472675/
 CHE     Switzerland               1012     https://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/en/data-insights/intensive-care-beds-capacity
 TUR     Turkey                   16850     https://dosyasb.saglik.gov.tr/Eklenti/36164,siy2018en2pdf.pdf?0
 GBR     United Kingdom            7018     https://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/en/data-insights/intensive-care-beds-capacity
 USA     United States            84676     https://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/en/data-insights/intensive-care-beds-capacity
 ARG     Argentina                 8404     https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/sites/63d94877-en/index.html?itemId=/content/component/63d94877-en
 BRA     Brazil                   43466     https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/sites/63d94877-en/index.html?itemId=/content/component/63d94877-en
 BRN     Brunei Darussalam           57     https://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal/Fulltext/2020/05000/Critical Care Bed Capacity in Asian Countries and.6.aspx
 BGR     Bulgaria                  1347     https://www.covid19healthsystem.org/countries/bulgaria/livinghit.aspx?Section=2.1%20Physical%20infrastructure&Type=Section
 KHM     Cambodia                   495     Selected to be close to the minimum observed levels.
 CHN     China                    50328     https://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal/Fulltext/2020/05000/Critical Care Bed Capacity in Asian Countries and.6.aspx
 COL     Colombia                  5286     https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/sites/63d94877-en/index.html?itemId=/content/component/63d94877-en
  CRI    Costa Rica                 136     https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/sites/63d94877-en/index.html?itemId=/content/component/63d94877-en
 HRV     Croatia                    277     https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7472675/
 CYP     Cyprus                     126     https://in-cyprus.philenews.com/coronavirus-seven-patients-in-intensive-care/
 IND     India                    32784     https://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal/Fulltext/2020/05000/Critical Care Bed Capacity in Asian Countries and.6.aspx
 IDN     Indonesia                 7306     https://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal/Fulltext/2020/05000/Critical Care Bed Capacity in Asian Countries and.6.aspx
 HKG     Hong Kong SAR, China       533     https://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal/Fulltext/2020/05000/Critical Care Bed Capacity in Asian Countries and.6.aspx
 KAZ     Kazakhstan                3943     https://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal/Fulltext/2020/05000/Critical Care Bed Capacity in Asian Countries and.6.aspx
 MYS     Malaysia                  1086     https://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal/Fulltext/2020/05000/Critical Care Bed Capacity in Asian Countries and.6.aspx
 MLT     Malta                       70     https://www.covid19healthsystem.org/countries/malta/livinghit.aspx?Section=2.1%20Physical%20infrastructure&Type=Section
 MAR     Morocco                   2100     https://northafricapost.com/39786-covid-19-morocco-expands-hospital-capacity.html
 PER     Peru                       943     https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/sites/63d94877-en/index.html?itemId=/content/component/63d94877-en
 PHL     Philippines               2378     https://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal/Fulltext/2020/05000/Critical Care Bed Capacity in Asian Countries and.6.aspx
 ROU     Romania                   1500     https://www.covid19healthsystem.org/countries/romania/livinghit.aspx?Section=2.1%20Physical%20infrastructure&Type=Section
 RUS     Russian Federation       17500     https://tass.com/world/1162077
 SAU     Saudi Arabia              7813     https://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal/Fulltext/2020/05000/Critical Care Bed Capacity in Asian Countries and.6.aspx
 SGP     Singapore                  650     https://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal/Fulltext/2020/05000/Critical Care Bed Capacity in Asian Countries and.6.aspx
 ZAF     South Africa              2323     https://www.samrc.ac.za/news/covid-19-surge-investing-heavily-icu-capacity-not-only-option
 TWN     Taiwan                    6725     https://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal/Fulltext/2020/05000/Critical Care Bed Capacity in Asian Countries and.6.aspx
 THA     Thailand                  7241     https://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal/Fulltext/2020/05000/Critical Care Bed Capacity in Asian Countries and.6.aspx
 TUN     Tunisia                    479     https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.06.02.20120147v1.full.pdf
 VNM     Vietnam                    251     https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/wpro---documents/countries/viet-nam/covid-19/vnm-moh-who-covid-19-sitrep4.pdf
 ROW     Rest of the World        57225     Selected to be close to the minimum observed levels.



N OTES: This table provides the resources from which we built the ICU capacities dedicated for COVID-19 patients in
each country. If there is a direct number for the ICU beds for COVID-19 in a resource, we used that number. Otherwise
we assigned 70% of the total ICU beds to COVID-19 patients. We estimated this ratio from the countries that we have the
information about dedicated ICU beds to COVID-19 patients.




                                                                              62
