                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DO WORKERS BARGAIN OVER WAGES? A TEST USING DUAL JOBHOLDERS

                                       Marta Lachowska
                                        Alexandre Mas
                                        Raffaele Saggio
                                     Stephen A. Woodbury

                                      Working Paper 28409
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28409


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2021




We thank David Card, Arin Dube, Attila Linder, Andreas Mueller, Johannes Schmieder, and Till
von Wachter for useful comments. We are grateful to the Employment Security Department
(ESD) of Washington State for allowing access to the Washington wage records, and especially
to Jeff Robinson of ESD, whose help was essential to understanding the data. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Marta Lachowska, Alexandre Mas, Raffaele Saggio, and Stephen A. Woodbury. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Workers Bargain over Wages? A Test Using Dual Jobholders
Marta Lachowska, Alexandre Mas, Raffaele Saggio, and Stephen A. Woodbury
NBER Working Paper No. 28409
January 2021
JEL No. J0,J2,J3,J41

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper examines the behavior of dual jobholders to test a simple model of wage bargaining
versus wage posting in which workers facing hours constraints in their primary job take a second,
flexible-hours job for additional income. When a secondary job offers a sufficiently high wage, a
worker either bargains with the primary employer for a wage increase or separates. The
bargaining model provides a number of predictions that we test using matched
employer-employee administrative data from Washington State. The estimates match the model's
predictions quite well. First, separation probabilities in the primary job are sensitive to wages in
the secondary job, but hours are not. Second, hours and separations in the secondary job are
sensitive to wages in the primary job due to income effects. Third, wage bargaining takes place
mainly among workers in the highest wage quartile; for these workers, wage increases in the
secondary job lead to wage increases in the primary job. In contrast, for workers in the lowest
wage quartile, wage increases in the secondary job lead to higher separation rates but no
significant wage increase in the primary job, consistent with wage posting. These patterns suggest
that high-wage workers receive a larger share of the surplus generated by the employment
relationship.

Marta Lachowska                          Raffaele Saggio
W.E. Upjohn Institute for                Department of Economics
Employment Research                      University of British Columbia
300 S. Westnedge Avenue                  6000 Iona Drive
Kalamazoo, MI 49007                      Vancouver, BC V6T 1L4
marta@upjohn.org                         and NBER
                                         rsaggio@mail.ubc.ca
Alexandre Mas
Industrial Relations Section             Stephen A. Woodbury
Simpson International Building           Department of Economics
Princeton University Princeton,          Michigan State University
NJ 08544                                 486 West Circle Drive, Room 110
and NBER                                 East Lansing, MI 48824
amas@princeton.edu                       and W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research
                                         woodbur2@msu.edu
1     Introduction

How wages are set is central to understanding the growth of wages and earnings, worker mobility,
wage inequality, and the causes of unemployment, as Hall and Krueger (2010, 2012) have de-

scribed. Bargaining models and explanations based on them assume that workers have the ability
to negotiate compensation and that wages incorporate information about a worker's outside op-
tion(s). With renegotiation, wages can adjust in response to new information. The alternative to

bargaining is wage posting, whereby employers set wages that individual workers cannot influence
and must either accept or reject.1
    Hall and Krueger (2010, 2012) noted that the scarcity of empirical evidence on the extent of

wage bargaining and wage posting in setting wages is puzzling in view of the importance of the

question. To obtain such evidence, they surveyed a representative sample of newly hired U.S.

workers and found that one-third reported bargaining over pay before accepting their position.

Hall and Krueger's work was followed by studies using observational data: Faberman et al. (2017)

found that workers who could have stayed in their job before accepting another position reported

obtaining a higher wage, and Lachowska (2017) found that workers' subjective assessments of

how easy it would be to find an alternative job or to be replaced in their current job are highly

correlated with the wage received in their current job. Both suggest an important role for outside

options in determining wages.

    A more recent approach to obtaining evidence on wage bargaining and wage posting is to
observe variation in a worker's outside options (or other differences in bargaining power) that are

uncorrelated with labor demand or employer characteristics. This approach has been taken by
Caldwell and Harmon (2019), who examine how the wages of Danish workers are affected by
changes in information about their outside opportunities. Information about those options is based

on networks of former coworkers, and using this approach, Caldwell and Harmon find a significant
role for outside options in wage setting.
    1 While wages in a posting model may respond to outside options, this would happen at the market-level--
idiosyncratic changes in the outside option of a single worker should not affect wages.



                                                     2
   Our approach in this paper is related to Caldwell and Harmon's, but it differs by examining how

the wages and separation behavior of dual jobholders in Washington State respond to wage changes
in their secondary job. Such a relationship would be evidence of the importance of bargaining
in wage setting. One advantage of the approach is that it gives a clear measure of changes in

a worker's outside option in the form of the wage earned on another job held by that worker.
A second advantage is that the approach can be applied to any setting where there is matched
employer-employee data with dual jobholders.

   A worker's jobs are classified as primary (job 1) and secondary jobs (job 2) based on the
hours worked in each job. To implement the bargaining test, we relate changes in the wage of

coworkers in the secondary job to the worker's own wage in the primary job. Specifically, we

use wage changes of coworkers in the secondary job as an instrument for wage changes in the

secondary job. We can then estimate how primary-job wages, hours, and separations relate to

wage changes in the secondary job while controlling for employer fixed effects of the primary job

(interacted with quarter). These fixed effects flexibly control for shocks affecting all workers in the

primary employer, such as labor demand shocks that might be correlated between the primary and

secondary employers.

   To interpret the estimates, we embed bargaining in the canonical hours-constrained model for

dual jobholding (Shishko and Rostker, 1976). In the model, workers facing hours constraints in

their primary job take a second, flexible-hour job for extra income. Employers can respond to a

worker's improved outside option by raising the wage if the worker threatens to separate. The
model has a number of predictions that are both testable and potentially different from alternative
models of dual jobholding, such as the job portfolio model (Renna and Oaxaca, 2006), where

workers have preferences for multiple jobs. Hours in the primary job should be invariant to wage
changes in the secondary job, while hours in the secondary job should be inversely related to the
wage rate in the primary job (due to income effects). Separation from the primary job should be

positively related to the wage rate in the secondary job, and separation from the secondary job
should be positively related to the wage rate in the primary job.


                                                  3
   The model also predicts that wage bargaining is more likely than posting among high-wage than

low-wage workers. This is because high-wage jobs tend to generate more surplus for the employer,
so it will be in the employer's interest to respond to a worker's outside option by increasing the
wage rather than allowing the worker to separate. But low-wage jobs generate low surplus for the

employer, so the employer's wage response will be limited and more separations will be observed,
consistent with wage posting. Accordingly, the model predicts an inverse relationship between the
wage response and the separation response to an improved outside option.

   The data strongly support these predictions. First, work hours with the primary employer are
insensitive to wage changes at the secondary employer (the outside option). This is consistent with

the model, in which a worker's hours with the primary employer are constrained and influence the

worker's decisions to take a second job.

   Second, we find a statistically significant relationship between changes in the wages of cowork-

ers in the secondary job and changes in the worker's own wage in the primary job, suggesting that

bargaining does play a role in wage setting. The estimate is robust to including employer-by-

quarter fixed effects and to limiting the sample to workers whose two jobs are in different indus-

tries. Bargaining effects are more prominent with employers where wages tend to vary greatly

across workers, and when workers have longer tenure in their secondary job. The estimated bar-

gaining effect aggregated over all workers is quantitatively small, though similar to previous studies

that have estimated bargaining in other settings (Caldwell and Harmon, 2019, J¨
                                                                              ager et al., 2020).

   Third, the evidence supports the model's predictions about differences in the importance of
bargaining among different groups of workers. In particular, the bargaining effect is relatively
important among workers in the top quartile of the wage distribution, whereas workers in the

lowest quartile of the distribution respond to improved outside options by separating from their
primary job (consistent with wage posting and an absence of bargaining).
   In addition to its relevance to the literature on outside options, this paper is related to the

literature on estimating income effects (Imbens, Rubin and Sacerdote 2001; Cesarini et al., 2017).
and to the literature on multiple jobholding and its determinants. Multiple jobholding has gained


                                                  4
renewed interest with the rise of the electronically mediated gig economy (Katz and Krueger,

2019; Mas and Pallais, 2020). Secondary jobs may serve as a source of extra income due to
hours constraints in the primary job (Shishko and Rostker, 1976), to solve underemployment while
searching for the optimal wage-hour job combination (Paxson and Sicherman, 1996) or to smooth

consumption due to income volatility (Koustas, 2018; Tazhitdinova, 2020). We extend this line of
research by using a linked employer-employee panel based on administrative records to test the
predictions of the canonical hours-constraint model of multiple jobholding.

    In the next section, we develop the hours-constrained model of dual jobholding with bargaining
and summarize its testable predictions. Section 3 describes the data and reports summary statistics

for the main sample used in estimation. (Appendix A includes additional details about construction

of the samples used to estimate the models.) The econometric framework is developed in section

4, and section 5 describes the empirical findings. We start with a discussion of the first-stage

effects--that is, the impact of changes in coworkers' wages on a worker's own wage. We then

examine the effects of secondary-job wage changes on work hours and the probability of separating

from the primary employer; and of primary-job wage changes on work hours and the probability

of separating from the secondary employer. Finally, we examine the evidence on wage bargaining,

first for the full sample, then for several subgroups of workers, including the upper and lower

quartiles of the wage distribution. The final section briefly summarizes the results and discusses

their implications.


2    Conceptual Framework

We begin by outlining the canonical hours-constraint model of how workers choose to hold mul-
tiple jobs. The model is related to Rueben Gronau's model of home production (Gronau, 1977),

which Shishko and Rostker (1976) applied to dual jobholding. In this model, workers take a sec-

ond job because, although their primary job offers better terms, the primary employer limits work
hours. If the worker desires additional income, she will take a second (less attractive) job, provided

it offers a wage above the worker's reservation wage at the maximum hours allowed by the primary

                                                  5
employer.

    Figure 1 shows the kinked budget constraint facing such a worker, who optimizes among time
in the primary job, the secondary job, and leisure. The budget constraint has a slope of -w1 up to
                                    ¯ ), then a slope of -w2 thereafter.2 In Figure 1, the worker's
the hours limit on the primary job (H

optimum is shown by point A, where she works the maximum allowable hours on the primary job
 ¯ ), works H
(H          ~ -H
               ¯ hours on the secondary job, and spends the remaining available hours in leisure.

    The employer obtains a surplus from the employment relationship, the size of which depends

on the degree of heterogeneity of jobs and workers. Unless the labor market is perfectly competi-
tive, the employer will incur a cost when replacing an incumbent worker because the replacement

worker will produce a lower surplus. Denote by  the incumbent worker's value to the firm over

her replacement; that is, if a worker leaves and a firm is forced to fill the vacancy, the firm loses 

in profits. This loss will be greater the greater is the heterogeneity of the labor market in question,

and its size will determine the employer's willingness to bargain if a worker threatens to separate.

    How does the worker respond to wage changes in this model? Consider first an increase in

the wage on the secondary job from w2 to w2 . If the change is small enough that the wage on

the secondary job is still below the primary wage (w2 < w1 ), then a worker will continue to work
                                            ¯ ), and any adjustments will be in hours on the
the maximum allowable hours on primary job (H

secondary job. This situation is shown in Figure 2, panel (a), with equilibrium moving from point

A to point B, both interior solutions in hours for the secondary job.3 The prediction that hours in the

primary job are invariant to secondary-job wages distinguishes this model from the job portfolio
model outlined in Renna and Oaxaca (2006), where workers have preferences for multiple jobs. In
that model there is a negative cross-elasticity of hours with respect to wages in the alternative job.

    Alternatively, if the change in the secondary-job wage results in that wage exceeding he primary
job wage (w2 > w1 ), then the outcome depends on the relationship between the worker's value over
replacement in the primary job ( ) and the difference between the new wage on the secondary
    2 While wage is the only differentiator between firms, the model can be easily adapted to include non-wage amenity

differences.
    3 The figure is drawn so that secondary-job hours increase, but this prediction is ambiguous as it depends on the

sign of the uncompensated labor supply elasticity.


                                                          6
job the primary job wage (w2 - w1 ). If (w2 - w1 ) >  , the worker leaves the primary job for
the secondary job. If (w2 - w1 ) <  , the primary employer matches the new secondary-employer

wage. As is apparent, when  is small there will be a limited bargaining response from the primary
firm, and small changes in the secondary job wage will lead to separation. When  is large there
will be a bargaining response from the primary employer, and a reduced tendency for a worker to

separate, for a given change in the secondary-job wage.
   Consider next an increase in the primary-job wage, from w1 to w1 . As shown in Figure 2,
                                                               ¯ ), and if leisure is a normal
panel (b), hours on the primary job remain at the upper limit (H

good, secondary-job hours decline due to an income effect. We would not expect a bargaining

response from the secondary employer because hours in the secondary job are unconstrained, and

the secondary-job wage was previously dominated by the primary-job wage.

   To summarize, this simple model produces the following predictions:

  1. Primary-job hours do not respond to secondary-job wages.

  2. Primary-job separation rates increase with secondary-job wages.

  3. Secondary-job hours fall and secondary-job separation rates rise with primary-job wages (as

      a result of income effects).

  4. Primary-job wages rise with secondary-job wages (as a result of bargaining)

  5. Secondary-job wages do not rise with primary-job wages.

  6. When a worker has a high value over replacement, improved outside options will result in
      wage responses but relatively limited separation effects. When a worker has a low value

      over replacement, wage responses will be limited, and separation effects will be more pro-
      nounced. Therefore, the wage response and the separation response to an improved outside
      option will be inversely related.




                                               7
3     Data and Summary Statistics

The data used in this paper are based on quarterly administrative wage records maintained by the
Employment Security Department of Washington State to administer the state's unemployment in-

surance (UI) system. The available quarterly data provide information on earnings and work hours
of all workers employed by UI-covered employers in the state between 2001­2014. UI-covered
employers in Washington are required to report each worker's quarterly earnings and work hours,

which allows us to construct an hourly wage rate in each quarter for most workers in Washing-
ton's formal labor market. Lachowska, Mas and Woodbury (2018) examine the reliability of the

Washington hours data and conclude they are of high quality.

    Dual Jobholders: We begin by restricting the sample to workers who have positive work hours

over consecutive quarters. Specifically, for a worker in quarter t to be included in our sample, the

worker must work for the same employer in quarter t , t - 1, and t + 1; that is, that quarter must

be a full quarter of employment. We do this to avoid situation that might lead us to believe that

a worker holds more than one job in a quarter, when in fact she is instead transitioning between

employers mid-quarter; see the appendix for more details.

    If a worker holds more than two jobs under these criteria we retain the two jobs with the most

work hours. The job/employer where the worker has worked the most hours in a given quarter is

denoted the "primary job/employer." The job/employer where the worker has worked the second-

most hours in a given quarter is denoted as the "secondary job/employer."
    We further remove from the sample the primary employment spells associated with the Public

and the Education Sector.4 We also removed from the estimation sample employer-by-quarter ob-

servations where none of the associated employees is a dual jobholder because these observations
do not contribute to the empirical analysis presented in Section 4. Using these criteria, we are able

to identify around 2.7 million worker-quarter observations where a worker has at least two jobs

(out of about 66 million worker-quarter observations where a worker has at least one job).
    4 We exclude workers in the education sector because of an unusually large number of workers who have a second
job in the same sector. We exclude the public sector because bargaining at the worker level is unlikely to take place in
that industry.


                                                           8
3.1    Summary Statistics

Table 1 reports the summary statistics for our main estimation sample.5 Column 1 considers sum-

mary statistics for worker-quarter observations where the associated worker is not holding two jobs
in the same quarter. Columns 2 and 3 consider worker-quarter observations where the worker is a
dual jobholder. Column 2 reports statistics that refers to to the primary job, while column 3 focuses

on the secondary job.
    We start by highlighting differences between the primary job of a single jobholder vs. the
primary job of a dual jobholder (column 1 vs. column 2). The latter tends to pay a lower hourly

wage and is associated with fewer hours. Separation rates from primary jobs are higher among dual

jobholders. Part of these differences appears to be driven by different employer characteristics,

such as firm size which tends to be smaller for people who hold two jobs.

    Table 1 also permits us also to evaluate differences between primary and secondary job among

dual jobholders (column 2 vs. column 3). By construction, hours in the secondary job are substan-

tially lower. Interestingly, the sum of hours on the primary job and secondary job is higher than the

total hours observed among single jobholders, suggesting that dual jobholders are working more

hours in a given quarter. Hourly wages are slightly lower in the secondary job, while the probabil-

ity to observe a separation is much higher in the secondary job. On average, the earnings obtained

on the secondary job amount to around 21 percent of one's total pay.
    Interestingly, dual-job holding tends to be concentrated among specific types of employers/jobs.

For instance, among workers with only one job, the corresponding average share of coworkers who

are dual jobholders is only 5 percent. Among dual jobholders, that share jumps to 11 percent (when
the coworkers are defined relative to the primary-job employer) and 48% (when coworkers are de-

fined relative to the secondary-job employer). The former is consistent with the hours constraint

explanation for dual job holding, as dual jobholders will tend to be concentrated in firms with
hours constraints. The latter suggests a secondary employer is likely to "cluster" workers who are
   5 Table A1 in the Appendix reports these summary statistics in the subsample of individuals for whom we have

demographic information.




                                                      9
all using such employer as their secondary job.6


4     Econometric Framework

Our main specification has the following form:

                          j                                         j                    j
                       yit1 =  + D Dualit +  (Dualit × w
                                                       ¯-2                         1
                                                          it ) +  j1 (i,t ),t + rit ,                          (1)


where i denotes worker and t denotes quarter. The superscripts j1 and j2 indicate whether a partic-
ular variable is measured in the primary job ( j1 ) or in the secondary job ( j2 ). The function j1 (i, t )

returns the identity of the employer associated with the primary job of worker i in quarter t so that

 j1 (i,t ),t capture primary employer by quarter fixed effects. Dualit is a dummy indicating whether

worker i has a secondary job in quarter t . Standard errors are two-way clustered at the worker and

primary-employer level.
               2   j
    The term w
             ¯- it is the measure of the change in the outside option of a dual jobholder. Specifi-
         2 j
cally, w
       ¯- it represents the average change in the log wage between t and t + 1 for the secondary-job

coworkers of worker i in quarter t .7

    Econometrically, the bargaining tests specifications are similar to those in Caldwell and Har-

mon (2019) in that we are looking at wage changes within firm and time period as a function of a
                                                     j
measure of the outside option. In this case yit1 represents the change in log wage from the primary

job for worker i between quarter t and quarter t + 1. Therefore, the  -coefficient compares changes
in log wages of dual jobholders to all other workers in a given firm j and quarter t as a function of
wage shocks in a worker's second job. In other specifications we use combinations of log wages,
                                       j
log hours, and separations for yit1 , depending on the analysis.
    Importantly, when looking at the effects of wage shocks from the secondary job on either

hours or wages in the primary job, we condition the analysis on stayers, that is, individuals that
    6 Around 14% of all the observed employer-quarter appear in our data only as secondary-job spells; that is, the
associated employer in that quarter is no worker's primary job. More than half of the time, these observations are
found in the health care sector.
   7 For workers who do not have a secondary job, w   j2
                                                    ¯-  it is set to zero.




                                                         10
remain with the same primary employer between t and t + 1. Conditioning on stayers allows us to

test directly whether incumbent primary employers are "bargaining" employers who respond to a
change of the outside option of the worker by raising her wage (Cahuc, Postel-Vinay and Robin,
2006; Manning, 2011).8

    We also consider a version of model (1) where we restrict the analysis to only dual jobholders
so that the regression becomes


                                        j                j                   j
                                     yit1 =  +  w
                                                ¯-2                       1
                                                   it +  j1 (i,t ),t + rit .                                     (2)

    The estimate of  in model (2) compares changes in outcomes of dual jobholders to other dual

jobholders in a primary employer j and quarter t as a function of shocks in a worker's second job.

Restricting the analysis to only dual jobholders is expected to reduce statistical power because any

worker with one job is excluded from the sample.

    We can reverse the analysis in (2) to estimate how the the hours-, wage-, and separations mea-

sured on the secondary job respond to a wage shock on the primary job. The associated empirical

model reads as follows


                                        j                j                   j
                                     yit2 =  +  w
                                                ¯-1                       2
                                                   it +  j2 (i,t ),t + rit ,                                     (3)

where the variable Dualit is omitted because we are focusing on secondary-job outcomes as a
function of primary-job wage shocks and so all the workers must be dual jobholders. In this

model,  j2 (i,t ),t captures secondary-job employer fixed effects by quarter.

    The  -coefficient in Equation (3) estimates the response of secondary-job outcomes to an ex-
ogenous change in the wage on the primary job after controlling for firm-by-quarter shocks. Note

that, when the outcome of interest is log hours, the  -coefficient measures how hours in the sec-

ondary job change in response to a wage shock from the primary job. Following the framework
presented in Figure 2, panel (b), we expect the  -coefficient for hours to be negative. The  -
    8 Conditioning on stayers also allows us to avoid mismeasurement issues in earnings and hours that might incur

in our data during "partial" quarters where the individual is switching employers and might receive as a result extra
severance payments.


                                                         11
coefficient allows us to derive an estimate of the marginal propensity to consume out of unearned
                                                             w2  h2
income due to reduced hours in the second job: mpe =         h1  w1 .   (Cesarini et al., 2017).


4.1    Heterogeneity Analysis

To assess the presence of heterogeneous effects, we estimate augmented models of the form:

                j
             yit1 =  + D Dualit + CCharit +  (Charit × Dualit )+
                                                                                                   (4)
                                   2    j                        2        j                1j
                    +  (Dualit × w
                                 ¯- it ) +  (Dualit × Charit × w
                                                               ¯- it ) +  j1 (i,t ),t + rit ,

    where Charit is some characteristics of either the worker or of her primary/secondary job. We

report both the  - and  - coefficients obtained from (4).


4.2    First-Stage Effects

Models (1) and (3) estimate the effect of a shock to coworkers' wages in a worker's job on the

wage in the worker's other job. This indirect channel can be thought of as an intent-to-treat or

reduced form effect. However, the most direct channel of a shock in a job is on the wage in that

same job. This first-order effect for the model in (1) can be estimated as follows:

                                    j                 j                       j
                                wit2 =  + FS w
                                             ¯-2                       2
                                                it +  j1 (i,t ),t + rit ,                          (5)


This model allows us to compare the change in workers' wages in a given secondary employer j2

as a function of the change in average coworker (leave-self-out) wage from the same secondary
employer, j2 . Dividing the intent-to-treat estimates of  in (1) by the "first-stage" estimate of FS

from (5) yields the direct effect of a wage increase in the secondary job. The estimate of  in
Equation (3) can be rescaled by the corresponding estimate of FS in an analogous way.


5     Results

We now turn to the results. We first examine the first-stage effects: the estimated impact of the

change in average coworker log wage on a worker's own wage. Next, we test the hours-constraint


                                                    12
model predictions by examining the labor supply response to changes in the outside option at the

hours and separations margin. Finally, we present the bargaining estimates.


5.1    First-Stage Effects

We use changes in average coworker log wage as an instrument for an individual's wage in the

secondary job. The top panel of Table 2 shows the first-stage estimates for this instrument based
on model (5): The effect of average wage of co-workers in job 2 on a worker's wage in job 2.
Estimates range from 0.59 to 0.65 and are highly significant. An estimate of 0.6 implies that a

1 percent increase in the average wage of coworkers corresponds to a 0.6 percent increase in a

worker's wage. For subsequent regressions we will use intent-to-treat specifications, and these

can be scaled up by this first-stage coefficient to quantify the direct effect of a wage increase on

primary-job outcomes.


5.2    Hours and Mobility Response to Secondary-Job Wage Changes

Here we test the predictions from the hours-constraint model in Section 2.

   The middle panel of Table 3 shows estimates from regressing job 1 change in log hours on

change in coworker average log wage in job 2. Consistent with prediction #1, the coefficient in the

baseline specification is close to zero and insignificant. Primary-job hours are not responsive to

secondary-job wages. This holds also in column 2, which restricts the analysis to cases where the

primary-job sector is different from the secondary-job sector. Dropping such observations elimi-
nates cases where the outside option reflects market-wide changes as opposed to an idiosyncratic
change to the outside option of a given worker. Again, the point estimate is small and not sig-

nificantly different from zero. When we restrict the analysis to only dual jobholders, the hours
response is positive and statistically different from zero.
   While the data largely support the conclusion that primary-job hours are fixed, separations from

the primary-job to employment or non-employment are sensitive to secondary-job wage. The top
panel of Table 3 presents the estimates on the probability of a worker separating from the primary-


                                                  13
job as a function of the change in the log wage of the secondary job. Consistent with prediction #2,

the effects are all positive and significant. When the second job wage rises, primary job adjustment
occurs in the separation but not in the hours margin.
    If workers are separating from their primary job in response to a wage increase in their second

job we would expect the secondary employer to become their primary employer. This is indeed the
case, as seen in Table 4. Specifically, if we define as the outcome an indicator for the secondary
job becoming the primary job over consecutive periods, an increase in the second job wage leads

to a positive and significant (at the 10 percent level) increase in the probability of the secondary
employer becoming the primary. The magnitude of this response (0.0032) is close to the separation

response from the primary employer in Table 3 (0.0042).

    The separation results will be helpful for interpreting the bargaining estimates. A possible lim-

itation to our approach is that second jobs are not credible alternatives. The job mobility findings

suggest that workers are on the margin between employers and, thus, second employers can pose

a credible outside option.


5.3     Secondary-Job Hours Response to Primary-Job Wage Changes

Table 5 tests the third prediction of the model, that secondary-job hours decline and separations

increase in the primary-job wage. In the second panel we regress the change in log hours in job 2

on the coworker average of the change of log wages in job 1. The coefficient is negative and highly

significant, consistent with hours in the secondary job being at least somewhat flexible and there

being an income effect.9
    Using this estimate we can compute the marginal propensity to consume out of unearned in-
                                                                  w2  h2
come due to reduced hours in the second job: mpe =                h1  w1 .   The denominator of this expression

represents the change in unearned income from the change in job-1 wage, and the numerator is the
change in earnings from the change in labor supply in job 2. Note that the hours elasticity in Table
    9 It is also possible that these reductions in hours are coming from a substitution effect as workers add hours in

their primary job and drop hours in the secondary job. However in Lachowska et al. (2021) we estimate an own-firm
elasticity of labor supply of approximately zero for workers in primary firms. This kind of inelastic response to the
own wage is consistent with inflexible hours in primary firms.


                                                         14
                                               -0.0261       w1  h2
5 scaled by the first-stage estimate is         0.58     =   h2  w1 .   Therefore, using means from Table 1, we
                     -0.0261 h2 w2       -0.0261 137.3 17.24
compute, mpe =        0.58 w1 h1     =    0.58 17.84 436.5     = -0.014. This estimate implies that, for every
dollar of unearned income, workers lower labor supply in the hours margin reduces earnings by 1.4
cents. This estimate is in-line with income effect estimates from lottery studies, such as Cesarini

et al. (2017).
    The top panel of Table 5 shows the same relationship but for the separations margin. We see
statistically strong responses to the primary-job wage, also consistent with income effects.


5.4     Bargaining

We now move to the bargaining test. We begin with the the baseline model that shows how primary

and secondary wages covary on average and then examine heterogeneity in responses.

5.4.1    Baseline Effects

In Table 3 we regress the change in coworker log wages in the secondary job on the change in

the log wage in the primary job. We find a positive and statistically significant relationship in the

baseline specification in column 1. We also see similar magnitude effects when the primary and

secondary job are in different sectors (column 2).

    To assess magnitudes we divide the intent-to-treat coefficient in column 1 (0.0082) by the

corresponding first-stage coefficient in column 2 of Table 2 (0.63). Doing this implies that a 1-

percent increase in own wage in job 2 results in a 0.013 percent increase in the main job. While

small in magnitude, the estimate is close to the corresponding estimates in Caldwell and Harmon
            ager et al. (2020).10
(2019) and J¨
    The bargaining effects are asymmetrical between job categories. In Table 5, we regress the

secondary-job wage on the primary-job wage and cannot reject zero in either of the specifications.
  10 Caldwell  and Harmon (2019) have an elasticity of earnings to outside offers of approximately 0.02. They report
that 10 new positions at an individual's former coworkers' current firms results in an increase of $50 of annual earnings.
Average annual earnings in their sample is $42,650. People have on average 156 connections. Putting these together
gives an elasticity of 0.02 (=5*(156/42,650)). J¨ ager et al. (2020) find that a one dollar increase in UI translates to a
0.01 dollar increase in wages.




                                                             15
This aligns with prediction #5: in an unconstrained job that is dominated by the primary job, the

secondary employer does not bargain.

5.4.2     Heterogeneity

Tables 6 and 7 examine the heterogeneous bargaining response by a number of job characteris-

tics.11 Prediction #6 from the conceptual framework implies that in sub-groups where there are
larger wage response to improved outside options we should smaller separation effects. This rela-
tionship holds for a worker's position in the wage distribution. In the second panel of Table 6, the

bargaining effect is present and statistically significant for top-quartile workers with an elasticity

of 0.0228 (column 2). The corresponding coefficient for bottom-quartile workers is statistically in-

distinguishable from 0 (column 1). Consistent with prediction #6, in the first panel the separation

response is positive and significant for bottom-quartile workers but not for top-quartile workers.

The results by wage distribution quartile are consistent with bottom-quartile workers having lim-

ited surplus while top-quartile workers having surplus that gives employers scope to increase pay.

    Relatedly, we also find that separation responses are particularly pronounced for individuals

for whom a significant amount of their total earnings is obtained from their secondary job. As

expected, these individuals are particularly more likely to make their secondary job their primary

occupation (see panel (b), column 4 of Table 4).

    In Table 7, we report wage and separation responses by industry. Figure 3 shows the scatterplot
of these two responses weighted by the number of dual jobholders by sector. While the relationship

is somewhat imprecise (t-statistic = -1.4), there appears to be a negative relationship between the
two measures.
    We have also examined heterogeneity in a number of measures that we think may be related

to the potential and extent of bargaining. Two measures proxy for the credibility of the outside
option from the second employer: a worker's tenure with the secondary employer and an indicator
  11 As  discussed in Lachowska, Mas and Woodbury (2020), demographic information is available for workers who
have at some point claimed UI benefits. Heterogeneity by demographic characteristics are largely underpowered due
to relatively small samples, see Table A2.




                                                       16
for whether secondary employer is primary employer for more than 90 percent of its employees.

For both of these measures, we expect a stronger bargaining response in response to an outside
option, but the evidence is mixed. The wage response is stronger (and statistically significant) for
workers with a longer tenure with the secondary employer, but the wage and separation responses

are negative for secondary employers where a large share of workers are primary (Table 6).
    In Table 6, column 4 we analyze heterogeneity of the estimates based on whether the primary
employer is more likely to be a "bargaining" or a "posting" employer. To do so, we assume

that posting employers have a low degree of variability in within-firm wage changes. In contrast,
bargaining employers are expected to have a large degree of variability; this variability will depend

on the heterogeneity in outside options among its workers, see also Manning (2011). Accordingly,

we flag an employer as a "bargaining employer" if the employer is in the fourth quartile of the

standard deviation of within-firm changes in log wages among stayers. This measure strongly

predicts a positive wage response from the primary employer when the wage of the secondary

employer increases. This estimate gives us additional assurance that we are detecting a bargaining

response.


6    Conclusion

We have examined the market for dual jobholders both to obtain evidence on the reasons for dual

jobholding and to test for the extent of wage bargaining in the labor market. The empirical evidence

suggest three main conclusions. First, the data are consistent with work hours being constrained
in the primary job, which influences workers' decisions about taking a second job. Second, wage

bargaining is an observable feature of the labor market, although for dual jobholders in aggregate,

the importance of bargaining is limited. That is, wages do respond to an outside option--in this
case a wage increase at the secondary job--but for dual jobholders, the overall magnitude of the

response is small. Third, wage bargaining is important among workers in the top quartile of the

wage distribution. In the model, highly skilled workers generate a relatively large surplus for the
employer, which creates an incentive for the employer to raise a worker's wage rather than accept a

                                                 17
separation. In contrast, wage bargaining appears nonexistent among workers in the lowest quartile

of the wage distribution, where we observe separations in response to improved outside options.
This is consistent with low-wage jobs generating relatively little surplus, which in turn leads to
wage posting.

   The paper adds to the literature by showing that workers--at least those in the top quartile
of the wage distribution--are able to bargain over wages, and that their bargaining power stems
from an outside option available to them. The findings imply that, whereas low-wage workers can

obtain wage gains only by moving to a different employer, high-wage workers may experience
wage growth either by moving up the job ladder (that is, moving to another employer) or by

negotiating a higher wage if they have the bargaining power that an outside option gives them.

Another implication is that employers, particularly those who employ high-wage workers, have

some discretion to discriminate among individual workers in offering compensation. This finding

runs counter even to models of imperfectly competitive labor markets, which generally assume

that wages are set uniformly for workers in a skill class.




                                                 18
References

Cahuc, Pierre, Fabien Postel-Vinay and Jean-Marc Robin. 2006. "Wage Bargaining with On-the-
  job Search: Theory and Evidence." Econometrica 74(2):323­364.

Caldwell, Sydnee and Nikolaj Harmon. 2019. Outside Options, Bargaining, and Wages: Evidence

  from Coworker Networks. Unpublished manuscript University of Copenhagen.

                                                                   ¨
Cesarini, David, Erik Lindqvist, Matthew J. Notowidigdo and Robert Ostling. 2017. "The Ef-
  fect of Wealth on Individual and Household Labor Supply: Evidence from Swedish Lotteries."

  American Economic Review 107(12):3917­46.

Faberman, R Jason, Andreas I Mueller, Ays
                                        ¸eg¨
                                           ul S
                                              ¸ ahin and Giorgio Topa. 2017. Job Search Be-

  havior among the Employed and Non-employed. Working paper 23731 National Bureau of Eco-

  nomic Research.

Gronau, Reuben. 1977. "Leisure, Home Production, and Work­the Theory of the Allocation of

  Time Revisited." Journal of Political Economy 85(6):1099­1123.

Hall, Robert E and Alan B. Krueger. 2010. Evidence on the Determinants of the Choice between

  Wage Posting and Wage Bargaining. Working Paper 16033 National Bureau of Economic Re-

  search.

Hall, Robert E and Alan B. Krueger. 2012. "Evidence on the Incidence of Wage Posting, Wage

  Bargaining, and On-the-job Search." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4(4):56­
  67.

Imbens, Guido W., Donald B. Rubin and Bruce I. Sacerdote. 2001. "Estimating the Effect of
  Unearned Income on Labor Earnings, Savings, and Consumption: Evidence from a Survey of

  Lottery Players." American Economic Review 91(4):778­794.

J¨
 ager, Simon, Benjamin Schoefer, Samuel Young and Josef Zweim¨
                                                             uller. 2020. "Wages and the

  Value of Nonemployment." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 135(4):1905­1963.

                                            19
Katz, Lawrence F. and Alan B. Krueger. 2019. "The Rise and Nature of Alternative Work Arrange-

  ments in the United States, 1995­2015." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 72(2):382­416.

Koustas, Dmitri. 2018. Consumption Insurance and Multiple Jobs: Evidence from Rideshare

  Drivers. Working paper.

Lachowska, Marta. 2017. "Outside Options and Wages: What Can We Learn from Subjective
  Assessments?" Empirical Economics 52(1):79­121.

Lachowska, Marta, Alexandre Mas, Raffaele D Saggio and Stephen A Woodbury. 2021. The

  Importance of Firms in Hours Determination. Mimeo.

Lachowska, Marta, Alexandre Mas and Stephen A Woodbury. 2018. How Reliable Are Adminis-

  trative Reports of Paid Work Hours? Unpublished manuscript.

Lachowska, Marta, Alexandre Mas and Stephen A. Woodbury. 2020. "Sources of Displaced Work-

  ers' Long-Term Earnings Losses." American Economic Review 10(110):3231­3266.

Manning, Alan. 2011. Imperfect Competition in the Labor Market. In Handbook of Labor Eco-

  nomics. Vol. 4 Elsevier pp. 973­1041.

Mas, Alexandre and Amanda Pallais. 2020. "Alternative Work Arrangements." Annual Review of

  Economics 12:631­658.

Paxson, Christina H. and Nachum Sicherman. 1996. "The Dynamics of Dual Job Holding and Job
  Mobility." Journal of Labor Economics 14(3):357­393.

Renna, Francesco and Ronald L. Oaxaca. 2006. The Economics of Dual Job Holding: A Job
  Portfolio Model of Labor Supply. Discussion Paper 1915 IZA.

Shishko, Robert and Bernard Rostker. 1976. "The Economics of Multiple Job Holding." American

  Economic Review 66(3):298­308.




                                             20
Tazhitdinova, Alisa. 2020. Increasing Hours Worked: Moonlighting Responses to a Large Tax

  Reform. Working Paper 27726 National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                           21
Figures and Tables

                             Figure 1: Labor Supply Decision with Dual Jobs




Note: This figure shows a situation where a worker optimizes between time in the primary job, the secondary job,
                                                                                                                  ¯,
and leisure. The worker first chooses hours worked in the primary job, and once she reaches the limit in hours at H
            ~   ¯
additional H - H hours are supplied at a lower wage in the secondary job. This lower wage produces a kink in the
budget constraint.




                                                        22
                                          Figure 2: Change in Wage
                                   (a) Increase in the Wage of the Secondary Job




                                    (b) Increase in the Wage of the Primary Job




Note: This figure shows the hours response for a potential change in the wage of the secondary job (Panel a) and for
a change in the wage in the primary job (Panel b).




                                                        23
                               Figure 3: Wage and Separation Response in Primary Job across Sectors

                                                                                                 Utilities

                                     .025
                                                                                             Accommodation and Food Services                                            Constant: .01;
                                                                                                                                                                        Slope: -.5;
                                                                                                                                                                        R2: .17.


                                                                                                                             Retail
                                                                                                                       Real Estate  Trade
                                                                                                                                   and Rental and Leasing
              Effect on Separation




                                                                                                             Health Care and Social Assistance
                                                                                                                                                                           Other Services (except Public Administration)
                                                                                                                                       Transportation and Warehousing
                                                                                                                    Construction

                                                                                         Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation
                                                                                                                   Administrative Support and Waste Management and Remediation Services
                                                                                                                            Wholesale Trade
                                        0

                                                                                                                                                 Manufacturing
                                                                                                       Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services




                                                            Management of Companies and Enterprises

                                                                                     Information
                                                                                          Mining, Quarrying, and Oil and Gas Extraction
                                                                                                                                                                         Finance and Insurance




                                     -.025
                                         -.025                                           0                                                                  .025                                                           .05
                                                                                              Effect on Log Wages (Stayers)
                                            Regression results weighted by # of dual job holders in each sector.


Note: This figure reports estimates from Equation (1), estimated separately for each sector. The y-axis reports how
changes in the outside option impact separation rates between quarter t and quarter t + 2. The x-axis reports how
changes in the outside option impact change in log wages in the primary job between t and t + 1. All regressions
control for primary-employer by quarter fixed effects. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are two-way
clustered at the worker and primary-employer level. See text for details.




                                                                                                               24
                                                      Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                                       Workers with only one job                          Dual Job Holders
                                                                Primary Job                   Primary Job               Secondary Job
                                                                      [1]                          [2]                          [3]
Hourly wage                                                         25.55                        17.84                        17.24
                                                                   (21.10)                      (12.03)                      (16.36)

Hours                                                              468.15                       436.50                       137.30
                                                                  (136.38)                     (148.40)                     (121.96)

Earnings                                                         12,033.73                      7,796.18                    2,042.75
                                                                 (9944.01)                     (5802.09)                   (2333.87)

Separation                                                           0.08                         0.11                         0.25


Separation (Job-to-Job)                                              0.04                         0.10                         0.10


Tenure (in Quarters)                                                13.86                        12.10                        7.67
                                                                   (12.54)                      (11.42)                      (8.00)

Change in Log Hours                                                  0.01                         0.01                        0.00
                                                                    (0.28)                       (0.17)                      (0.27)

Change in Log Wage                                                   -0.01                        0.00                        -0.03
                                                                    (0.37)                       (0.26)                      (0.64)

Firm Size                                                          106.64                        81.38                        93.58
                                                                  (781.15)                     (682.22)                     (783.36)

Change in Coworkers Log wage                                         0.01                         0.01                        0.01
                                                                    (0.15)                       (0.13)                      (0.13)

Share of Coworkers who are Dual Jobholders                           0.05                         0.11                        0.48
                                                                    (0.09)                       (0.19)                      (0.42)

Share of Total Earnings from Job #2                                                               0.21                        0.21
                                                                                                 (0.16)                      (0.16)
Number of Workers                                                 4,146,548                     505,280                     505,280
Number of Employers                                                 93,943                      134,056                     121,831
Number of Quarter-Worker Observations                            63,268,985                    2,677,798                   2,677,798
Note: This table provides summary statistics for various estimation samples. In the first column, we consider worker-quarter observations
where the worker is holding one single job. In the second column, we consider worker-quarter observations where the worker is holding two
jobs and we report mean and standard deviation (in round brackets) separately for the primary and the secondary job. All statistics are quarter-
worker weighted except for firm size, which is weighted by employer-quarter observations.
                                      Table 2: First-Stage Estimates
                                                                                   Job#1 and Job#2 are in
                                                 Dual Jobholders Only
                                                                                      Different Sectors
Outcome: Change in Log Wage Job#2 (Stayers)                 v3                               v4
Change in Wage of Peers, Job#2                          0.6280***                        0.6457***
                                                         (0.0206)                         (0.0198)

Mean Dependent Variable                                   .0087                               .0092
Observations                                             1491447                             915329

Outcome: Change in Log Wage Job#1 (Stayers)
Change in Wage of Peers, Job#1                          0.5808***                          0.5492***
                                                         (0.0285)                           (0.0260)

Mean Dependent Variable                                   .0036                               .0037
Observations                                             1102897                             659627
Note: This table reports estimates from the "first stage" regression discussed at the end of Section 4. The first
panel corresponds to equation (5) of the main text, where the outcome variable is quarter-to-quarter change in the
log wage in the secondary job (for stayers). This outcome variable is regressed on the (leave-out) change in the
wage of the peers from the secondary job. The model controls for quarter-primary employer fixed effects. In the
second panel, the outcome variable is quarter-to-quarter change in the log wage in the primary job (for stayers).
This outcome variable is regressed on the (leave-out) change in the wage of the peers from the primary job. The
model controls for quarter-secondary employer fixed effects. Both regression equations are conditional on
having a dual job in a given quarter. Column 1 estimates both panels on our sample of dual job holders. Column 2
restricts this sample so that Job#1 and Job#2 are in different sectors. Standard errors are reported in parentheses
and are two-way clustered at the worker and employer of the outcome of interest level.
   Table 3: Impact of Changes in Coworkers' Wages from Job #2 on Worker Outcomes in Job #1
                                                 Job#1 and Job#2 are in
                                   Baseline                             Only Dual Jobholders
                                                    Different Sectors
Outcome: Separation from Job#1        v3                   v4
Change in Wage of Peers, Job#2     0.0042*              0.0060**              0.0054*
                                   (0.0019)             (0.0021)              (0.0024)

Mean Dependent Variable                         .0834                         .083                            .1074
Observations                                  62630479                      61916730                         1506110

Outcome: Change of Log Hours in Job#1 (Stayers)
Change in Wage of Peers, Job#2                  0.0011                       0.0039                         0.0073**
                                               (0.0022)                     (0.0024)                        (0.0026)

Mean Dependent Variable                        -.0049                         -.005                           .0017
Observations                                  58582829                      57942744                         1347851

Outcome: Change of Log Wage in Job#1 (Stayers)
Change in Wage of Peers, Job2                0.0082***                     0.0077***                        0.0059**
                                              (0.0020)                      (0.0018)                        (0.0019)

Mean Dependent Variable                         .0092                         .0092                           .0091
Observations                                  58582829                      57942744                         1347851
Note: This table reports estimates from of our baseline specification in equation (1). In the first panel, the outcome variable is
a dummy equal to 1 if we observe a separation between quarter t and quarter t+2 from the primary job. In the second and third
panel, the outcome variable is quarter-to-quarter change in the log hours (second panel) or in log wages (third panel) from the
primary job, where both outcomes condition on being a stayer. "Change in Wage of Peers, Job#2" represents the leave-out
change in the wage of the peers of a given individual from her secondary job between quarter t and quarter t+1. This variable
is set to zero if an individual in a given quarter is not holding two jobs. Column 1 estimates the model on both dual job
holders as well single job holders present in the WA data. Column 2 restricts this sample so that Job#1 and Job#2 are in
different sectors. Column 3 restricts the analysis to worker-quarter observations where the worker is a dual job holder. All
regressions control for primary employer by quarter fixed effects and a dummy for dual job-holding (Column 1-2). Standard
errors are reported in parentheses and are two-way clustered at the worker and primary employer level.
                                          Table 4: Effects on Job-to-Job Transitions
                                                  Baseline (No          Bottom Quartile             Top Quartile        Above Median Share in
                                                  Interactions)          Wage Job#1                 Wage Job#1             Earnings Job#2
Outcome: Job-to-Job Transition
Change in Wage of Peers, Job#2                        0.0023                  -0.0018                  0.0021                  -0.0082***
                                                     (0.0018)                (0.0021)                 (0.0020)                   (0.0021)

Change in Wage of Peers, Job#2 x Job Char                                    0.0095*                   -0.0003                  0.0160***
                                                                             (0.0041)                 (0.0043)                   (0.0037)

Mean Dependent Variable                               .0459                   .0459                     .0459                     .0459
Observations                                        62630479                62630479                  62630479                  62630479

Outcome: Secondary Job Becomes Primary Job
Change in Wage of Peers, Job#2                        0.0032                  -0.0021                  0.0037                  -0.0061***
                                                     (0.0018)                (0.0020)                 (0.0019)                   (0.0018)

Change in Wage of Peers, Job#2 x Job Char                                    0.0123**                  -0.0070                  0.0130***
                                                                             (0.0038)                 (0.0042)                   (0.0034)

Mean Dependent Variable                                   .0022                  .0022                   .0022                     .0022
Observations                                           62630479               62630479                 62630479                  62630479
Note: This table reports estimates from of our heterogeneity specification displayed in equation (4). In the first panel, the outcome variable is an
indicator equal to 1 if we observe a job-to-job transition between quarter t and quarter t+2. In the second panel, the outcome is an indicator if the
secondary job of the current period (t) becomes the primary job in the next period (t+2). "Change in Wage of Peers, Job#2" represents the leave-
out change in the wage of the peers of a given individual from her secondary job. "Change in Wage of Peers, Job#2 x Job Char" interacts the
latter variable with a job characteristic listed on top of each column. All regression controls for primary employer by quarter fixed effects, a
dummy for dual job holder, a dummy for the characteristic listed in each column, an interaction between that characteristic and the dual job
indicator. In Column 4, the characteristic that we used for the interaction is a dummy equal 1 if the share of an individual's earnings coming from
the secondary job is above the corresponding sample median for dual job holders. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are two-way
clustered at the worker and primary employer level.
 Table 5: Impact of Changes in Coworkers' Wages from Job #1 on Worker Outcomes in Job #2
                                                   Dual Jobholders and Job#1 and Job#2 are in
                               Dual Jobholders
                                                               Different Sectors
Outcome: Separation from Job#2       v3                                v4
Change in Wage of Peers, Job#1   0.0147***                         0.0155***
                                  (0.0039)                          (0.0044)

Mean Dependent Variable                      .2533                                        .2526
Observations                                1660291                                      1014853

Outcome: Change of Log Hours in Job#2 (Stayers)
Change in Wage of Peers, Job#1             -0.0261***                                    -0.0250**
                                             (0.0072)                                     (0.0084)

Mean Dependent Variable                      -.0306                                       -.0313
Observations                                1210689                                       737264

Outcome: Change of Log Wage in Job#2 (Stayers)
Change in Wage of Peers, Job#1               0.0005                                        0.0027
                                            (0.0030)                                      (0.0036)

Mean Dependent Variable                      .0038                                         .004
Observations                                1210689                                       737264
Note: This table reports estimates from equation (3). In the first panel, the outcome variable is a dummy equal to 1 if we
observe a separation from the secondary job between quarter t and quarter t+2. In the second and third panel, the
outcome variable is quarter-to-quarter change in the log hours (second panel) or in log wages (third panel) from the
secondary job, where both outcomes condition on stayers only. The independent variable of interest across all models is
the (leave-out) change in the wage of the peers from the primary job, denoted as "Change in Wage of Peers, Job#1".
Column 1 estimates the model on the universe of dual job holders that we observe in the data. Column 2 restricts this
sample so that Job#1 and Job#2 are in different sectors. All regression controls for secondary employer by quarter fixed
effects. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are two-way clustered at the worker and secondary employer
level.
                                                                        Table 6: Heterogeneity by Job Characteristics
                                                Bottom Quartile           Top Quartile       Above median share Q4 of Sd of Within-Firm-Within-    Tenure with       Tenure with
                                                 Wage Job#1               Wage Job#1          in earnings job#2    Worker variation in Wage     Primary Employer Secondary Employer
Outcome: Separation from Job#1                          v2                     v3                     v4                                               v5
Change in Wage of Peers, Job#2                       -0.0011                0.0045*               -0.0046*                  0.0055**                0.0089**          0.0082**
                                                    (0.0022)                (0.0021)               (0.0022)                 (0.0021)                (0.0033)          (0.0029)

Change in Wage of Peers, Job#2 x Job Char            0.0133**                -0.0035               0.0130***                            -0.0074                        -0.0004**                -0.0008***
                                                     (0.0042)               (0.0044)                (0.0038)                           (0.0049)                         (0.0002)                  (0.0002)

Mean Dependent Variable                               .0834                   .0834                  .0834                              .0834                            .0821                     .0821
Observations                                        62630479                62630479               62630479                           62630479                         46699891                  46699891


Outcome: Change of Log Wages in Job#1 (Stayers)
Change in Wage of Peers, Job#2                 0.0081***                    0.0052**                0.0080**                            0.0009                           0.0037                    0.0039
                                                     (0.0022)               (0.0019)                (0.0027)                           (0.0010)                         (0.0025)                  (0.0023)

Change in Wage of Peers, Job#2 x Job Char             0.0000                0.0228**                 -0.0001                          0.0405***                          0.0002                   0.0004*
                                                     (0.0036)               (0.0073)                (0.0034)                           (0.0096)                         (0.0001)                  (0.0002)

Mean Dependent Variable                                  .0092                  .0092                   .0092                              .0092                            .0086                    .0086
Observations                                           58582829               58582829               58582829                           58582829                         44065192                  44065192
Note: This table reports estimates from of our heterogeneity specification displayed in equation (4). In the first panel, the outcome variable is a dummy equal to 1 if we observe a separation from the primary job
from quarter t to quarter t+2. In the second panel, the outcome variable is quarter-to-quarter change in the log wage from the primary job, measured for stayers only. "Change in Wage of Peers, Job#2" represents
the leave-out change in the wage of the peers of a given individual from her secondary job. "Change in Wage of Peers, Job#2 x Job Char" interacts the latter variable with a demographic characteristic listed on
top of each column. "Above median share" is a dummy equal to 1 if the share of an individual's earnings coming from the secondary job is above the corresponding sample median for dual job holders. "Q4 of Sd
of Within-Firm-Within-Worker variation in Wage Changes" is constructed as follows: we start by computing the within-firm standard deviation of wage changes among its dual job holders stayers. We then
construct quartiles of this standard deviation across firms. Q4 means the top quartile of this measure, hence firms in Q4 have the highest variability in wages changes among its employees. The last two columns
intearct our independent variable of interest with tenure from either the primary or secondary job. To minimize issues due to left censoring, we measure tenure starting from 2005. All regression controls for
primary employer by quarter fixed effects and a dummy for dual job holders. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are two-way clustered at the worker and primary employer level.
                                                   Table 7: Heterogeneity by Sectors
                                                                                                                 Effect on Log Wage Change
                                                                             Effect on Separation
                                                                                                                        (Stayers Only)
Agriculture                                                                         -0.0078                                  0.0539
                                                                                   (0.0161)                                (0.0470)
Mining, Quarrying, and Oil and Gas Extraction                                       -0.0199                                 -0.0069
                                                                                   (0.0550)                                (0.0217)
Utilities                                                                            0.0286                                  0.0005
                                                                                   (0.0155)                                (0.0107)
Construction                                                                        -0.0072                                 -0.0002
                                                                                   (0.0109)                                (0.0100)
Manufacturing                                                                       -0.0058                                  0.0096
                                                                                   (0.0067)                                (0.0063)
Wholesale Trade                                                                      0.0009                                  0.0089
                                                                                   (0.0083)                                (0.0084)
Retail Trade                                                                         0.0121                                  0.0112
                                                                                   (0.0043)                                (0.0046)
Transportation and Warehousing                                                       0.0035                                  0.0175
                                                                                   (0.0079)                                (0.0074)
Information                                                                         -0.0170                                 -0.0002
                                                                                   (0.0094)                                (0.0059)
Finance and Insurance                                                               -0.0180                                  0.0308
                                                                                   (0.0077)                                (0.0131)
Real Estate and Rental and Leasing                                                   0.0097                                  0.0120
                                                                                   (0.0133)                                (0.0150)
Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services                                    -0.0091                                 -0.0013
                                                                                   (0.0087)                                (0.0084)
Management of Companies and Enterprises                                             -0.0136                                 -0.0172
                                                                                   (0.0487)                                (0.0275)
Administrative Support and Waste Management                                         -0.0035                                  0.0053
                                                                                   (0.0079)                                (0.0062)
Health Care and Social Assistance                                                    0.0091                                  0.0038
                                                                                   (0.0040)                                (0.0021)
Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation                                                 -0.0005                                 -0.0066
                                                                                   (0.0105)                                (0.0069)
Accommodation and Food Services                                                      0.0186                                 -0.0008
                                                                                   (0.0067)                                (0.0033)
Other Services (except Public Administration)                                        0.0073                                  0.0185
                                                                                   (0.0094)                                (0.0139)
Note: This table reports estimates from equation (1), estimated separately in each sector. Column 1 reports estimates of our proxy for the wage shock
from the secondary job on separation between quarter t and quarter t+2. Column 2 reports estimates of our proxy for the wage shock from the
secondary job on the change in log wage between t and t+1 among stayers. All regression controls for primary-employer by quarter fixed effects.
Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are two-way clustered at the worker and primary-employer level.
A     Data Appendix

This appendix first describes the data used in the analysis. It then describes the sample restrictions
imposed on the estimation sample.


A.1    Further Description of the Data

The data used in this paper are based on quarterly administrative wage records maintained by the

Employment Security Department (ESD) of Washington State to administer the state's unemploy-
ment insurance (UI) system. The available quarterly data provide information on earnings and

work hours of all workers employed by UI-covered employers in the state between 2001­2014.

Workers who drop out of the labor force, become self-employed, work in the underground econ-

omy, or move out of state will not appear in the records. This is because self-employed workers are

not covered by UI, underground earnings are not reported, and out-of-state earnings will be picked

up in the earnings records of another state.

    UI-covered employers in Washington are required to report each worker's quarterly earnings

and work hours, which allows us to construct an hourly wage rate in each quarter for most workers

in Washington's formal labor market; in the analysis, earnings and wage rates are CPI-adjusted

using the year 2005 as the base. Each worker's quarterly record also includes an employer identi-

fier and the employer's four-digit North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) code,

making it possible to construct employment at both the employer and industry level; see also La-
chowska, Mas and Woodbury (2020) for further discussion of Washington administrative wage
records.


A.2    Construction of the Estimation Sample

We build the estimation sample using the following steps. We begin by using all the available UI

wage records from 2001­2014. Using these data, for every worker in a given quarter, we rank
a worker's employer by the number of quarterly work hours (we have also ranked employers by

earnings; the coefficient of correlation between the hours- and earning-based rank is 0.95). Using

                                                 32
this ranking, we define a worker's primary employer as the employer with whom she worked the

highest number of hours in that quarter. A secondary employer is then defined as the employer
with whom the worker worked had the next-highest number of hours in that quarter, and so forth.
   In the raw data, 87 percent of jobs are jobs with primary employers (that is, primary jobs),

10 percent are secondary jobs, about 1 percent are tertiary jobs, and less than 0.5 percent are
quaternary jobs. We compute several variables using the raw data, for example, a firm's size is
the number of all employees in a firm in a quarter. We also compute the number of employers a

worker had in each quarter. In the raw data, about 23 percent of workers appear to have more than
one employer. However, many such observations are workers transitioning between employers

mid-quarter rather than having more than one job for longer than a quarter. Accordingly, in the

analysis, we exclude such "partial" quarters of employment; see the sections below. Next, we

create two subsamples: a subsample of primary jobs and a subsample of secondary jobs that we

merge together to a dataset of dual jobholders.

A.2.1   Primary-Job Subsample

We first set up a panel where, for each worker and quarter, there is one primary employer (as

mentioned above, a primary employer is the employer with whom a worker worked the highest

number of hours in that quarter). We define full-quarter job spells; that is, quarters of employment

bookended with the same primary employer. We do this to avoid including "partial" quarters of
employment, which might lead us to believe that a worker holds more than one job in a quarter,

when she is transitioning between employers mid-quarter. About 70 percent of all worker-quarter
observations are full quarter spells with a primary employer. Note that once we restrict this sample
to only include full quarters, this leaves us with only job stayers. Note also that, the full quarter

restriction implies for a quarter t to be included in the analysis sample, that the worker must be
employed with the same primary employer in t - 1, t , and t + 1. Therefore, in order to define sepa-
rations (a transition from a primary employer to another primary employer or to non-employment),

we need to look out to quarter t + 2. Accordingly, we define separation as having a different pri-



                                                  33
mary employer in quarter t + 2 or not being employed in t + 2. We drop observations employed in

the Public Sector (Education Services and Public Administration), as well as observations with a
missing sector.

A.2.2   Secondary-Job Subsample

To create a dataset of secondary jobs, we set up a panel where, for every worker and quarter, there
is one secondary employer. As previously, we restrict this dataset to job spells are full quarters. For
secondary jobs, about 19 percent of worker-quarter observations are full quarters. This shows that

often what appears to be dual-job holding is actually a worker transitioning between employers

mid-quarter.

A.2.3   Leave-Self-Out Averages of Wage Changes

Using the primary job dataset for each worker in each quarter, we compute firm-by-quarter leave-

self-out averages of changes in log wages. We winsorize average firm-by-quarter log wage changes

at -1 and +1 log points. We then merge these leave-self-out averages of wage changes to each

employer in the secondary job stayer dataset.

A.2.4   Dataset of Dual Jobholders

Finally, we merge secondary job dataset to the primary job dataset. This merged dataset includes

all workers with either one primary job or workers with a primary and a secondary job. Note that,

for workers who do not have a second job, the firm-average change in wages on the non-existent
secondary job is set to zero. Once we drop observations where in a given firm-quarter there is no

dual jobholder, the estimation sample consists of 58­62 million observations (depending on what

outcome is studied) of which about 1.3­1.5 million are observations of dual jobholders.

A.2.5   Demographic Information

State employment security agencies typically record workers' characteristics only when they claim
UI. Accordingly, we observe demographic characteristics (year of birth, gender, race, and educa-


                                                  34
tion) only for workers who claimed UI benefits at least once during 2001­2014. For gender and

race, we assign an indicator with a constant, modal value over this period. We assign the age of
a worker in each quarter based on the worker's year of birth. For education, we assign a constant
level if we observe the worker only once (that is, if he or she claimed UI only once); however, if a

worker claimed UI more than once, we assign the first observed value of education for all quarters
until the quarter in which we observe a change. We observe demographics for about 30 percent of
the sample.


B     Other Results

This appendix presents summary statistics for the sample with worker demographics as well as the

main estimation using this selected sample.




                                                35
              Table A1: Summary Statistics (Workers with Available Demographic Characteristics)
                                      Workers with only one job            Dual Jobholders
                                                     Primary Job                  Primary Job                Secondary Job
Hourly Wage                                             20.44                         15.98                      14.96
                                                       (13.42)                       (8.86)                     (11.39)

Hours                                                   476.79                       443.39                      129.17
                                                       (131.62)                     (142.58)                    (113.28)

Earnings                                                9,815.39                    7,094.41                    1,685.28
                                                       (6796.12)                   (4498.85)                   (1641.68)

Separation                                                0.11                         0.13                        0.29
                                                          0.31                         0.34                        0.45

Separation (Job-to-Job)                                   0.06                         0.12                        0.12
                                                          0.25                         0.32                        0.32

Tenure                                                   11.07                         9.87                        6.64
                                                        (10.36)                       (9.50)                      (7.01)

Change in Log Hours                                       0.01                         0.01                        0.00
                                                         (0.25)                       (0.17)                      (0.27)

Change in Log Wage                                        -0.01                        0.00                        -0.03
                                                         (0.40)                       (0.27)                      (0.69)

Firm Size                                               124.14                       152.27                      166.21
                                                       (846.98)                    (1042.54)                   (1129.44)

Change in Coworkers Log wage                              0.01                         0.01                        0.01
                                                         (0.14)                       (0.13)                      (0.14)

Share of Coworkers who are Dual Jobholders                0.05                         0.11                        0.48
                                                         (0.09)                       (0.19)                      (0.43)

Share of Total Earnings from Job #2                                                    0.20                        0.20
                                                                                      (0.15)                      (0.15)

Female                                                    0.45                        0.55                        0.55


Age                                                      40.31                        41.00                       41.00
                                                        (12.30)                      (12.21)                     (12.21)

College Degree                                            0.19                        0.19                        0.19


White                                                     0.72                        0.66                        0.66

Number of Workers                                      1,362,973                     181,154                     181,154
Number of Employers                                     77,541                       73,447                       67,424
Number of Quarter-Worker Observations                 21,446,913                     829,982                     829,982
Note: This table provides summary statistics for the subsample of individuals who at some point claimed UI benefits in the
Washington State UI system and for whom we can then measure their demographics. In the first column, we only consider worker-
quarter observations where the worker is holding only one job. In the second colum, we consider worker-quarter observations where
the worker is holding two jobs and we report mean and standard deviation (in round brackets) separately for the primary and the
secondary job. All statistics are quarter-worker weighted except for firm size, which is weighted by employer-quarter observations.
                                                                   Table A2: Heterogeneity by Demographics
                                                         Sample with
                                                                                      Female                     White              Young (Age<30)          Old (Age>40)             College
                                                        Demographics
Outcome: Separation from Job#1                                v3                         v3                         v3                       v4                    v5
Change in Wage of Peers, Job#2                              0.0003                     0.0019                    -0.0019                  -0.0004                0.0047               0.0036
                                                           (0.0034)                   (0.0052)                  (0.0063)                 (0.0038)               (0.0046)             (0.0041)

Change in Wage of Peers, Job#2 x Demographic                                           -0.0028                   0.0031                   0.0023                 -0.0107              -0.0125
                                                                                      (0.0071)                  (0.0075)                 (0.0091)               (0.0066)             (0.0077)

Mean Dependent Variable                                      .1078                     .1078                     .1078                    .1078                  .1078                .1078
Observations                                               21187115                  21187115                  21187115                 21187115               21187115             21187115


Outcome: Change of Log Wages in Job#1 (Stayers)
Change in Wage of Peers, Job#2                             0.0081**                   0.0102*                    0.0138                  0.0091**                0.0062             0.0087**
                                                           (0.0028)                   (0.0047)                  (0.0074)                 (0.0032)               (0.0032)            (0.0034)

Change in Wage of Peers, Job#2 x Demographic                                           -0.0039                   -0.0081                  -0.0061                0.0044               -0.0026
                                                                                      (0.0057)                  (0.0076)                 (0.0056)               (0.0047)             (0.0060)

Mean Dependent Variable                                           .01                       .01                       .01                      .01                     .01                  .01
Observations                                                   19210890                 19210890                  19210890                19210890                 19210890              19210890
Note: This table reports estimates from of our heterogeneity specification displayed in equation (4), estimated on the subsample sample of individuals for whom we can measure their demographic
characteristics. In the first panel, the outcome variable is a dummy equal to 1 if we observe a separation from the primary job from quarter t to quarter t+2. In the second panel, the outcome
variable is quarter-to-quarter change in the log wage from the primary job, measured for stayers only. "Change in Wage of Peers, Job#2" represents the leave-out change in the wage of the peers of
a given individual from her secondary job. "Change in Wage of Peers, Job#2 x Demographic" interacts the latter variable with a demographic characteristic listed on top of each column. All
regression controls for primary employer by quarter fixed effects, a dummy for dual job holder, a dummy for the characteristic listed in each column, an interaction between that characteristic and
the dual job indicator. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are two-way clustered at the worker and primary employer level.
