                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           WORKFORCE AGING, PENSION REFORMS, AND FIRM OUTCOMES

                                         Francesca Carta
                                       Francesco D'Amuri
                                       Till M. von Wachter

                                       Working Paper 28407
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28407


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2021


The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Bank of Italy or the National Bureau of Economic Research. We are grateful to Daron Acemoglu,
Massimo Anelli, Joshua Angrist, Audinga Baltrunaite, Gaetano Basso, Marco Bertoni, Giulia
Bovini, Giorgio Brunello, Matteo Bugamelli, Lorenzo Cappellari, David Card, Federico Cingano,
Antonio dalla Zuanna, Marta De Philippis, Vincenzo Galasso, Libertad Gonzales, Simon Jaeger,
Jeffrey Liebman, Erzo Luttmer, Pedro Martins, Marco Manacorda, Alexandre Mas, Claudio
Michelacci, Luigi Pascali, Michele Pellizzari, Roberto Piazza, Giovanni Pica, Luigi Pistaferri,
Andrea Salvatori, Fabiano Schivardi, Benjamin Schoefer, Paolo Sestito, Alessandro Tarozzi,
Eliana Viviano, and seminar and conference participants at NBER Summer Institute, NBER
Longer Working Lives and Labor Demand Workshop, Stanford Working Longer and Retirement
Conference, Bank of Italy, Bocconi University, University of Padova, Einaudi Institute for
Economics and Finance, Brucchi-Luchino Conference, European Central Bank, European
Commission (DG Employment), INPS, OECD, for very useful comments. Some of the data used
in this project were provided as part of the "VisitINPS scholars" programme. We are very
grateful to Massimo Antichi, Massimo Ascione, Daniele Checchi, Mariella Cozzolino, Edoardo
Di Porto and Paolo Naticchioni for their help. All remaining errors are solely ours.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Francesca Carta, Francesco D'Amuri, and Till M. von Wachter. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Workforce Aging, Pension Reforms, and Firm Outcomes
Francesca Carta, Francesco D'Amuri, and Till M. von Wachter
NBER Working Paper No. 28407
January 2021
JEL No. H55,J23,J26

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper quantifies the effect of a policy-induced sharp increase in retirement ages on input mix
and economic outcomes of firms using Italian matched worker-firm data. Data on lifetime
pension contributions are used to calculate the expected additional number of older workers
employed by each firm due to the reform. Resulting instrumental variable estimates show an
increase in older workers leads to a precisely estimated rise in employment of younger workers,
value added, and total labor costs at constant labor productivity and unit labor costs. The findings
suggest rising institutional retirement ages can help firms to retain valuable older employees.


Francesca Carta                                  Till M. von Wachter
Directorate General for Economics                Department of Economics
Statistics and Research                          University of California, Los Angeles
Bank of Italy                                    8283 Bunche Hall
via Nazionale 91                                 MC 147703
00184, Rome                                      Los Angeles, CA 90095
Italy                                            and NBER
francesca.carta@bancaditalia.it                  tvwachter@econ.ucla.edu

Francesco D'Amuri
Directorate General for Economics,
Statistics and Research
Bank of Italy
Via Nazionale 91
00184, Rome
Italy
francesco.damuri@bancaditalia.it
1       Introduction
The world is aging at a fast rate and by 2030 34 countries will be "super aged", with a share
of 65+ year-olds higher than 20% of the total population (Moody's Investor Service, 2010).
Germany, Japan and Italy have already met this definition. This shift in the age structure
of the population will tend to lower labor force participation and to increase the dependent
population, with potential negative consequences for public pension programs and economic
growth (Attanasio et al., 2007; Hansen, 1939; Storesletten, 2000; Summers, 2013).
    Against this background, in the last decades governments have tried to increase the
labor force participation of older individuals, often by raising the statutory retirement age
(OECD, 2015). A much discussed and studied potential side-effect of these policies is that
older workers may crowd out younger cohorts in the labor market (e.g., Gruber and Wise
(2010); Maestas et al. (2016)). Much less is known about the impact of these policies on
the economic outcomes and choices of businesses. On the one hand, greater presence of
older workers may hamper firms' productivity and future growth if older workers are less
innovative or less willing to take risks than younger ones (e.g., Engbom (2019)). On the other
hand, older workers have substantial job experience,1 and an increasing number of studies
suggests that departures of senior colleagues may be detrimental to co-worker productivity
(e.g., Jaeger and Heining (2020), Schivardi and Sauvagnat (2020)). Moreover, the aging
of the labor force has been associated with increases of productivity-enhancing automation
at the industry level (Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018)), and hence firms may benefit from
increased employment of experienced older workers.
    This paper investigates these issues by estimating the causal effects of an exogenous
increase in the share of older workers on firms' input levels, wages, value added, capital,
and labor productivity. We exploit a sharp and unexpected pension reform entering into
force in Italy in 2012 and use unique matched employer-employee and firm balance-sheet
data to study its effects. A key feature of our data is the availability of complete pension
contribution histories for all workers in our sample of firms. This allows us to calculate for
each employer how many of its older employees experienced an unexpected rise in retirement
age due to the unanticipated reform. To obtain complete balance sheet information and
to ensure a precise measure of this shock, we focus on firms with at least 50 employees at
baseline in our main analysis.
    1
    The canonical human capital model predicts that human capital increases over the life cycle (e.g., Becker
(1964); Ben-Porath (1967)), and a large number of empirical studies estimate that skills increase with age,
be it general skills (e.g., Bowlus and Robinson (2012)) or skills that are specific to industry, occupation, or
employer (e.g., Gathmann and Sch¨   onberg (2010); Neal (1995); Parent (2000); Poletaev and Robinson (2008);
Topel (1990)).



                                                      2
    Based on these data, our analysis proceeds in four steps. We begin by showing that, in
our setting, most older workers retire as soon as they are eligible for a public pension, such
that the pension reform led to unanticipated increases in the number of older employees
for participating employers. We instrument the change in employment due to older workers
with the unexpected change due to the reform in the share of older workers eligible to retire.
To benchmark our results to the literature, we then study the impact of such unexpected
rise in the share of older workers on hiring and separations of younger and middle aged
workers. Our main results consist in the analysis of the effect of older workers' employment
on a range of firm economic outcomes, including value added, investment, and labor costs.
Finally, while our main results pertain to mid-size to larger firms in the manufacturing and
services sector, we extend our analysis to the universe of firms of all sizes and in all sectors of
the economy, except agriculture. For this large data set we do not have the full information
on individual working histories necessary to simulate pension eligibility, and so we use it for
robustness checks only.
    The paper has three key findings. First, we find that an exogenous 10% increase in
the number of older workers implies a 1.8% increase in the number of young workers, and
a 1.3% increase for middle aged, sustained over three years. Hence, older and younger
workers seem to be complements in the firms we study. Second, while total labor costs and
value added also increase, a key finding is that this occurs proportional to employment, i.e.,
labor costs per worker and value added per worker are unaffected. Therefore, the reform
led to an expansion in output and employment in affected firms at constant average labor
cost and average labor productivity. Finally, we do not detect any significant effect of an
increase in the number of older workers on wages (both on average and by age group). While
this may be because the Italian institutional setting features rather rigid wages, this would
only enhance potential negative consequences if older workers were to represent a burden to
the firm. Since our identification strategy relies on the exogenous variation of employment
of older (55+) employees across otherwise identical firms, it does not allow us to detect
economy-wide changes in the wage. To circumvent this problem, we analyzed the change
in employment and mean wages by age over time. While this shows the reform led to clear
shifts in employment rates among older workers, we find no reduction in wages for those
nearing retirement.
    Our results provide evidence for the presence of complementarity between workers of
different age classes. The fact that employment and value added increase at constant labor
productivity suggests that firms are able to absorb older workers without difficulties, at least
in the short term. These findings are hard to reconcile with the notion that additional older
workers are a burden on firms. Instead, they appear to be more consistent with the view that


                                                3
older workers have skills and other attributes coveted by firms that may be difficult to replace
in the labour market, as suggested by a large empirical literature on skill-accumulation in
labor economics, and in line with recent related work on frictions in hiring (Jaeger and
Heining, 2020). Certainly, it does not appear that an increase in older workers at the firm
level is a barrier to investment or lowers labor productivity, consistent with findings in
Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018) that older workers in the U.S. appear to be complements to
technologies and automation.
    This paper is related to several strands of prior literature. Chiefly, our paper contributes
to a small but growing number of microeconomic studies of the effect of older workers'
employment on firms outcomes. A key value added of our work to this emerging literature
is to study the causal effect of firm-specific quasi-experimental increases in employment
of older workers on a range of firm-level economic outcomes. We thereby complement
panel-based estimates that do not find a negative relationship between firm-level older
workers' employment changes and firm outcomes, and cross-sectional estimates that do.2
    A related macroeconomic literature studying the relationship between older workers'
employment and economic outcomes at the country, state, and industry level provides
important findings complementary to ours. Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018) find that, in
industries with more opportunities for automation, an increasing share of older workers
leads to productivity increases. In their model it is the relative decline in older relative
to middle-aged and younger workers that triggers automation, consistent with our finding
that an increasing share of highly experienced older workers is absorbed at constant labor
productivity and unit labor costs.3 Engbom (2019) finds that labor force aging in the last 30
years among US states lowered worker and firm dynamism with ultimately negative effects
on economic growth.4 While our approach is designed to exclude confounding factors that
are more difficult to control for in a macroeconomic setting, we focus on at most three years
after the reform and cannot capture general equilibrium effects. Yet, our results underscore
that frictions in the hiring of older workers, likely explained by availability of pension benefits
and lack of worker mobility, can be costly for employers.
   2
     Cross sectional analyses find that the presence of older workers tends to be negatively associated with
estimates of firm productivity (Haltiwanger et al., 1999; Lallemand and Rycx, 2009; Mahlberg et al., 2009).
Nevertheless, such a negative relationship is not found in studies using panel data (Daveri and Maliranta,
2007; G¨obel and Zwick, 2012; Mahlberg et al., 2013; Malmberg et al., 2008) or in more structural approaches
(Dostie, 2011). See Table A1 of the Appendix for a schematic review of the literature on the effects of aging
workforce on firm outcomes.
   3
     A similar mechanism could also explain findings in Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017) that the effect of
population aging on economic growth across countries appears to be zero or positive rather than negative.
   4
     Feyrer (2007) uses a large panel of countries and shows that increases in the proportion of workers aged
40-49 are associated with productivity growth, while those in younger (15-39 year olds) and older (50-59 and
60+) cohorts have negative effects.



                                                     4
    Our findings are consistent with a large empirical literature in labor economics that has
documented increasing age-experience profiles in skills that are both general and specific
to the occupation, industry, or employer. Recently, an increasing number of studies have
documented the effect of a loss of co-workers, and in particular of a senior team leader, on
worker productivity. Jaeger and Heining (2020), Isen (2013) and Schivardi and Sauvagnat
(2020) investigate the effect of death of a co-worker on worker and firm outcomes. Other
papers study death of inventors (Jaravel et al., 2018), primary investigators (Azoulay et al.,
2010), or the departure of professors (Waldinger, 2012). Our paper extends this literature
by analyzing the effect of an increase of senior colleagues on firms' outcomes. We are aided
by the fact that we study the effect of a change in employment of a group of workers, not a
single individual, and hence may be more able to detect firm-level impacts.5
    A paper on worker-level outcomes related to ours is Bianchi et al. (2020), who study
the effect of the same reform we analyze on workers' careers within firm. They find that
the rise in older workers leads to a reduction in wage growth for workers not in retirement
age.6 While our methodologies differ, our results are compatible with their findings. The
existence of frictions preventing the hiring of older workers that is needed to explain our
findings implies a retirement would lead to an internal promotion, which is what they find.
Our findings on firm-level outcomes suggest that these freshly promoted workers are not as
valuable to the firm as the older workers they replace.7
    Our paper is also related to a substantial literature studying the effect of older workers'
employment on younger workers' job opportunities at the macro and micro level. Studies
exploiting macroeconomic variation typically do not find a negative correlation between
older and younger workers' employment.8 Recent microeconomic studies based on pension
reforms find mixed evidence of the effect of delaying older workers retirement on younger
workers' employment outcomes. For example, Martins et al. (2009) find negative effects for
women but not for men in Portugal. In the Netherlands, Hut (2019) finds a negative effect
of delays in retirement on younger workers employment concentrated in cash-constrained
firms. Studying the same reform as we do, but focusing on smaller to mid-size employers,
Boeri et al. (2017) find a negative effect of a firm's growth in the number of older workers on
    5
      In contrast, other papers using shifts in employment by groups of workers typically focus on worker
outcomes, not firm outcomes, such as studies of the effect of job losses during group or mass layoffs.
    6
      In another analysis of a positive employment shock, Doran et al. (2015) find that firms that win an H-1B
visa in a lottery and hire an H-1B worker moderately reduce the employment of other workers at the firm.
    7
      We compare our methodologies and results in more detail in our robustness section.
    8
      Studies working at the macro level do not detect any negative trade-off between the employment rates
of older and younger cohorts (Gruber and Wise, 2010; Maestas et al., 2016; Tommasino and Zizza, 2015),
that - if any - is restricted to periods of economic downturns (Bertoni and Brunello, 2020); some negative
effects are found on young workers' occupations and wages (Mohnen, 2019).



                                                      5
employment of younger workers. After an extensive robustness analysis, we conclude that the
difference in results is likely to be due to the fact that our main measure of the shock relates
the number older workers' unexpectedly postponing retirement to total employment of the
firm rather than to the pre-existing stock of older workers. We argue that total employment
better captures the economic impact of the reform on businesses.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews predictions from
theory; Section 3 presents the data, and Section 4 describes the Italian pension reform that
we exploit in the empirical analysis. Sections 5 and 6 discuss the identification strategy and
present main (static and dynamic) results. Section 7 provides further robustness checks.
Section 8 concludes.


2       Effects of pension reforms on firm outcomes
This section briefly reviews the predictions for the effect of a pension-induced reduction in the
retirement rate of older workers on the main outcomes of interest: the employment of older
and younger workers, wages, investment, value added, labor productivity, and profitability of
firms. We begin with a frictionless, competitive, benchmark and then move to more realistic
scenarios frequently considered in the context of older workers, such as rigid wages and firing
costs. We conclude that, although theories based on generic production functions are very
flexible, a model in which older workers have firm-specific or other hard-to-hire-for skills is
a good candidate to explain our findings.
    The empirical literature has found, and we confirm, that pension reforms have a strong
effect on older workers' employment choices due to financial incentives and social norms,
among others.9 An increase in the statutory retirement age thus reduces the quit rate of
older workers. In the following discussion we assume this is an exogenous shock to the firm.
In the empirical analysis, we will turn to our instrumental variable strategy. In what follows,
we also clarify whether the empirical strategy is affected by the underlying market structure.

Competitive Case

Assume as a benchmark case that older workers' skills are available on the market at going
wages, that there are no firm-specific skills or firing costs, and that labor markets are perfectly
competitive. Hence, in every period firms can freely choose the age composition of their
workforce. The production function combines capital and labor, where labor is a composite
of old and young workers. In this case, in the aftermath of an increase in the statutory
    9
    E.g., Cribb et al. (2016); Lalive et al. (2017); Manoli and Weber (2016); Mastrobuoni (2009); Staubli
and Zweim¨ uller (2013).


                                                   6
retirement age, wages of older workers fall and they remain fully employed. This increase in
the employment of older workers affects utilization and prices of younger workers and capital
depending on whether they are substitutes or complements in production with older workers.
Firms' profits are unaffected since factor prices equal their marginal products. In typical
cases, there will be an increase in total value added.10 Finally, under standard assumptions
of decreasing or constant returns to scale, average labour productivity would be expected to
fall.
    Since in this benchmark case firms are free to choose the optimal levels of employment, a
reform changing the age of pension eligibility does not necessarily affect firms' employment
of older workers. As a result, the pension reform is a market-wide shock. Firms remain on
their labor demand curves, and their employment choices depend on the respective relative
marginal products. In this case, our instrumental variable approach still provides exogenous
variation between firms in the number of older workers losing pension eligibility. However,
conditional on the stock of older workers prior to the reform, in the completely frictionless
case the change in eligibility will be uncorrelated with the new stock of older workers at the
firm after the reform. In the empirical part, we will assess this prediction directly by looking
at the estimated coefficient on our instrument in the first stage equation.

Case of Wage Rigidities and Firing Costs

In the presence of implicit or explicit long-term contracts and high seniority, often wages are
deemed downwardly rigid and the actual or reputational costs of firing older employees can
be high. In this scenario, raising the statutory retirement age leads to a direct firm-level
shock - i.e., the pension reform increases the stock of older workers employed at the firm
without a corresponding reduction in wages. In this case, the firm will optimize profits
by adjusting the level of other inputs.11 This adjustment again depends on the degree of
complementarity of these inputs with older workers and on the diminishing marginal product
of aggregate labor. When complementarities prevail over the reduction in the marginal
product of labor, the firm's employment of younger workers goes up and total firm size
and overall production increase.12 Only if older and younger workers are perfect substitutes
  10
     Unless, for example, the reduction in the marginal product of other inputs offsets the increase in
production from additional older workers.
  11
     If firms face small or moderate adjustment costs, they can restore the optimum by firing older workers,
leaving unchanged other input quantities with no effect on value added. As in the frictionless benchmark,
in this case the pension reform may not directly affect firms employment of older workers conditional on the
existing stock. If young and old workers are perfect substitutes, the firm could instead keep some of their
older workers and reduce hiring or increase firing of younger workers as well.
  12
     If the production function has constant returns to scale, only the presence of complementarities between
young and old workers drives the effects on other inputs of an increased number of old employees.



                                                     7
the firm reduces employment of younger workers and does not change the overall level of
employment and production. The effect on profits is ambiguous, but is likely to be negative
if firms were at an optimum before the reform.13 Similarly, from an optimum, labor costs
per worker would be expected to increase, and average labor productivity would be expected
to fall.

Case of Specific Skills

It may be that older workers' skills are scarce in the labor market, for example if skills are
firm-specific or if older workers are hard to replace because of frictions.14 An increasing
number of studies reports evidence that higher-tenured workers are indeed hard to replace
(e.g., Azoulay et al. (2010); Jaeger and Heining (2020); Isen (2013); Schivardi and Sauvagnat
(2020); Waldinger (2012)). The retirement rate represents the depreciation rate of this
stock of hard-to-replace human capital. By raising the amount of high-skilled older workers
and reducing the short-run costs or constraint of obtaining these skills, an increase in the
statutory retirement age thus represents a gain for the firm, rather than an inconvenience or
a cost. This positive shock leads to an increase in total employment, value added, and profits.
The employment of younger workers increases, whereas the response in capital depends on
the degree of complementarity with the labor input. Output per worker will not decrease,
and may increase, depending on the degree of complementarity between workers of different
age.15
    These initial adjustment patterns could change in the long run. In the context of
firm-specific training, consider a turnover model in which young/inexperienced workers are
hired to replace old/experienced workers who retire in the next period. The steady state
property of the model implies a negative trade-off between young and old workers: the
number of young workers hired needs to be equal to the number of old workers who retire.16
  13
     Applying the Envelope theorem, the effect on firm's profit depends on the difference between the marginal
product of older workers (given the other input quantities at the new optimal level) and older workers' wages.
Diminishing marginal productivity would imply a negative effect, while complementarity with other inputs
can lead to a positive effect. The presence of deferred compensation contracts for older workers would
reinforce the negative effect of the pension reform on profits.
  14
     Human capital theory predicts that older workers have on average higher skills (Becker, 1962;
Ben-Porath, 1967; Lazear, 2009); such result has been confirmed by a large empirical literature in labor
economics analyzing general (e.g., Bowlus and Robinson (2012)), industry-specific (e.g., Neal (1995)),
occupation-specific (e.g., Parent (2000); Poletaev and Robinson (2008); Gathmann and Sch¨      onberg (2010)),
or firm-specific skills (e.g, Topel (1990)).
  15
     General hiring/search costs on the employer's side (recruiting, opening of a vacancy, etc.) could be
present for all age classes. Retaining older, high-tenured workers would cut general recruitment costs with
positive effects on profits. However, it seems implausible that this would lead to an increase in costly hiring
of younger workers and an expansion in production if hiring costs had not been particularly high for older
workers.
  16
     A firm could try to induce older workers to work longer through offering higher wages. Once eligible

                                                      8
In this case, a permanent reduction in the retirement rate would tend to lower the need to
hire and train younger workers. However, in the presence of high turnover costs and high
quit rates, the firm may still find it optimal to expand total employment in response to the
lower retirement rate. In this case, the rise in firm's total scale can lead to a larger number
of younger workers and an expansion in production over the long run as well.


3     Data and Sample
Analyzing the effects of an increase in the number of older workers on firm outcomes is
demanding in terms of data; in particular, we need information on the age-structure of the
workforce of each employer, typically not available in survey or administrative firm-level data.
We also need firm-level economic outcomes, which is typically not available in worker-level
data. In addition, for each employee we need their full earnings and work history to
infer pension eligibility. For the purpose of our analysis, we use a unique data set that
matches three different sources of data. The first one is the Bank of Italy's Survey on
Industrial and Services firms (INVIND).17 It is a panel of 4000 manufacturing and services
firms in the private non financial sector with 20+ employees (representative of 70% of
total sales in the Italian economy). The second source of data is the Social Security
administrative data set, provided by INPS ­ the Italian National Social Security Institute ­,
with full working histories, wages and main job-related socio-demographic characteristics of
all workers employed at least one day at INVIND firms during the 2005-2015 time interval.
In particular, all the needed information is available in order to retrieve the exact year in
which the individual is eligible for a public pension (that is, gender, age and years of paid
social security contributions); for a subset of workers, it is also possible to observe when the
individual actually claims the public pension.18 Third, we use CEBI (Centrale dei Bilanci),
which contains full balance sheet information for each firm in every year (total labor costs
and valued added, capital).
    We restrict the analysis to the years 2010-2014. The far reaching pension reform used as
an exogenous shifter for older workers' labor supply entered into force in January 2012. We
are able to follow our firms for two years before and two years after the year of the reform.
Another pension reform took place in 2008 that could potentially confound the results, while
a major labor market reform, coupled with hiring incentives, was legislated in 2015 (Sestito
for a pension benefit, this could be very costly, due to increasing marginal tax rates as pension constitutes
taxable income. In steady state the cost of training a younger worker will equate the cost of retaining an
older worker.
  17
     See Bank of Italy (2014) for a description of this data source.
  18
     This information is only available for workers born in 24 birth dates a year.


                                                     9
and Viviano, 2018).
    We restrict the analysis to firms that employed at least 50 employees in the year they
first appeared in the sample; we implement this restriction for three reasons: i) balance sheet
information can be patchy and variables can show very volatile dynamics in smaller firms,
ii) measures of the age shares of employment crucial for our identification strategy are also
likely to be volatile for smaller firms, and iii) since the INVIND survey covers 20+ firms
only, there could be non random attrition of shrinking firms as they cross the 20 employees
threshold from above and of course such phenomenon is more likely to happen in smaller
firms (D'Aurizio and Papadia, 2019). We statistically test whether the reform we study had
an impact on firm exit and entry into the sample.
    Finally, we restrict the data to firms sampled in each of the five years and do not have
missing values on variables such as capital, labor costs and value added. Our final sample is
a balanced panel of 1,025 firms/year for a total of 5,125 observations. Descriptive statistics
for the main variables are reported in Table A2 of the Appendix.19
    In a robustness check, we also replicate the main analysis on a data set covering the
whole population of Italian firms who paid social security contributions for at least one
day in a given year between 2010 and 2014 (1.5 million firms). For this large matched
employer-employee dataset we do not have the information needed to calculate the minimum
age at which individuals can claim a public pension. For this reason and the reasons
mentioned above we use it mainly as a robustness check.


4      The Italian pension system and the 2011 reform
In the last decades the Italian pension system has been revised through a long term reform
process aimed at improving its financial sustainability. In our empirical analysis we take
advantage of the pension reform legislated at the end of 2011 and that unexpectedly increased
the minimum legal requirements for public pension eligibility (Law 214/2011, known as
"Fornero Reform"). The reform passed at the end of 2011 (December 22) during the sovereign
debt crisis, and was effective from January 1, 2012. The reform was completely unexpected,
as confirmed by the incidence over time of google searches for "pension reform" that had an
all-time peak just in December 2011 (Figure A1 of the Appendix).
    As in many OECD countries, the Italian pension system is characterized by a large first
pillar consisting of public pension funds and by almost negligible second and third pillars
  19
    All estimates presented in the paper are unweighted, but the inclusion of survey weights would not
alter the results in any way. We also carried out the analysis on a balanced or unbalanced sample for main
outcomes and got similar results. Results for the weighted regressions are not reported here but are available
upon request.


                                                     10
(respectively, compulsory and voluntary20 pension funds). Two types of work-related pension
benefits are available and give access to full retirement: old age and seniority schemes.
Eligibility for the first one is mainly based on workers' age. For the second, it mainly
depends on the number of accrued years of social security contribution.
    The substantial changes in the eligibility rules introduced by the reform for both the
seniority and the old age pensions are summarized in Figure 1. Such changes implied an
overnight increase in the average Minimum Retirement Age (MRA) of about 3 years for
individuals aged 55 and more. We provide full details of these changes in Section A.1 of the
Appendix. The new rules in place since 2012 allowed workers who were already eligible for
a public pension when the bill passed to retire under the pre-reform rules, without losing
their eligibility.


4.1     Simulation of pension eligibility and Minimum Retirement
        Age
The sudden pension reform led to unexpected changes in public pension eligibility and a
reduction in the retirement rate. Workers were affected differently depending on their age,
gender and years of accrued social security contributions. The policy change also increased
the number of older workers more in some firms than others, partly because of differences
in the number of older workers near retirement age. In addition, given eligibility can also
derive from seniority and gender, firms experienced differential increases in older workers'
employment even for a given age structure.
    In order to reconstruct the share of eligible workers at the firm level and its unexpected
changes over time we follow several steps. First, we need to recover the minimum age at
which an individual has access to pension benefits. We call it Minimum Retirement Age
(MRA) ­ the minimum between the retirement age for old age and seniority pension (see
Section 4 and Figure 2, bottom panel) ­ and it is computed for all individuals in each
year, on the basis of three characteristics (age, gender, number of accrued years of social
security contribution) and according to two different sets of pension rules. First, the MRA
is computed according to pension rules in place at time t (M RAit |Lawt|t ); second, it is
determined on the basis of pension rules known at t - 1 for time t (M RAit |Lawt|t-1 ). Since
  20
     The legislative decree n. 252/2005, implemented in 2007, introduced an automatic enrolment mechanism
for voluntary pension funds: if an employee does not make an active choice after a six-month period (counting
from January 1, 2007 for old employees and from the hiring date for new employees), the severance payment
will automatically be assigned to an occupational pension plan (typically, the industry-wide occupational
plan). However, according to Covip (2018), in 2017 less than 30% of the Italian working population has
signed a contract with a private pension fund; however, private pension benefits are conditional on the
eligibility for a public pension.


                                                     11
the MRA is determined also by the number of accrued years of social security contribution
at the end of the individual working career, we assume that individuals in our sample will
accumulate years of contribution continuously from the year of observation onward.
    As a second step, we define workers' pension eligibility at t according to the pension rules
in place at time t, and the expected eligibility at time t based on the rules in place at time
t - 1:
                                        
                                        1 if age  M RA |Law ,
                                                it    it   t|t
                     ELIGit |Lawt|t   =                                                      (1)
                                        0 otherwise.

and                                     
                                        1 if age  M RA |Law
                                                it    it    t|t-1 ,
                   ELIGit |Lawt|t-1   =                                                      (2)
                                        0 otherwise.

    The dummies ELIGit |Lawt|t and ELIGit |Lawt|t-1 refer, for individual i, to eligibility in
t according to the pension rules in place at time t and t - 1, respectively.
    Once we have reconstructed actual and expected eligibility and the MRA at the individual
level, we can assess the magnitude of the changes that were introduced by the 2011 pension
reform at the aggregate level and across firms.
    Based on these definitions, our calculations show that the law had large effects on the
average retirement age. In the top panel of Figure 2, the dashed line identifies for each year
the share on total private sector employees of workers that in year t were expected to become
eligible to retire according to the law in place in year t - 1, while the solid one refers to the
share of individuals who actually became eligible in year t with the legislation in place at
the beginning of year t. Any divergence between the two is due to unexpected changes in
eligibility criteria between t - 1 and t. From the graph it is clear that no unexpected changes
take place in any year but in 2012 ­ the first year of implementation of the reform. In that
year, the share of workers who were expected to become eligible to retire was equal to 2.0%,
and it actually went down to 1.2%. In Figure 2, we also show the expected MRA at t given
the law in place in t - 1 and the actual simulated MRA for workers aged 55 or more; also
in this case the pattern is the same, apart from the large unexpected increase in the MRA
that takes place in 2012, equal on average to 3 additional years in order to reach eligibility.
    Looking at the aggregate level, such changes seem to have had a clear impact on the share
of 55+ workers employed in our sample of firms. In Figure 3, we show in dark grey the actual
shares of 55+ workers on total employment in our sample, and in light grey the projected
evolution of such share based on the pre-2012 trend. While the data points overlap in 2010
and 2011, a wedge opens in 2012 and increases over time. In 2014, the actual share of 55+


                                               12
workers is slightly below 15 p.p., almost 3 p.p. higher than the level projected according to
the pre-2012 trend.


5     Empirical Approach
5.1     First Differences Ordinary Least Squares Estimates
The goal of the analysis is to measure the causal effect of an increase in the employment of
older workers on firm outcomes. We start by exploiting the panel structure of our data and
estimating the following specification in first differences:

                                      OLDj,t - OLDj,t-1
                      yj,t =  +                                 + Xj,2010 + dst +      j,t               (3)
                                        EM P Lj,t-1

                                                                                              OLD
                                                                                               j,t  -OLD  j,t-1
where j and t respectively identify firm and year and yj,t is a set of firm outcomes; EM           P Lj,t-1
is the change in older workers employment (those aged at least 55) as a share of firm total
employment in t - 1; dst are sector (manufacturing or services) by year fixed effects and Xj,2010
are the shares of middle aged (35-54) workers and old (55+) workers on total employment
in the initial year of the analysis (2010).
    We look at a range of different outcomes at the firm level: (a) net change in the number
of workers aged 15-34 and 35-54 (equal to total hiring minus total separations); (b) gross
changes in hiring and separations separately by temporary and permanent contracts (c) full
time equivalent wage for 15-34, 35-54 and 55+ age classes (d) firm total labor costs, value
added, capital, both total and in per worker terms. For changes in employment (a), the
                                           yj,t -yj,t-1
dependent variable yj,t is defined as EM        P Lj,t-1
                                                         ; for variables in (b) and (c), the dependent
                              yj,t -yj,t-1
variable yj,t is defined as yj,t-1 .
    We choose to carry out all our estimates in first-differences since in this way we control
for time-invariant unobservable characteristics. To also control for firm-specific trends, in
our main results we also add firm fixed effects fj to the first-difference estimates. Year fixed
effects absorb a common non-linear trend.
    Even though they control for time invariant unobserved heterogeneity and possible linear
firm-specific trends, estimates based on equation 3 may still be biased if net employment
variation of older workers is endogenous to firms' demand conditions. First, one would expect
that older workers more likely keep on working rather than retire if employed in a booming
firm to enjoy higher future wages. Second, booming firms might retain more workers of any
age class, invest more, and produce more. This would lead  in equation 3 to be upward
biased reflecting, for example, a spurious positive correlation between a rise in older workers'


                                                    13
employment and a rise in value added.
    In our empirical analysis, we exploit the panel nature of our data to directly assess
whether there are pre-existing trends that are correlated with the change in the fraction of
older workers around the reform (Section 7.1). Since we do not find evidence of such trends,
we believe our OLS models in itself are informative. In addition, in our main estimation
strategy we use the exogenous variation introduced by the reform to implement instrumental
variable estimates.


5.2     First Differences Instrumental Variable Estimates
The unexpected change in the minimum retirement age allows us to overcome these endogeneity
issues by providing an exogenous shifter in the supply of older workers. This is because in
Italy, during this period, pension wealth is maximized when claiming the public pension as
soon as eligibility is reached. Hence, most workers claim at the MRA: unexpected changes in
the pension rules thus provide exogenous variation in older workers employment in otherwise
identical firms.
    We test the validity of these assumptions by estimating the probability to claim pension
benefits ­ and of being employed ­ as a function of the number of years to or from the time
in which the individual actually reaches pension eligibility.
    We estimate the following individual-level event-study model:

                                                M
                                  Yit =  +           k Dit
                                                        k
                                                           + Xit +       i                               (4)
                                              k-m


where Y is equal to one if the individual i claims a public pension (is employed) at time t,21
X are individual-level characteristics (age, gender, years of social security contributions),
  k
Dit  is an indicator for the k-th period before or after eligibility is reached (from m periods
before to M periods after eligibility onset (k = 0)). The coefficient k captures the change
in claiming/employment rate for each k .
    In Figure 4 we show the point estimates for k from regression 4. The clear discontinuity
in the year in which eligibility is reached shows that most individuals claim a public pension
as soon as they are entitled to it (top panel) and stop working (bottom panel). Indeed, there
is an almost deterministic link between pension eligibility and retirement (confirming the
results of Battistin et al. (2009)).

  21
     Here, we adopt the loosest possible definition of employment, defining individuals as employed in year t
if they had worked at least for one day in that year.



                                                     14
    This result is not surprising since for all workers who started working before 1993
(including those directly affected by the reform we study) the public pension is a Defined
Benefit plan; the transfer a retiree receives is an approximately fixed percentage of the
last ten years' average wage. Once eligibility is reached, postponing the claim results in a
negligible increase in the amount of the transfer received (through seniority related wage
growth) that does not make up for the forgone transfers. The private pension system plays
a minimal role.22

5.2.1    First stage

We use the exogenous variation in MRA provided by the reform to implement an instrumental
variable (IV) strategy. We use the increase in the share of older workers that was unexpected
by the firm as an instrument for the potentially endogenous change in the share of older
workers in equation 3. To do so, we need to simulate eligibility for pension benefits for
all older workers in a given firm, something that is typically hard to do since it requires
knowledge of complete working histories in order to reconstruct the number of years of
social security contributions. However, our data allow us to simulate eligibility under the
old and the new law.
    Once eligibility is simulated at the individual level, we calculate the share of eligible
workers losing pension eligibility at the firm level. We focus on year 2012, since it is the
only year in which the pension rules changed unexpectedly in the years we study. We show
in Figure 5 the distribution of the share of a firm's total workforce of 55+ workers losing
eligibility because of the reform we study. In other words, we plot the distribution of our
instrumental variable

                                ELIGj,2012 |Law2011 - ELIGj,2012 |Law2012
                        zjt =                                             .
                                              EM P Lj,2011
    The instrument displays a large amount of variation across firms. A non-negligible
fraction of firms is unaffected by the policy change (with share zero). Among firms experiencing
a reduction in the fraction of workers eligible to retire, the reduction in the fraction eligible
is typically 3 per cent among the total workforce or less (see Figure 5).
    To get a sense of the variation implied by the instrument, it is useful to decompose it
into the share of workers age 55+ employed at the firm in 2011 that lose eligibility, and the
share of workers 55+ among a firms' total employment in the same year. Figure 3 shows
that the average share of older workers in 2011, the year prior to the reform, was about 10%
  22
   In 2015 24.2% of workers were enrolled in private pension funds; private pension benefits are usually
small compared to the public ones.



                                                  15
(see also Appendix Table A2). As the share on total employment of 55+ workers who lost
public pension eligibility in 2011 was on average equal to 0.7%, 7% of 55+ employees lost
eligibility due the reform in that year.23 Going beyond the means, Figure 5 implies at most
30% of a firm's employees above age 55 experienced a reduction in pension eligibility (3 p.p.
on total employment).
    Turning to the first stage, we estimate the following regression for years 2011-2012:

            OLDj,2012 - OLDj,2011    ELIGj,2012 |Law2011 - ELIGj,2012 |Law2012
                                  =+
               EM P Lj,2011                        EM P Lj,2011
                                 ELIGj,2012 |Law2011
                            +                        + Xj,2010 + ds +        j,2012           (5)
                                   EM P Lj,2011
         ELIG      |Lawy
where EMj,    2012
             P Lj,2011
                         is the fraction of eligible workers in 2012 according to the law in place
in year t with t = 2011, 2012. We add sector fixed effects ds and the share of 55+ and 35-54
y.o. workers in 2010 (Xj,2010 ) as control variables.
    The exclusion restriction implies that, conditional on the control variables, the change
in the share of workers who are eligible to retire in 2012, as determined by the unexpected
change in the law taking place between 2011 and 2012,24 changes the fraction of older workers
employed at the firm but is not correlated with unobserved firm-level demand shocks. The
key identifying assumption is supported by the following: i) eligibility is determined by the
interaction between pre-determined characteristics of the workers (some of them difficult to
observe with precision by firms, such as years of paid social security contributions) and rules
that changed significantly and in unexpected ways (see Section 4 and Tables A3 and A4 in
the Appendix), ii) individuals in our sample retire as soon as they reach eligibility, given
the incentives provided by the institutional setting (as discussed in Section 4 and shown in
Figure 4).
    Table 1 reports the results of our first-stage regression. The results imply that the pension
reform had a proportionally stronger effect on the employment of older workers among
employers that experienced a larger reduction in pension eligibility among its workforce. At
the firm level, a one percentage point unexpected decrease in the share of eligible workers
in employment is associated to a 0.56 percentage point increase in total employment due
to 55+ workers (the estimate is statistically significant at the 1% level). The F-test of
excluded instruments equal to 32 signals the instrument has power. Since the average share
of older workers prior to the reform was about 10% (Appendix Table A2), this implies that
a firm experiencing a 0.7 percentage point decrease in retirement eligibility among all of
 23
      I.e., (ELIGj,2012 |Law2011 - ELIGj,2012 |Law2012 )/OLDj,2011 = zjt /0.10.
 24
      See Table A3 and the Appendix for details of changes in pension legislation.



                                                      16
its employees (the average decrease in eligibility in our sample, equivalent to 7 out of a
100 workers age 55+ losing access to a public pension), experiences an increase in total
employment due to older workers equal to 0.4 percentage points (0.7*0.56, the latter being
the first stage coefficient).
    We conduct two additional tests in order to assess the validity of our instrument. First,
in Figure A2 of the Appendix we report on the X axis - for each quintile of the respective
distribution - the averages of the residuals of a regression of the instrument on the controls,
and on the Y axis the corresponding averages for a regression of the instrumented variable
on the controls. The relationship between the instrumented variable and the instrument is
monotonic and quite stable across the firm-level distribution of changes in eligibility.
    Second, we run a set of placebo estimates in which we regress the instrumented 55+
employment change taking place in 2012 on the cumulative changes of actual 55+ employment
taking place between 2010 and 2014. Figure 6 shows that in the two years preceding the
reform (2010 and 2011), changes in 55+ employment at the firm level were uncorrelated
with the instrumented 55+ employment change taking place in 2012. After 2012, estimated
coefficient values remain around one, signalling that the increase in 55+ employment taking
place when the reform entered into effect was still visible two years after its inception. This
is consistent with the fact that the average delay in MRA implied by the reform for 55+
workers was equal to three years (e.g., see the second panel of Figure 2).


6     Results
Throughout our main empirical analysis, we discuss both our OLS and IV estimates based
on panel data. While the IV results are our preferred estimates, we view the OLS estimates
as providing helpful corroborating information for the following reasons: we find no evidence
of firm-specific trends either when including firm fixed effects or in our dynamic analysis
(Subsection 7.1); in many cases our OLS and IV estimates are qualitatively very similar
and are not statistically different from each other; the IV estimates tend to have a higher
variance since, by design, they use much less variation than the panel data.


6.1    Employment and wages
We find that an exogenous increase in employment of older workers at the firm leads to
an increase in employment in other age classes as well. This occurs through an increase in
hiring and a (somewhat smaller) decrease in separations. The net increase in employment is
driven by increases in both fixed-term and permanent positions for younger (15-34) workers


                                              17
and by a rise in permanent positions for the middle-aged (35-54). Finally, we find no clear
impact on wages for workers of any age.
    We start by looking at the results for net employment (Table 2). We find a strong
and positive association between variation in 55+ employment and employment of young
(15-34) and middle-aged (35-54) workers. These results hold when estimating equation 3 both
without and with firm fixed effects, and are nearly identical across these two specifications;
results are also very similar when looking at the balanced or unbalanced panel (Column
1-2 and 3-4, respectively), signalling our findings are not affected by sample selection over
time.25
    We also restrict the analysis only to employment changes taking place between the reform
year (2012) and the previous one, which allows us to directly compare OLS with IV estimates
(bottom panel of Table 2). For 15-34 workers the coefficient estimate remains very similar
in 2011-12 for both OLS and IV estimates; for relatively more mature (35-54) workers, point
estimates do not move when looking at the single-year first difference OLS, but decrease by
a half when considering the corresponding IV results.26
    Taking the IV estimates as our favorite coefficient estimates, a 1 percentage point increase
in total employment due to 55+ workers would imply a 0.5 percentage point increase in the
share of younger workers. The implied elasticities between old and youth (middle aged)
employment are equal to 0.018 (and 0.013), meaning that a 10% increase in the number
of older workers due to the reform would imply a 1.8% (1.3%) increase in the number of
young (middle aged) workers.27 With respect to typical employment shares in our balanced
panel (see Appendix Table A2), an increase in the share of older workers by one standard
deviation (7.5 percentage points) would lead to a rise in the youth share by 30% of its
standard deviation (13.3 percentage points).
    Tables 3 and 4 analyze more in detail the dynamics behind the net employment changes
we find in terms of hiring and separations margins and changes in permanent and fixed term
contracts. The positive employment variation for 15-34 workers is mostly attributable to an
increase in the hiring rate (Column 1, Table 3), while separations move little (Column 3).
  25
      The positive relationship between firm level-employment changes among 55+ aged workers and of workers
aged 15-34 is also apparent in non-parametric plots. We first separately regressed net employment changes
among 55+ and 15-34 y.o. on controls. Figure A3 of the Appendix shows, by quintiles of the residuals of 55+
variations, a connected scatterplot of the mean of 55+ and 15-34 variation residuals. A positive monotonic
relationship is apparent.
   26
      By the formula of a standard Hausman test, t = (bols - biv )/ iv 2 -  2 , the difference in the estimates
                                                                            ols
is statistically significantly different from zero.
   27
      The elasticities are obtained by multiplying the coefficient estimate by the inverse of the pre-existing
share of the specific age class in total employment. As we saw in Subsection 9, at the average share of older
workers in employment, a 10% increase in the number of older workers would correspond to a rise in 1% of
the share of older workers in employment due to the pension reform.


                                                      18
Looking at 35-54 workers, we find both an increase in hiring and a decrease in separations;
results are qualitatively similar across specifications, but the IV estimates are not statistically
different from zero.
     We also find that the contribution of temporary and permanent contracts in explaining
the net employment increases differ by age (Table 4). Overall, for 15-34 individuals a
substantial share of the increase in net employment occurs via a rise in fixed-term contracts;
in contrast, in response to a rise in the share of older workers, workers age 35-54 are
substantially more likely to be hired under a permanent contract. The magnitudes of the
point estimates of the OLS specifications and IV model vary somewhat, especially for the
middle aged, but the qualitative findings are similar across specifications.
     Moving on to w ages, Table 5 shows the impact of an increase in the share of workers age
55+ on year-on-year changes in Full Time Equivalent (FTE) daily wages.28 We find that
employment growth in the 55+ age class is associated with a decrease in FTE wage growth
concentrated in their own age class that is broadly similar across specifications (Column
3). The effect is not statistically different from zero for the IV estimate, our preferred
specification. Point estimates are close to zero and not statistically significant in the other
age classes for most specifications.29 We also replicated these findings using contractual
instead of gross wages, and find similar results.30
     Increases in employment coupled with no or small wage reductions can be rationalized by
the fact that, in the Italian institutional setting, wages tend to be rigid in the short run due
to the importance of collectively bargained national contracts setting wages for three years
in advance (see Adamopoulou et al. (2016)); moreover, should an increase in employment for
any of the three age classes imply an increase in their wages in the whole economy, we would
still fail to see them, given the fact that our identification strategy is based on variation
across firms and can only spot differential changes in wages at the firm level. Nevertheless,
   28
      The Full Time Equivalent wage is obtained as the ratio between the sum of wage payments received in
a given employment spell in a given year and the related days worked for full time workers; for part time
workers the days worked are made equivalent to the full time ones by dividing by the full to part time hours.
The denominator is thus based on contractual hours but the numerator also includes payments related to
overtime hours (not separately identified in our data).
   29
      Employment variations could entail a change in the observable characteristics in the three age brackets we
are considering here, resulting in a change in average wage growth that is just due to a changing composition
of the pool of workers. We thus run the same regression on a wage measure that is net of composition effects,
equal to the constant plus the residuals of a wage regression on gender, citizenship and the individual's exact
age measured in years (Table A5). Results are not affected by this adjustment for composition.
   30
      Using a different specification than we do, Bianchi et al. (2020) report reductions in middle-aged workers'
contractual wages in the aftermath of the reform among slower-growing, mid-size employers. When we
analyze event studies for wages for our sample of larger firms, we find a qualitatively similar though imprecise
reduction in wages for the middle aged. We return to comparing our approach to theirs in Section 7.3.




                                                       19
when looking at the wage-age gradient for the economy as a whole,31 we find little evidence
for relative wage adjustment (Figure A4 of the Appendix), and if anything an increase in
mature workers' wage, that could also be due to their changing composition due to the
pension reform.
    To investigate further, in Figure 7, top panel, we show - separately for men and women
- the average rate of exit from employment by age among all workers in the whole private
sector in the years before (2009-2011) and after the reform (2012-14). While - due to the
complex nature of pension eligibility - no single age is affected, one sees a clear increase in
the age of exit from employment. In contrast to the large changes in employment, when
we compare average FTE daily wages in the years before (2009-2011) and after the reform
year (2012-14), they barely changed for workers 50-59 (Figure 7, bottom panel). Within
each period we see a rapid decline in wages as workers retire, most likely due to selection.
The timing of this decline shifts with age, consistent with the increased retirement age. As
a result, if at all wages tend to increase for workers in the range of 60 to 65 years range.
However, given strong potential changes in the sample composition across ages as workers
retire, we do not interpret this as causal.



6.2       Firm outcomes
A key advantage of our setting is that it allows us to study firms' economic responses to a
rise in employment of older workers. Table 6 shows our findings in levels and Table 7 shows
effects in per worker terms. We find that a rise in the share of older workers leads to an
increase in value added and labor costs at constant average labor productivity or costs per
worker.
    To set the stage for this analysis, we first confirm that, based on the unbalanced panel
including all INVIND firms, an increase in employment due to 55+ workers does not have
any impact on the probability of firms' exit from and entry into the sample (Table A6 of the
Appendix).32
    Based on the balance sheet variables for our balanced sample (Table 6), we focus first
on two measures of total labor costs. One is reconstructed from the individual workers'
administrative records (INPS) and is equal to the total gross salary paid by the firm (total
FTE days worked times Average FTE wage, Column 2); the other one is coming directly
from the balance sheet data (Column 3). The two measures differ because labor costs from
the balance sheet include expenses related to perks and benefits paid to workers and social
 31
      We use a 7 per cent simple random sample for the private non-agricultural sector dependent employment.
 32
      Additional analysis on firms' exit, for the population of Italian firms is reported in Table A8.


                                                     20
security contributions paid by the firm, which are not included in the INPS data. Considering
both measures, we find that an increase in the share of employment of older workers increased
labor costs, an effect estimated to be statistically significantly different from zero in all of
our specifications. The same is true for the effect of an increase in the share of older workers
on total value added.
    Our different OLS estimates are again very similar, while both the IV point coefficients
and the standard errors increase. By design, IV estimates reduce the amount of variation
used with respect to the corresponding OLS estimates, so an increase in the variance is
to be expected. Given IV and OLS estimates are not statistically different from zero, we
are careful in interpreting the differences in magnitudes. It is possible that the firms most
affected by the increase in the mandatory retirement age were most constrained in terms of
the labor supply of older workers, and hence experienced a larger increase in value added
and labor costs.
    Finally, all specifications indicate that a rise in the employment of 55+ workers tends
to raise capital investment. Only the panel data estimates are precisely estimated, while
results obtained using the 2011-12 years only confirm this pattern but the estimates are not
statistically significant from zero. It is likely that the unexpected shock taking place in 2012
and due to the unanticipated pension reform did not have a strong immediate impact on
firms' investment plans.
    Looking across the estimates, we find that - overall - the expansion in value added
associated to an increase in 55+ workers is at least as large as the rise in the associated
labor costs. Indeed unit labor costs, defined as the ratio between total labor costs and value
added at the firm level, remain unaffected.
    Table 7 analyzes the response of balance sheet variables in per-worker terms. Overall,
the effects of a rise in older workers' employment we find are substantially smaller and often
not statistically different from zero.
    The effects on labor costs per-worker are smaller compared to the ones on total labor
costs for all specifications, though point estimates are generally positive. Small increases are
plausible given that the share of workers with a relatively higher pay level increases. The
coefficients on value added per worker tend not to be precisely estimated, and differ across
specifications. There is no indication of a negative effect, and if at all the effect estimated
for the reform years is positive. Across specifications and time intervals, we find a negative
(albeit imprecisely estimated) effect on capital per-worker.
    Taken together, these results show that an increased presence of older workers at the
firm is associated with: i) an increase in employment in the other age classes, pointing to
complementarity of workers between different age groups and to the fact that mature workers


                                              21
might be endowed with skills that are hard to replace; ii) a null or slight negative impact on
wages of older workers themselves when employed in treated firms, iii) an increase in total
labor costs that is in line with- if not smaller than - the one in value added; iv) no negative
impact on average labor productivity, as measured by value added per worker.
   In the remaining sections, we probe the sensitivity of these results and find them to be
very robust.


7       Robustness
7.1       Dynamic Results
In this section we estimate the dynamic version of equation 3, by interacting the instrument
with year dummies.33 Since the reform was passed in December, we refer to the change with
respect to 2012 as its immediate impact (the same discussed in Section 6). We refer to years
2013 and 2014 as the first and second year after the reform. The coefficients on the models
estimated for the two years before the reform (2011 and 2010) should not be statistically
different from zero. This would confirm that the increase in the share of workers age 55+ due
to the reform was not correlated with changes in the dependent variable that were already
ongoing before the reform was introduced in 2012.
    When we analyze employment outcomes across age classes (Figure 8), we find no different
pre-existing trends and a jump in employment for younger and middle aged workers in the
year in which the reform was introduced. In the following two years, variations in 15-34 and
35-54 employment remain positive but not statistically significant at standard levels; this
means that the positive impact of an exogenous increase in 55+ employment on other age
classes that took place in 2012 brought to persistently higher levels of employment.
    As for main firm outcomes, no differential pre-existing trends before the reform is detected
(Figure 9). The significant increase in value added taking place in 2012 is larger than the
increments in total employment, that rises in line with total labor costs. In the two years
following the reform, the 2012 shock is not associated to additional changes in firm outcomes
dynamics, meaning that the increases witnessed in 2012 brought to new higher levels of value
added and labor costs. Finally, the level of total capital is not significantly impacted by
the reform in the 2010-14 interval. Overall, these results confirm that the firm is able to
increase production by taking advantage of the positive labor supply shock from a increase
in workers aged 55 or more without a rise in per worker labor costs or a decline in average
worker productivity.
 33
      First stage statistics are reported in table 1.


                                                        22
7.2       Heterogeneity
We consider several dimensions of heterogeneity across firms in order to shed light on the
mechanisms driving the results found and to test their robustness.
    In particular, we separate young from old firms, where firms are defined as young if their
share of 55+ workers was below the median (10%) in 2011 and old otherwise. Similarly we
define as small a firm whose size was below the median (170 employees) in 2011 and large
otherwise.
    Results of the IV estimates34 ­ reported in Table 8 ­ show that the main patterns found on
the whole sample are broadly confirmed in the subgroups. Even if the standard errors become
large as the number of observations shrinks in the subgroups, some interesting patterns
emerge: the positive effect on youth employment is larger in magnitude (but very imprecisely
estimated) in relatively younger firms. Also, the positive effect on employment seems to be
concentrated exclusively in relative larger firms, that are probably better able to adapt to an
unexpected increase in the presence of 55+ workers by exploiting their internal labor market
and expanding the scale of production.


7.3       An alternative shock measure
According to the results of this paper, an increase in older workers' presence in the firm can
be absorbed fairly well by ­ relatively large ­ Italian firms. A positive shock on the labor
supply of older workers determines ­ if anything ­ a reduction in their wages, and an increase
in employment levels for workers of other ages. Higher employment levels are matched
by an increase in value added. These results point to the presence of complementarity
between workers of different age and to the existence of specific human capital generating
replacement frictions such that reductions in the retirement flows affect firms' labor demand
and outcomes. Indeed, we do not find any negative impact on value added per worker of an
aging pool of employees.
The absence of negative employment effects on younger workers is in line with most of the
literature looking at the possible crowding out effects generated by the labor supply shocks
of specific segments of the population (female participation, migration).
Using similar data and exploiting the variation in older workers employment due to the
2012 reform, but focusing on smaller firms, two papers (Boeri et al. (2017) and Bovini and
Paradisi (2019), later subsumed in Bianchi et al. (2020)) do find a trade off between older
and younger workers in the short run. Both papers estimate the impact of the 2012 reform
in a DD setting at the firm level. In Boeri et al. (2017) the main treatment is equal to the
 34
      First stage statistics are reported in Table 1.


                                                        23
share of 55+ workers who had to postpone retirement over all 55+ employment; in Bianchi
et al. (2020), it is equal to the average number of years of minimum retirement age delay for
those individuals that, at the end of 2011, were at most 3 years far from being eligible to
receive a public pension (defined as Close To Retirement, CTR); the treatment is divided by
the number of individuals close to retirement. In both cases, the measure of the treatment
is standardized by some measure of the number of individuals that were at risk of being
treated. As such, the treatment only measures the intensity of the shock on a subgroup of
workers employed at the firm, but not how relevant such shock is compared to the whole
workforce employed at the firm.
    As a further robustness check for our main results, we carry out a last set of estimates,
that also take into account the number of years of unexpected pension delay and not only
the share of workers that lost eligibility in 2012. The IV estimates presented in Section 5.2
rely on the fact that, due to an unexpected reform taking place in 2012, a fraction of older
workers had to postpone their retirement from that year to a later time. Nevertheless, the
reform could have delayed the minimum retirement age by more than a year and also for
individuals who were not expected to retire in 2012 but in the near future. We thus present
additional results based on another measure of the shock implied by the reform, that is equal
to the number of years of retirement delay for those individuals that were expected to retire
in the near future, divided by the 2010 number of workers employed at the firm:35


                                     Y T R2012,i,j |Law2012 - i Y T R2012,i,j |Law2011
                    Tj2012 =     i
                                                                                                         (6)
                                                      EM P L2011,j
    The variable YTR identifies Years to Retirement for workers i either before or after the
reform. To calculate the average change we have to define which workers are deemed 'close'
to retirement. We calculated the measure for workers that before the reform had one to five
years left to reach their MRA.
    We thus estimate the following equation for year 2012-11:

                                yj,t =  + dst +   Tj2012 + Xj,2010 +          jt                         (7)

    where Tj2012 is the treatment as defined in equation 6, yj,t is the year on year change in
the dependent variable, ds are sector fixed effects, and Xj,2010 are the usual controls (shares
of 35-54 and 55+ workers in 2010).
  35
    This specification is close to the one adopted by Bovini and Paradisi (2019), later subsumed in Bianchi
et al. (2020), with the exception that the shock is equal to the total number of years of pension eligibility
delay among Close To Retirement (CTR) individuals divided by total employment rather than by the number
of CTRs.


                                                     24
    Table 9 shows the results for different definitions of which workers are taken to be close
to retirement, defined by remaining years to retirement (YTR). We begin by looking at
the impact of the treatment Tj2012 on employment variation of 55+ workers themselves,
finding a positive coefficient irrespective of the number of YTR used to define the group of
individuals close to retirement (Table 9). Positive effects of the treatment on employment
are confirmed also for the other age classes (15-34 and 35-54). The findings from our main
analysis are confirmed as well when looking at Full Time Equivalent wages, and for all of
the firm outcomes.36


7.4       Additional evidence on the population of Italian firms
As a final robustness check we estimate equation 3 on an alternative dataset having partial
info on the population of Italian firms (we are thus working with 1.5 million firms for the
2012-11 period). We do not use this dataset in the rest of the analysis because it does not
include information on the years of social security contributions each worker has paid and ­
as such ­ it does not provide the information necessary to simulate the actual and expected
MRA. For these reasons, the additional estimates cannot rely on an IV strategy. We estimate
the first differences OLS specification of equation 3 for the reform years (2011-12).
    Results reported in Table A8 are again in line with those obtained with our sample of
relatively large firms and show a positive correlation between 55+ employment variation and
employment variation in other age classes, a negligible impact on wages and positive effects
on capital and value added.


8       Conclusions
In response to population aging, in the last decades many governments provided incentives
to postpone retirement through increases in the statutory retirement age or through tax
breaks. However, the increased participation of older workers has raised two main concerns.
There are fears that older workers may crowd out younger cohorts in the labor market, by
reducing their work opportunities. A larger presence of older workers may hamper firms'
productivity and future growth since older workers, even if more experienced, may be less
innovative and less willing to take risks than younger cohorts.
    This paper analyzes the causal effects of a short-run increase in employment of older
workers on firms' input mix, wages, labor costs, total capital, value added, and average
labor productivity. After showing that in the Italian institutional setting older workers
 36
      We also repeated the analysis using a dynamic specification as in Section 7.1, finding coherent results.


                                                       25
mostly retire after reaching pension age, we exploit a recent reform of pension eligibility
as an exogenous increase in the presence of older workers at the firm level. Effects are
estimated based on a unique matched employer, employee, balance sheet data set for the
period 2010-14.
     We find that an unexpected increase in the share of older workers leads to a positive
impact on young and middle-age employment. An exogenous 10% increase in the number
of old workers implies a 1.8% increase in the number of young and 1.3% of middle-aged
workers. Total labor costs increase in line with employment, and remain broadly constant in
per-worker terms. Total value added increases and labor productivity per worker is constant.
These adjustments occur with little changes in daily wages. Despite substantial aggregate
employment responses, we find no evidence of aggregate wages for older workers.
     These results are consistent with a model in which firm-specific human capital or market
frictions make it costly to replace older, higher-tenured workers in the market. Younger
and middle-aged workers appear to be imperfect substitutes, and in our setting are likely
complements to older workers. The fact that labor costs increase in line with employment and
tend to respond less than value added signals that firms were able to adjust smoothly, and
may have benefited, from the shock implied by the pension reform. There is no evidence that
older workers may have been overpaid relative to their productivity, or that their increase
implied a burden to the firm. Overall, the absence of any negative impact on value added per
worker seems to point out that concerns on the impact of an aging workforce on productivity
might be overstated, in line with the findings of Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018).
     Generalizing our results requires some caution. First, since the effective retirement age
in Italy is not very high (62 years old for men and 61 for women; corresponding figures at
OECD level are 65 and 63.6, respectively), the non-negative effects on firms' outcomes we
found might be driven by the fact that incumbent older workers are not too old and thus
still productive. Second, to implement our causal research design and for reasons of data
quality, in our main results we focus only on large firms, which are less likely to be credit
constrained and perhaps more able to expand employment. While we show our findings are
robust for a broader sample that includes smaller firms, a separate analysis with high-quality
economic data for smaller firms and a different research design may be fruitful for future
work. Finally, by design, our analysis is neither equipped to capture market-level responses
or to isolate longer-term relationships between population aging and economic outcomes.




                                             26
References
Acemoglu, D. and P. Restrepo (2017, May). Secular Stagnation? The Effect of Aging on
  Economic Growth in the Age of Automation. American Economic Review 107 (5), 174­79.

Acemoglu, D. and P. Restrepo (2018). Demographics and automation. mimeo .

Adamopoulou, E., E. Bobbio, M. D. Philippis, and F. Giorgi (2016). Wage rigidities and
 business cycle fluctuations: a linked employer-employee analysis. IZA Journal of Labor
 Policy 22 (5), 164­194.

Attanasio, O., S. Kitao, and G. L. Violante (2007). Global demographic trends and social
  security reform. Journal of Monetary Economics 54 (1), 144­198.

Azoulay, P., J. Wang, and J. Gra Zivin (2010). Superstar extinction. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 125 (2), 549­589.

Bank of Italy (2014). Survey of Industrial and Service Firms. Technical report, Bank of
  Italy.

Battistin, E., A. Brugiavini, E. Rettore, and G. Weber (2009). The retirement consumption
  puzzle: evidence from a regression discontinuity approach. The American Economic
  Review 99 (5), 2209­2226.

Becker, G. S. (1962). Investment in human capital: A theoretical analysis. Journal of
  Political Economy 70 (5, Part 2), 9­49.

Becker, G. S. (1964). Human capital: a theoretical analysis with special reference to education.
  New York: Columbia University Press.

Ben-Porath, Y. (1967). The production of human capital and the life cycle of earnings.
  Journal of Political Economy 75 (4, Part 1), 352­365.

Bertoni, M. and G. Brunello (2020). Does Delayed Retirement Affect Youth Employment?
  Evidence from Italian Local Labour Markets. Economic Policy .

Bianchi, N., G. Bovini, J. Li, M. Paradisi, and M. Powell (2020). Career spillovers in internal
  labor markets. mimeo .

Boeri, T., P. Garibaldi, and E. Moen (2017). Closing the Retirement Door and the Lump of
  Labor. mimeo .

Bovini, G. and M. Paradisi (2019). Labor substitutability and the impact of raising the
  retirement age. WorkINPS paper .

Bowlus, A. J. and C. Robinson (2012). Human capital prices, productivity, and growth.
  American Economic Review 102 (7), 3483­3515.




                                              27
Cardoso, A. R., P. Guimar~aes, and J. Varej~ ao (2011). Are older workers worthy of
  their pay? An empirical investigation of age-productivity and age-wage nexuses. De
  Economist 159 (2), 95.

Cataldi, A., S. Kampelmann, and F. Rycx (2012). Does it pay to be productive? The case
  of age groups. International Journal of Manpower 33 (3), 264­283.

Covip (2018). Relazione annuale per l'anno 2017. Technical report, Commissione di Vigilanza
  sui Fondi Pensione.

Cribb, J., C. Emmerson, and G. Tetlow (2016). Signals matter? Large retirement responses
  to limited financial incentives. Labour Economics (42), 203­212.

D'Aurizio, L. and G. Papadia (2019). Using administrative data to evaluate sampling bias
  in a business panel survey. Journal of Official Statistics 35 (1), 67­92.

Daveri, F. and M. Maliranta (2007). Age, seniority and labour costs: lessons from the Finnish
  IT revolution. Economic Policy 22 (49), 118­175.

Doran, K., A. Gelber, and A. Isen (2015). The effects of high-skilled immigration policy on
 firms: Evidence from visa lotteries. NBER WP (20668).

Dostie, B. (2011). Wages, productivity and aging. De Economist 159 (2), 139­158.

Engbom, N. (2019). Firm and worker dynamics in an aging labor market. FED Minneapolis
  WP (756).

Feyrer, J. (2007). Demographics and productivity.          The Review of Economics and
  Statistics 89 (1), 100­109.

Gathmann, C. and U. Sch¨ onberg (2010). How general is human capital? A task-based
 approach. Journal of Labor Economics 28 (1), 1­49.

G¨
 obel, C. and T. Zwick (2012).          Age and productivity:      sector differences.    De
 Economist 160 (1), 35­57.

Gruber, J. and D. A. Wise (2010). Social security programs and retirement around the world:
  The relationship to youth employment. University of Chicago Press.

Haltiwanger, J. C., J. I. Lane, and J. R. Spletzer (1999). Productivity differences across
  employers: The roles of employer size, age, and human capital. The American Economic
  Review 89 (2), 94­98.

Hansen, A. H. (1939). Economic progress and declining population growth. The American
  Economic Review 29 (1), 1­15.

Hut, S. (2019). Financial frictions and firm labor adjustments: Evidence from a retirement
 policy. mimeo .



                                             28
Ilmakunnas, P. and S. Ilmakunnas (2015). Hiring older employees: do the age limits of
  early retirement and the contribution rates of firms matter? The Scandinavian Journal
  of Economics 117 (1), 164­194.

Isen, A. (2013). Dying to know: Are workers paid their marginal product. University of
   Pennsylvania Working Paper .

Italian Institute of Social Security (2016). XV Annual Report. Technical report.

Jaeger, S. and J. Heining (2020). How Substitutable Are Workers? Evidence from Worker
  Deaths. MIT, mimeo .

Jaravel, X., N. Petkova, and A. Bell (2018). Team-specific capital and innovation. American
  Economic Review 108 (4-5), 1034­73.

Lalive, R., A. Magesan, and S. Staubli (2017). Raising the full retirement age: Defaults vs
  incentives. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lallemand, T. and F. Rycx (2009). Are older workers harmful for firm productivity? De
  Economist 157 (3), 273­292.

Lazear, E. P. (2009). Firm-specific human capital: A skill-weights approach. Journal of
  Political Economy 117 (5), 914­940.

Maestas, N., K. J. Mullen, and D. Powell (2016). The effect of population aging on economic
 growth, the labor force and productivity. (22452).

Mahlberg, B., I. Freund, J. C. Cuaresma, and A. Prskawetz (2013). Ageing, productivity
 and wages in Austria. Labour Economics 22, 5­15.

Mahlberg, B., I. Freund, and A. Prskawetz (2009). Firm productivity, workforce age and
 vocational training in Austria. Labour Markets and Demographic Change , 58­84.

Malmberg, B., T. Lindh, and M. Halvarsson (2008). Productivity consequences of workforce
 aging: stagnation or Horndal effect? Population and Development Review 34, 238­256.

Manoli, D. S. and A. Weber (2016). The effects of the early retirement age on retirement
 decisions. NBER WP (22561).
                ´ A. Novo, and P. Portugal (2009). Increasing the legal retirement age: The
Martins, P. S., A.
 impact on wages, worker flows and firm performance.

Mastrobuoni, G. (2009). Labor supply effects of the recent social security benefit cuts:
 Empirical estimates using cohort discontinuities. Journal of Public Economics 93 (11),
 1224­1233.

Mohnen, P. (2019). The Impact of the Retirement Slowdown on the U.S. Youth Labor
 Market. mimeo .



                                            29
Moody's Investor Service (2010). Population aging will dampen economic growth over the
 next two decades. Technical report, February 4, 2010.

Neal, D. (1995). Industry-specific human capital: Evidence from displaced workers. Journal
  of Labor Economics 13 (4), 653­677.

OECD (2015). Ageing and Employment Policies - Statistics on average effective age of
 retirement.

Parent, D. (2000). Industry-specific capital and the wage profile: Evidence from the national
  longitudinal survey of youth and the panel study of income dynamics. Journal of Labor
  Economics 18 (2), 306­323.

Poletaev, M. and C. Robinson (2008). Human capital specificity: evidence from the
  dictionary of occupational titles and displaced worker surveys, 1984­2000. Journal of
  Labor Economics 26 (3), 387­420.

Schivardi, F. and J. Sauvagnat (2020). Are Executives in Short Supply? Evidence from
  Deaths' Events. mimeo .

Sestito, P. and E. Viviano (2018). Firing costs and firm hiring: evidence from an Italian
  reform. Economic Policy 33 (93), 101­130.

Staubli, S. and J. Zweim¨uller (2013). Does raising the early retirement age increase
  employment of older workers? Journal of Public Economics 108, 17­32.

Storesletten, K. (2000). Sustaining fiscal policy through immigration. Journal of Political
  Economy 108 (2), 300­323.

Summers, L. (2013). Why stagnation might prove to be the new normal. Technical report,
  The Financial Times.

Tommasino, P. and R. Zizza (2015). The lump of labour fallacy: a reassessment for the euro
  area. Occasional Paper Series 159.

Topel, R. (1990). Specific capital and unemployment: Measuring the costs and consequences
  of job loss. In Carnegie-Rochester conference series on public policy, Volume 33, pp.
  181­214. Elsevier.

Van Ours, J. C. and L. Stoeldraijer (2011). Age, wage and productivity in dutch
  manufacturing. De Economist 159 (2), 113­137.

Vandenberghe, V. (2013). Are firms willing to employ a greying and feminizing workforce?
  Labour Economics 22, 30­46.

Waldinger, F. (2012). Peer Effects in Science: Evidence from the Dismissal of Scientists in
 Nazi Germany. The Review of Economic Studies 79 (2), 838­861.




                                             30
Figures and Tables

Figure 1: Changes in Public Pension Eligibility Rules Due to Reform in December
2011, by Type of Eligibility
                          (a) Change in Eligibility for Public Pension Based on Age




                      (b) Change in Eligibility for Public Pension Based on Seniority




Notes : YSSC stands for Years of Social Security Contributions. In Italy, a worker can become eligible for a public pension either
by reaching a certain age or a certain number of YSSC (see Section 4 for a discussion). Under the seniority scheme, before the
2011 reform the eligibility rules were the same for men and women. One option referred only to the number of accrued YSSC
(YSSC pre-2012 ); the second one referred to a combination of requirements on the number of YSSC and age (YSSC Quota
pre-2012 ). After the reform, the second option - the Quota - was abolished. The seniority pension scheme introduced by the
new reform requires a given number of accrued YSSC which differs across genders.




                                                               31
Figure 2: Percent of Workers Eligible to Claim Public Pension and Average
Minimum Retirement Age (MRA) Among Workers Age 55 and Above - Actual
and Expected
                                     (a) Percentage Among Workers of All Ages




Notes : Our calculations based on INPS-INVIND data. Solid line: share of workers who are eligible for a public pension in year
t according to the law in place in year t, ELIGi,t |Lawt . Dotted line: expected share of workers who are eligible for a public
pension in year t according to the law in place in year t - 1, ELIGi,t |Lawt-1 . The solid vertical line identifies the first year in
which the pension reform we analyze was implemented.


               (b) Average Minimum Retirement Age Among Workers Age 55 and Above




Notes : Our calculations based on INPS-INVIND data. Solid line: Average Minimum Retirement Age in year t according to
the law in place in year t, M RAi,t |Lawt . Dotted line: expected share of workers who are eligible for a public pension in year
t according to the law in place in year t - 1, M RAi,t |Lawt-1 . The solid vertical line marks the first year in which the pension
reform we analyze was implemented.




                                                                32
Figure 3: The Evolution of the Share of Workers Age 55 and Above - Actual and
Imputed Based on Trend Up Until Pension Reform in December 2011




Notes : Authors calculations based on INVIND sample used in main empirical analysis, see Section 3 for details and Table A2
for descriptive statistics. In dark grey: the actual share of 55+ workers; in light grey: the predicted line based on the pre-2012
trend.




                                                               33
Figure 4: The Incidence of Claiming Benefits and Retirement Upon Reaching
Pension Eligibility (Minimum Retirement Age)
                                  (a) Probability of Claiming a Public Pension




                             (b) Probability of Working at Least a Day in a Year




Notes : Authors calculations based on INPS data. The first panel shows results of an event-study regression shown in equation
4 estimating the probability to claim pension benefits as a function of the time distance (measured in years) to the Minimum
Retirement Age (the first a worker reaches pension eligibility) and controlling for gender, age and Years of Social Security
Contributions paid. Results of a comparable regression estimating the probability of being employed at least one day in a given
year as function of the distance to the Minimum Retirement Age and controlling for gender, age and Years of Social Security
Contributions paid. Point estimates and 95% confidence intervals. YSSC stands for Years of Social Security Contributions (see
notes to Figure 1). Based on INPS data reporting incidence of public pension claims (simple random sample of 24 birthdates
for the whole private non agricultural sector), information not available in our main data set.




                                                             34
Figure 5: Distribution of the Share of Firms' Employees Unexpectedly Losing
Eligibility in 2012 Due to Pension Reform (Histogram of Instrumental Variable)




Notes :      Authors calculations based on INPS data.                   The figure shows the histogram of zjt          =
(ELIGj,2012 |Law2011 - ELIGj,2012 |Law2012 ) /EM P Lj,2011 as defined in Subsection 9, where j indexes firms. Given
the employment share of workers age 55 and above was on average 10% in the year prior to the reform, a 2 percentage point
rise in zjt implies a 20% rise in the fraction of employees age 55 and above losing eligibility to retire.


Figure 6: The Effect of the Reform on the Change of Employment Among Workers
Age 55 and Above: Assessing Pre-Existing Trends and Dynamic Effects




Notes : The graph reports estimates of separate regressions of two leads and two lags of cumulative change in employment of
workers age 55+ on the change in the firms' share of workers age 55+ from 2011 to 2012, instrumented by the change in the
share of a firms' employees losing eligibility to retire (as explained in Subsection 9 and notes to Table 1). Hence, the coefficient
is 1 in the year of the reform by definition.



                                                                35
Figure 7: Flows Into Retirement by Age and Wage-Age Gradient for Mature
workers Before and After 2011 Pension Reform in the Overall Economy
                                   (a) Fraction Workers Exiting Employment




                       (b) Difference in Average Log Wages With Respect to Age 40




Notes : Authors calculations based on INPS data (simple random sample of 24 birth dates for the whole private non agricultural
sector). Only employees working at least 150 days in a given year are included. Flows into retirement are calculated using
the negative percent change in employment at each age. The average of log full-time equivalent daily wages at each age are
normalized by subtracting the average of log daily FTE wages for 40-44 years old workers. Pre-reform years are 2009-2011 and
post-reform years are 2012-14.




                                                             36
Figure 8: Dynamic Effects of the Reform on the Annual Growth Rate in
Employment By Age Class




Notes : The graph reports estimates of separate regressions of the year-to-year growth rate on the change in the firms' share of
workers age 55+ from 2011 to 2012, instrumented by the change in the share of a firms' employees losing eligibility to retire (as
explained in Subsection and notes to Table 1). Regressions include as additional controls: the share of 35-54 and 55+ workers
in 2010, the share of workers eligible to retire before the reform (see notes to Table 1), sector fixed effects and year fixed effects.
Standard errors in brackets clustered at the firm level. Confidence intervals at the 95% level.



Figure 9: Dynamic Effects of the Reform on the Annual Growth Rate in Firm
Outcomes




Notes : The graph reports estimates of separate regressions of the year-to-year growth rate on the change in the firms' share of
workers age 55+ from 2011 to 2012, instrumented by the change in the share of a firms' employees losing eligibility to retire (as
explained in Subsection and notes to Table 1). Regressions include as additional controls: the share of 35-54 and 55+ workers
in 2010, the share of workers eligible to retire before the reform (see notes to Table 1), sector fixed effects and year fixed effects.
Standard errors in brackets clustered at the firm level. Confidence intervals at the 95% level.



                                                                 37
Table 1: Effect of Employees' Reduction in Retirement Eligibility Due to 2011
Pension Reform on Firms' Change in Employment due to Workers Age 55 and
Above (First Stage Regression). Years 2011-12

                                                                            All Firms
                                                                          Coef.      S.e.
                Reduction in Share of Employees Eligible to Retire      0.56***     (0.18)
                Pre-Reform Share of Employees Eligible to Retire        -0.39*** (0.10)
                Observations                                                   1025
                F-test                                                        31.99
                                                                         Young Firms            Old Firms
                                                                          Coef.      S.e.      Coef.      S.e.
                Reduction in Share of Employees Eligible to Retire      0.32***     (0.12)   0.61***     (0.22)
                Pre-Reform Share of Employees Eligible to Retire        -0.38*** (0.08)      -0.40*** (0.12)
                Observations                                                    437                  588
                F-test                                                         9.72                19.24
                                                                          Small Firms           Big Firms
                                                                          Coef.      S.e.      Coef.      S.e.
                Reduction in Share of Employees Eligible to Retire      0.56***     (0.22)   0.69***     (0.38)
                Pre-Reform Share of Employees Eligible to Retire        -0.35*** (0.11)      -0.53*** (0.22)
                Observations                                                    507                  518
                F-test                                                         16.7                21.43
Notes: First stage regression (equation 5). Dependent variable is change in the share of older workers among a firm's employees:
(OLDj,2012 - OLDj,2011 ) /EM P Lj,2011 . The change in the share of employees eligible to retire due to the reform is measured as
(ELIGj,2012 |Law2011 - ELIGj,2012 |Law2012 ) /EM P Lj,2011 . The pre-Reform Share of employees eligible to retire is measured
as ELIGj,2012 |Law2011 /EM P Lj,2011 .
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                              38
Table 2: Effect of Rise in Firms' Employment of Older Workers on Younger
Workers' Employment by Age Group. Years 2010-14 or 2011-12

                                                           Balanced panel              Unbalanced panel
                                                        Age 15-34     Age 35-54     Age 15-34      Age 35-54
                  First Difference (FD) OLS
                  Empl. Change Age 55+                   0.391***      1.466***      0.463***       1.694***
                                                         (0.0419)       (0.140)      (0.0493)        (0.149)
                  Observations                             5125          5125          7101           7101
                  FD OLS with Firm FE
                  Empl. Change Age 55+                   0.364***      1.467***      0.411***       1.610***
                                                         (0.0436)       (0.160)      (0.0451)        (0.154)
                  Observations                             5125          5125          7101           7101
                  FD OLS (Years 2011-12)
                                                         0.407***      1.629***      0.557***       1.700***
                                                         (0.0547)       (0.268)      (0.0735)        (0.184)
                  Observations                             1025          1025          1960           1960
                  FD IV (Years 2011-12)
                  Empl. Change Age 55+                   0.522**       0.786*          0.557         0.848**
                                                         (0.262)       (0.405)        (0.344)        (0.401)
                  Observations                            1025          1025           1960           1960
Notes: OLS refers to estimates of equation 3 on the balanced panel. Regressions include as additional controls: the share of
35-54 and 55+ workers in 2010, sector fixed effects and year fixed effects (not included in the one year regressions 2011-12).
Additional control variable for IV regression is the share of workers eligible to retire before the reform (see notes to Table 1).
First stage statistics for the IV estimates are reported in Table 1. Standard errors in brackets clustered at the firm level.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




Table 3: Effect of Rise in Firms' Employment of Older Workers on Hiring and
Separations by Age Group. Years 2010-14 or 2011-12.

                                              Hiring rate by Age Group            Separation rate by Age Group
                                              15-34         35-54       55+         15-34         35-54          55+
          First Difference (FD) OLS
          Empl. Change Age 55+               0.441***      1.197***   0.352***      0.0501      -0.269***      -0.648***
                                             (0.0553)       (0.131)   (0.0439)     (0.0443)      (0.0978)       (0.0439)
          Observations                         5125          5125       5125         5125          5125           5125
          FD OLS with Firm FE
          Empl. Change Age 55+               0.280***      0.895***   0.281***    -0.0847***    -0.572***      -0.719***
                                             (0.0414)       (0.133)   (0.0469)     (0.0287)      (0.0808)       (0.0469)
          Observations                         5125          5125       5125         5125          5125           5125
          FD OLS (Years 2011-12)
          Empl. Change Age 55+               0.409***      1.541***   0.536***     0.00152       -0.0883       -0.464***
                                             (0.0802)       (0.295)    (0.136)     (0.0707)      (0.124)        (0.136)
          Observations                         1025          1025       1025         1025         1025            1025
          FD IV (Years 2011-12)
          Empl. Change Age 55+                 0.480         0.484      0.102       -0.0422       -0.302       -0.898***
                                              (0.498)       (0.649)    (0.256)      (0.437)      (0.565)        (0.256)
          Observations                         1025          1025       1025         1025          1025           1025
Notes: OLS refers to estimates of equation 3 on the balanced panel. Regressions include as additional controls: the share of
35-54 and 55+ workers in 2010, sector fixed effects and year fixed effects (not included in the one year regressions 2011-12).
Additional control variable for IV regression is the share of workers eligible to retire before the reform (see notes to Table 1).
First stage statistics for the IV estimates are reported in Table 1. Standard errors in brackets clustered at the firm level.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                39
Table 4: Effect of Rise in Firms' Employment of Older Workers on Net
Employment Changes by Contract Type and Age Group. Years 2010-14 or
2011-12.

                                                   Fixed Term Contracts                     Permanent Contracts
                                                       by Age Group                            by Age Group
                                                15-34        35-54          55+          15-34       35-54      55+
           First Difference (FD) OLS
           Empl. Change Age 55+               0.125***      0.167***      0.0866***     0.266***    1.300***   0.913***
                                              (0.0218)      (0.0300)       (0.0173)     (0.0352)     (0.138)   (0.0173)
           Observations                         5125          5125           5125         5125        5125       5125
           FD OLS with Firm FE
           Empl. Change Age 55+               0.107***      0.154***      0.0950***     0.257***    1.313***   0.905***
                                              (0.0200)      (0.0331)       (0.0200)     (0.0402)     (0.158)   (0.0200)
           Observations.                        5125          5125           5125         5125        5125       5125
           FD OLS (Years 2011-12)
           Empl. Change Age 55+               0.112***      0.187***      0.0552***     0.295***    1.442***   0.945***
                                              (0.0352)      (0.0395)       (0.0145)     (0.0561)     (0.260)   (0.0145)
           Observations                         1025          1025           1025         1025        1025       1025
           FD IV (Years 2011-12)
           Empl. Change Age 55+                0.332*         -0.120        0.0483        0.190      0.906**   0.952***
                                               (0.188)       (0.181)       (0.0545)      (0.167)     (0.359)   (0.0545)
           Observations                         1025           1025          1025         1025         1025      1025
Notes: OLS refers to estimates of equation 3 on the balanced panel. Regressions include as additional controls: the share of
35-54 and 55+ workers in 2010, sector fixed effects and year fixed effects (not included in the one year regressions 2011-12).
Additional control variable for IV regression is the share of workers eligible to retire before the reform (see notes to Table 1).
First stage statistics for the IV estimates are reported in Table 1. Standard errors in brackets clustered at the firm level.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




Table 5: Effect of Rise in Firms' Employment of Older Workers on Wages by Age
Group. Years 2010-14 and 2011-12.
         VARIABLES                           Aged 15-34                     Aged 35-54                   Aged 55+
                                         Total   Contractual            Total   Contractual         Total    Contractual
         FD OLS                          -0.0569      0.0871            -0.0362       0.00891      -0.507***     0.178
         Net empl var 55+               (0.0567)     (0.0951)          (0.0449)       (0.105)       (0.105)     (0.180)
         Obs.                             5113         5113              5125          5125           5088       5088

         FD OLS with firm FE
         Net empl var 55+                -0.0441        0.0959          -0.0303       -0.0332      -0.506***     0.303
                                        (0.0648)        (0.107)        (0.0460)       (0.104)       (0.111)     (0.222)
         Obs.                             5113           5113            5125          5125           5088       5088
         FD (Years 2011-12)
                                         -0.100          0.282         -0.00784        0.106         -0.363      0.168
                                        (0.168)         (0.202)         (0.104)       (0.128)       (0.243)     (0.334)
         Obs.                             1022           1022            1025          1025           1020       1020
         FD IV (Years 2011-12)
         Net empl var 55+                -0.132          -0.939        0.0926          -0.244        -0.456     -3.327*
                                        (0.596)         (1.003)        (0.433)        (0.652)       (1.005)     (1.985)
         Obs.                             1022            1022          1025            1025          1020       1020
Notes: OLS refers to estimates of equation 3 on the balanced panel. Regressions include as additional controls: the share of
35-54 and 55+ workers in 2010, sector fixed effects and year fixed effects (not included in the one year regressions 2011-12).
Additional control variable for IV regression is the share of workers eligible to retire before the reform (see notes to Table 1).
First stage statistics for the IV estimates are reported in Table 1. Standard errors in brackets clustered at the firm level.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                  40
Table 6: Effect of Rise in Firms' Employment of Older Workers on Firms'
Economic Outcomes. Years 2010-14 and 2011-12.

                                                                                                Unit
                                                 Labor cost                 Value            Labor costs
                                            INPS    Balance sheet           Added        INPS   Balance sheet           Capital
   First Difference (FD) OLS
   Empl. Change Age 55+                   0.773***         0.682***        0.729***      0.0255          -0.0448        0.434***
                                          (0.0594)         (0.0762)         (0.115)     (0.0968)        (0.0824)         (0.104)
   Observations                             5116             5116            5116         5116            5116            5116
   FD OLS with Firm FE
   Empl. Change Age 55+                   0.499***         0.403***        0.415***     0.0841          -0.00623        0.283***
                                          (0.0600)         (0.0757)         (0.136)     (0.116)          (0.102)        (0.0999)
   Observations                             5116             5116            5116        5116             5116            5116
   FD OLS (Years 2011-12)
   Empl. Change Age 55+                   0.645***         0.595***        0.929***      -0.148         -0.258*           0.197
                                          (0.0857)          (0.104)         (0.190)     (0.169)         (0.156)          (0.195)
   Observations                             1025             1025            1025         1025           1025             1025
   FD IV (Years 2011-12)
   Empl. Change Age 55+                   1.678***         1.585**          3.767**      -0.217          -0.481           0.706
                                           (0.609)         (0.640)          (1.759)     (1.139)         (1.035)          (0.982)
   Observations                             1025             1025             1025        1025            1025            1025
Notes: OLS refers to estimates of equation 3 on the balanced panel. Labor cost-INPS is the total labor cost obtained by
multiplying the average wage by the number of FTE working days in INPS data. Labor cost-Balance sheet is the total labor
cost according to the firm balance sheet. Regressions include as additional controls: the share of 35-54 and 55+ workers in
2010, sector fixed effects and year fixed effects (not included in the one year regressions 2011-12). Additional control variable
for IV regression is the share of workers eligible to retire before the reform (see notes to Table 1). First stage statistics for the
IV estimates are reported in Table 1. Standard errors in brackets clustered at the firm level.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




Table 7: Effect of Rise in Firms' Employment of Older Workers on Firm Economic
Outcomes in Per Worker Terms. Years 2010-14 and 2011-12.

                                                                              Labor Cost               Value
                                                         Capital       INPS      Balance Sheet         Added
                     First Difference (FD) OLS
                     Empl. Change Age 55+                -0.291**     0.109***         0.0720          0.0572
                                                          (0.127)     (0.0368)        (0.0533)         (0.106)
                     Observations                          5116         5116            5116            5116
                     FD OLS with Firm FE
                     Empl. Change Age 55+                  -0.159     0.0938**         0.0474          -0.0389
                                                          (0.137)     (0.0443)        (0.0629)         (0.129)
                     Observations                           5116        5116            5116            5116
                     FD OLS (Years 2011-12)
                     Empl. Change Age 55+                  -0.143     0.228***        0.225**          0.461**
                                                          (0.219)     (0.0637)        (0.0901)         (0.190)
                     Observations                           1025        1025            1025            1025
                     FD IV (Years 2011-12)
                     Empl. Change Age 55+                  -0.473      0.327            0.213           1.610
                                                          (1.305)     (0.379)          (0.507)         (1.396)
                     Observations                           1025       1025             1025            1025
Notes: OLS refers to estimates of equation 3 on the balanced panel. Labor cost-INPS is the total labor cost obtained by
multiplying the average wage by the number of FTE working days in INPS data. Labor cost-Balance sheet is the total labor
cost according to the firm balance sheet. Regressions include as additional controls: the share of 35-54 and 55+ workers in
2010, sector fixed effects and year fixed effects (not included in the one year regressions 2011-12). Standard errors in brackets
clustered at the firm level. Additional control variable for IV regression is the share of workers eligible to retire before the
reform (see notes to Table 1). First stage statistics for the IV estimates are reported in Table 1.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                41
     Table 8: Heterogeneity in The Effect of a Rise in Employment of Workers Age 55 and Above on Worker and
     Firm Outcomes by Firm Type
                  Change in                         Employment                     FTE Wages                      Labor Cost                     Value Added
                                                   15-34  35-54            15-34     35-54   55+               Total per Worker               Total per Worker
                  Young Firms
                  Empl. Change Age 55+             1.367       0.350        -2.157     1.748       -1.037     5.382*          3.940*         8.852*           6.420
                                                  (1.247)     (1.306)      (2.235)    (1.929)     (5.896)     (3.120)         (2.336)        (5.371)         (5.002)
                  Observations                      437         437          437        437         432         437             437            437             437
                  Old Firms
                  Empl. Change Age 55+            0.441*      0.840*        0.136      -0.213      -0.535     1.126**          -0.181        3.025*           0.944
                                                  (0.237)     (0.431)      (0.610)    (0.454)     (0.877)     (0.570)         (0.516)        (1.721)         (1.355)




42
                  Observations                      588         588          585        588         588         588             588            588             588
                  Small Firms
                  Empl. Change Age 55+             0.299       0.438        -0.297     0.204       -0.234     1.574**          0.201          2.743           0.647
                                                  (0.285)     (0.555)      (0.735)    (0.517)     (1.209)     (0.729)         (0.599)        (1.774)         (1.496)
                  Observations                      507         507          504        507         503         507             507            507             507
                  Large Firms
                  Empl. Change Age 55+            1.090*      1.828**       0.260     -0.0507      -2.154      1.062           -0.129         6.141           4.121
                                                  (0.627)     (0.931)      (0.815)    (0.654)     (1.512)     (0.945)         (0.770)        (3.909)         (2.978)
                  Observations                      518         518          518        518         517         518             518            518             518
     Notes: Entries are first differences IV estimates of equation 3. Regressions include as additional controls: the share of 35-54 and 55+ workers in 2010, sector fixed effects.
     Additional control variable for IV regression is the share of workers eligible to retire before the reform (see notes to Table 1). First stage statistics for the IV estimates are
     reported in Table 1. Standard errors in brackets clustered at the firm level.
     * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
     Table 9: Effect of Alternative Measure of the Shock to the Firm Due to the Reform Based Average Delay in
     Retirement of Firms Employees, Calculated for Workers with Different Years to Retirement (YTR) Prior to
     the Reform. Years 2011-12
                                                           0 <= Y T R <= 1         0 <= Y T R <= 2         0 <= Y T R <= 3         0 <= Y T R <= 4        0 <= Y T R <= 5

              Employment      Change         15-34          0.058      (0.047)     0.0423     (0.028)      0.036*     (0.020)     0.029*      (0.015)    0.038***    (0.011)
              Age Group
                                             35-54        0.327**      (0.127)    0.172*      (0.093)     0.086**     (0.037)    0.078**      (0.033)    0.079***    (0.026)
                                              55+         0.164***     (0.058)    0.100**     (0.043)    0.069***     (0.018)    0.059***     (0.015)    0.044***    (0.011)
              Delta wage                     15-34          0.054      (0.086)     0.041      (0.051)      -0.013     (0.031)      0.011      (0.026)      0.010     (0.019)
                                             35-54          0.005      (0.063)     0.046      (0.034)       0.015     (0.022)      0.024      (0.018)      0.018     (0.015)
                                              55+           0.162      (0.163)     -0.027     (0.078)      -0.017     (0.057)      0.004      (0.046)     -0.022     (0.039)
              Firm outcomes                  Total




43
              Capital                                      0.392**     (0.167)      0.123     (0.079)     0.117**     (0.056)      0.071      (0.048)     0.070*      (0.039)
              Labor cost                     INPS          0.287**     (0.115)    0.269***    (0.059)    0.168***     (0.035)    0.155***     (0.031)    0.154***     (0.029)
              Labor cost                 Balance sheet     0.257**     (0.125)    0.252***    (0.057)    0.177***     (0.036)    0.149***    (0.0312)    0.148***    (0.0268)
              Value added                                   0.301      (0.245)    0.320***    (0.121)    0.254***     (0.084)    0.246***     (0.068)    0.244***     (0.055)
              Firm outcomes               Per worker
              Capital                                       0.367      (0.232)     -0.080      (0.112)     -0.031     (0.081)     -0.069      (0.069)     -0.051     (0.058)
              Labor cost                     INPS          0.137**    (0.0665)    0.0875**    (0.0346)     0.0267    (0.0225)     0.0218     (0.0189)      0.023     (0.016)
              Labor cost                 Balance sheet      0.120      (0.088)      0.061      (0.043)      0.013     (0.031)     0.0022      (0.026)      0.009     (0.020)
              Value added                                   0.158      (0.193)      0.086      (0.110)      0.051     (0.078)     0.0682      (0.063)     0.088*     (0.049)
     Notes: Estimates of equation 7. YTR = Years to retirement in year before reform. The table shows coefficients of a regression of the outcome variable on a shock measure equal
     to the average change in the number of years to retirement among firms employees as a fraction of all employees. This ratio is equal to the sum of year public pension eligibility
     delay among employees that, prior to the reform, alternatively had 1, 2,..,5 Years to Retirement (YTR), divided by the total number of employees at the firm. Regressions
     include as additional controls: the share of 35-54 and 55+ workers in 2010, sector fixed effects. See Subsection 7.3 for details. All regressions include sector and year fixed
     effects, the share of 35-54 and 55+ in 2010. Standard errors in brackets clustered at the firm level.
     * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
A       Online Appendix
A.1      Details on the institutional setting
The Italian welfare system features two main public pension schemes: old age and seniority.
    As for the old age pension scheme, before the reform the retirement age was 60 for women
and 65 for men, requiring also a minimum number of accrued years of contribution.37 The
Fornero pension reform swiftly increased the retirement age up to 67 by 2020, both for men
and for women, with at least 20 years of paid social security contributions; moreover, the
reform allowed all individuals to retire at 70, as long as they accrued at least 5 years of
contribution.
    As for the seniority pension scheme, before the reform, eligibility required either 40
years of paid contributions (irrespective of age) or a mix of age and years of social security
contributions, the so called "quota system" (for instance, the sum of age and years of social
security contribution should have been 96 in 2011, with at least 60 years of age and 35
years of social security contribution). The Fornero reform abolished the "quota system" and
raised the minimum years of paid contribution in 2012 from 40 to 42 for men, to 41 for
women.38 The new rules in place since 2012 allowed workers who were already eligible for a
public pension when the bill passed to retire under the pre-reform rules, without losing their
eligibility. This option was not available before the reform, since workers could retire in a
given year only if eligible under the rules in place that given year.
    Finally, early retirement is available only for women and has not been affected by the
reform. Such an option, despite the increase in the take-up after the reform, is rarely used,
given that it implies, on average, a 35% cut in the monthly transfer (Italian Institute of
Social Security, 2016). The maximum value of the take-up rate was not more than 20% in
2015 (around 11% before the reform). There is no mandatory retirement and working after
retirement is not prohibited.




  37
      Eligibility for old age scheme also required 20 accrued years of contribution. Before the Fornero reform,
the requirement was of 5 years for workers who had started to work since January 1996 (under the defined
contribution scheme), while it was already 20 for those who had started to work before January 1996 (under
the defined benefit scheme).
   38
      In 2013, the minimum number of required years of contributions rose to 43 for men and 42 for women;
from 2014 onward to 44 for men and 43 for women, respectively.


                                                      44
A.2        Additional figures and tables

                        Figure A1: Google searches for "Riforma pensioni"




Notes : Downloaded from https://trends.google.it/trends/ on February, 19, 2020.




                                               Figure A2: First stage




Notes : For each quintile of the distribution of eligibility change for 55+ workers expressed as a share of total employment, the
X axis reports the average eligibility change for 55+ workers expressed as a share of total employment and the Y axis reports
the average change in 55+ employment as a share of total employment.




                                                              45
Figure A3: Non-Parametric Relationship of Employment Changes for Older and
Younger Workers




Notes : The figure is based on equation 3. X axis reports - for each quintile - the average of the residuals of a regression of the
net employment variation of 55+workers on controls. Y axis reports the corresponding averages for 15-34 residuals.




Notes : The figure is based on the IV estimates for equation 3. X axis reports - for each quintile - the average of the residuals
of a regression of the instrumented net employment variation of 55+ workers on controls. Y axis reports the corresponding
averages for 15-34 residuals.




                                                               46
      Figure A4: The wage-age gradient for all workers in the overall economy




Notes : Authors calculations based on INPS data. Data cover the whole private non agricultural sector; only employees working at least 150
days in a given year are included. Each wage level is normalized to the average for 40-44 years old in each year.




                                                             47
                  Table A1: Literature review: estimates of the effects of aging workforce on firm outcomes
                                                                                        Old         Empirical           Main independent
     Authors                            Data                     Outcome                                                                         Effect
                                                                                        (y.o.)      Strategy            (or instrumental) var.

                                                                                                                                                 Limited eff. of age
                                                                 Value added                        FE, IV                                       on prod., larger on
                                        Finland, electronics,                                                           Lagged values
                                                                 per hour worked,       Dep.        controls for                                 wage; seniority and exp
     Daveri and Maliranta (2007)        forest, ind. machinery                                                          for experience
                                                                 gross wage,            var.: age   experience and                               matter more;
                                        1990-2002                                                                       and seniority
                                                                 TFP index                          seniority                                    prod/pay gap  in ;
                                                                                                                                                 no eff in traditional indus

                                        Sweden, manufac-
                                                                                                    FE (dev. from
                                        turing and mining        Value added                                            Lagged values            Slightly positive eff on VA
     Malmberg et al. (2008)                                                             50+         the mean)
                                        1985-1996                per worker                                             of age shares            p.w. in larger firms (50+
                                                                                                    IV (for avg. age)
                                        Avg. firm size: 80

                                        Portugal                                                                        Pension reform           Hirings and separations 
                                                                 Hiring, separations,
                                        non-farm priv.                                              DD+matching         stricter elig.           no eff. on net job creation
48




     Martins et al. (2009)                                       net job creation,      57-60
                                        sector, 1992-1997                                           (age*time)          requirements for         negative eff on sales
                                                                 sales
                                        Avg. firm size:< 100                                                            women                    no in p.w. terms

                                        Netherlands,
                                        manufacturing            Value added,                                                                    Slightly positive eff.
                                                                                        50-56,                          Lagged values
     Van Ours and Stoeldraijer (2011)   2000-2005                labor costs                        FE, FD, GMM                                  on prod. and wage
                                                                                        57+                             of age shares
                                        Avg. firm size: 97       per FTE                                                                         no prod./pay gap
                                        (FTE: 77)

                                        Portugal,
                                        manuf. and
                                                                 Sales, labor           50-54,                          Lagged values
     Cardoso et al. (2011)              service (priv. sect)                                        FD-IV-GMM                                    No no prod/pay gap
                                                                 costs p.w.             55+                             of age shares
                                        1986-2008
                                        Avg empl: 24

                                        Canada,                                                                         Inverted demand
                                                                                                                                                 No prod/
                                        economy, no agric.       Value added,                       Two-stage           funct for capital
     Dostie (2011)                                                                      55+                                                      pay gap
                                        1999-2005                avg. wage                          estimation          as proxy for
                                                                                                                                                 Heterogeneity by gender
                                        Avg. firm size: 15                                                              prod. shock
                                                                                        Old        Empirical            Main independent
      Authors                            Data                  Outcome                                                                           Effect
                                                                                        (y.o.)     Strategy             (or instrumental) var.


                                                                                        50+                                                      Negative eff. on prod,
                                         Belgium,              Value added per
                                                                                        (changes                        Lagged values            positive on avg. wage
      Cataldi et al. (2012)              private sector        hour worked,                        Pooled OLS, FD
                                                                                        in work                         of age shares            (ref. group: prime-aged)
                                         1999-2006             gross hourly wage
                                                                                        hours)                                                   prod./pay gap  with age
                                         Avg. firm size: 100

                                         Germany,                                                  Pooled OLS,
                                                                                                                                                 No negative eff.
                                         manuf. and services                                       dynamic GMM
                                                               Value added p.w.         50-54,                          Lagged values            on prod.
      G¨
       obel and Zwick (2012)             1997-2005                                                 (controls for
                                                               (sales-interm. inputs)   55-60                           of age shares            (ref. group: 35-40 y.o.)
                                         Avg. firm size: 176                                       experience and
                                                                                                                                                 No sectoral diff
                                         (FTE)                                                     seniority)

                                         Austria,                                                                                                No effect on VA p.w.
                                         private sector                                            OLS with                                      and avg. wage;
                                                               Value added p.w.,                                        Lagged values
      Mahlberg et al. (2013)             (no agric.)                                    49+        lagged regressors,                            negative eff. on avg. wage
49




                                                               average wage                                             of age shares
                                         2002-2005                                                 FE, RE, GMM                                   of the share of younger workers
                                         Avg. firm size: 70                                                                                      ( 29) (ref. group: prime-aged)

                                                                                                                                                 Larger negative eff. on prod.
                                                                                                                        Lagged values
                                         Belgium,                                                                                                than wage of older women,
                                                               Value added,             50-64      FD-IV-GMM            of age shares,
                                         priv. sector                                                                                            negative eff. on profits
      Vandenberghe (2013)a                                     labor costs,             men and    Two-stage            interm. goods
                                         1998-2006                                                                                               (ref. group: 30-49 men)
                                                               gross profits p.w.       women      estimation           as proxy for
                                         Avg Empl: 49                                                                                            Larger eff. in
                                                                                                                        prod. shock
                                                                                                                                                 services and large firms

                                         Finland,
                                                                                                                        Pension reform           Hirings increase mostly
                                         priv. non farm        Hirings of                          DDD
      Ilmakunnas and Ilmakunnas (2015)                                                  49-57                           stricter elig.           for 51-52 y.o., more
                                         buss. sector          old workers                         (age*size*time)
                                                                                                                        requirements             strongly in larger firms
                                         1994-1998

        a
         The author claims that the observed increase in the share of older women is more likely to be exogenous than that in the share of older men since
     driven by the alignment of the legal retirement age of women to that of men. Thus, this provides a sort of "natural experiment".
                                                                               Old      Empirical        Main independent
     Authors                      Data                   Outcome                                                                  Effect
                                                                               (y.o.)   Strategy         (or instrumental) var.

                                  Italy,
                                                                                                         Pension reform           Negative effects
                                  priv. sector           Net empl.
     Boeri et al. (2017)                                                       55+      DD               firm level               on young workers
                                  2008-2014              variation by age
                                                                                                         treatment                (less than 30)
                                  15-150 empl.

                                  Italy,
50




                                                                                                         Pension reform           Subst. between
                                  priv. sector           Hirings and firings
     Bovini and Paradisi (2019)                                                55+      DD               firm level               workers of
                                  2009-2015              by age class
                                                                                                         treatment                different ages
                                  3-200 empl.

                                  Netherlands,
                                                         Empl. by age                                    Pension reform           Negative effects
                                  priv. non fin sector                                  DD
     Hut (2019)                                          profits, labour       54-57                     ind. and firm            on financially constrained
                                  2001-2018                                             (year of bith)
                                                         costs, inv.                                     treatment                firms
                                  5+ empl.
                                       Table A2: Descriptive statistics
      UNBALANCED PANEL
      Variable                                          Obs           Mean      Std. Dev.        Min            Max
      Total employees                                   9,654          9654.0     608.9         3732.4         20.0
      Employment share (15-34, p.c.)                    9,654            23.4      13.7             0          90.6
      Employment share (35-54, p.c.)                    9,654            65.0      11.6            9.4          100
      Employment share (55+, p.c.)                      9,654           11.6       7.5              0          79.3
      Net employment variation (15-34, p.c.)            9,654             1.1       5.2          -36.3         306.5
      Net employment variation (35-54, p.c.)            9,654             0.0       9.0         -100.0         420.3
      Net employment variation (55+, p.c.)              9,654            -1.1       2.3          -28.7          50.8
      FTE Wage (15-34, euros)                           9,616           87.8       18.2           53.7         148.5
      FTE Wage (35-54, euros)                           9,654           110.1      29.6           58.5         216.5
      FTE Wage (55+, euros)                             9,579           132.2      51.3           54.3         338.2
      Wage var (15-34, p.c.)                            9,609             2.0      5.7           -15.8         20.2
      Wage var (35-54, p.c.)                            9,654             1.7      4.5           -11.7         17.0
      Wage var (55+, p.c.)                              9,538             2.2      11.7          -28.7         47.0
      Capital (euros*1000)                              9,654        113691.1   1261317             3        57200000
      Capital var. (p.c.)                               9,579            -0.8      11.7          -22.7         25.6
      Total labor costs (euro*1000)                     9,654         18435.4   100517.6         20.9       3507677.0
      Total labor costs var. (p.c.)                     9,579             2.2      7.7           -10.4         21.1
      Value added (euro*1000)                           9,654         44863.7   314858.9      -453461.0     12000000.0
      Value added var (p.c.)                            9,579             1.7      16.5          -27.3         30.8


      BALANCED PANEL
      Variable                                          Obs           Mean      Std. Dev.        Min            Max
      Total employees                                   5,125        691.2092   4678.207         21           140687
      Employment share (15-34, p.c.)                    5,125           22.9      13.3            0            90.6
      Employment share (35-54, p.c.)                    5,125           65.3      11.3           9.4           98.1
      Employment share (55+, p.c.)                      5,125          11.8        7.5            0            79.3
      Net employment variation (15-34, p.c.)            5,125            1.0       3.7          -36.3          66.7
      Net employment variation (35-54, p.c.)            5,125            0.1       5.8          -63.6          90.4
      Net employment variation (55+, p.c.)              5,125           -1.1       2.0          -24.5          25.5
      FTE Wage (15-34, euros)                           5,116        88.24434   18.05651      53.65068       148.462
      FTE Wage (35-54, euros)                           5,125        110.4067   29.14231      58.53726       216.4977
      FTE Wage (55+, euros)                             5,102        133.2559   51.27009      54.32445       338.2433
      Wage var (15-34, p.c.)                            5,113            2.1       5.6          -15.8          20.2
      Wage var (35-54, p.c.)                            5,125            1.8       4.3          -11.7          17.0
      Wage var (55+, p.c.)                              5,088            2.3      11.4          -28.7          47.0
      Capital (euros*1000)                              5,125        82330.73   418256.8         25          9053672
      Capital var. (p.c.)                               5,116           -0.4      11.4          -22.7          25.6
      Total labor costs (euro*1000)                     5,125        20679.73   119983.3      407.049        3507677
      Total labor costs var. (p.c.)                     5,116            2.3       7.3          -10.4          21.1
      Value added (euro*1000)                           5,125         46594.1    261139       -453461        7683976
      Value added var (p.c.)                            5,116            2.3      16.1          -27.3          30.8
Notes: INVIND-INPS-CEBI data. Years: 2010-2014, selected sample: firms that employed at least 50 employees in the year
they first appeared in the sample; firms which are sampled in each of the five years and do not have missing values on variables
such as capital, labor costs and value added.




                                                                51
Table A3: Requirements for old age pension eligibility; changes in rules according
to the law in place at time t and the law known at t - 1 for time t.

                                         Lawt|t              Lawt|t-1            Lawt|t - Lawt|t-1
                                      Men Women            Men Women             Men Women
                           Year t
                           2009       65       60          65          60        0      0
                           2010       65       60          65          60        0      0
                           2011       65       60          65          60        0      0
                           2012       66       62          65          60        1      2
                           2013       66.3     62.3        66.3        62.3      0      0
                           2014       66.3     63.8        66.3        63.8      0      0
                           2015       66.3     63.8        66.3        63.8      0      0
                           2016       66.6     65.6        66.6        65.6      0      0
                           2017       66.6     65.6        66.6        65.6      0      0
Notes: Old age pension eligibility requires the legal retirement age (reported in the Table) and at least 20 accrued years of
social security contribution. We incorporate the 1-year waiting window (the number of months between retirement eligibility
and actual pension disbursement) in the provision of statutory retirement age.




Table A4: Requirements for seniority pension eligibility; changes in rules
according to the law in place at time t and the law known at t - 1 for time
t.

                                 Lawt|t                            Lawt|t-1               Lawt|t - Lawt|t-1
                      Quota          only C            Quota            only C          Quota       only C
                      A, Q,       Men Women            A, Q,        Men Women           A       Men Women
                      C  35                            C  35
            Year t
            2009      59, 95      40         40        59,   95        40     40        0          0       0
            2010      59, 95      40         40        59,   95        40     40        0          0       0
            2011      60, 96      40         40        60,   96        40     40        0          0       0
            2012      -           42.1       41.1      60,   96        40     40        -          2.1     1.1
            2013      -           42.4       41.4      -               42.4   41.4      -          0       0
            2014      -           42.5       41.5      -               42.5   41.5      -          0       0
            2015      -           42.5       41.5      -               42.5   41.5      -          0       0
            2016      -           42.8       41.8      -               42.8   41.8      -          0       0
            2017      -           42.8       41.8      -               42.8   41.8      -          0       0
Notes: A stands for age, C for number of years of social security contribution. Quota= A + C is the sum of age and years of
social security contribution, which must be larger or equal than Q to reach retirement eligibility. Also requirements on minimum
retirement age (A) and accrued years of contribution (C ) are binding. Alternatively, retirement eligibility is also granted when
the number of accrued years of social security contribution is higher than a minimum amount (i.e. 39 in 2007, 40 in 2008). We
incorporate the 1-year waiting window (the number of months between retirement eligibility and actual pension disbursement)
in the provision of statutory retirement age.




                                                                  52
                         Table A5: Wages var net of composition effects
                                                                            Wages
                          VARIABLES                              15-34      35-54       55+
                          First Difference (FD) OLS              -0.126     0.175      -1.507*
                          Empl. Change Age 55+                  (0.164)    (0.387)     (0.859)
                                                                  5113      5125        5088
                          Obs.
                          FD OLS with firm FE
                          Empl. Change Age 55+                   -0.109     0.301     -2.203**
                                                                (0.190)    (0.449)     (0.912)
                          Obs.                                    5113      5125        5088
                          FD (Years 2011-12)
                          Empl. Change Age 55+                  -0.0651     0.511      -3.044*
                                                                (0.450)    (0.827)     (1.764)
                          Obs                                    1022       1025        1020
                          FD IV (Years 2011-12)
                          Empl. Change Age 55+                   -2.903     -3.345      -14.36
                                                                (1.998)    (2.814)     (10.28)
                          Obs.                                    1022       1025        1020
Notes: Estimates of equation 3. All regressions include sector and year fixed effects and the 2010 shares of 35-54 and 55+
workers. Standard errors in brackets clustered at the firm level.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                     Table A6: Check for attrition: sample entry and exit
                                 Column                                   1         2
                                 VARIABLES                               Exit     Entry
                                 First Difference (FD) OLS
                                 Empl. Change Age 55+                  -0.034     0.211
                                                                      (0.026)    (0.156)
                                 FD OLS with Firm FE
                                 Empl. Change Age 55+                 -0.0196    0.00915
                                                                      (0.020)    (0.144)
                                 Obs                                  13.176      13.176
Notes: Estimates of equation 3. All regressions include sector and year fixed effects and the 2010 shares of 35-54 and 55+
workers. Standard errors in brackets clustered at the firm level.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                           53
                                Table A7: Variation in part time shares
                                                                 15-34      35-54        55+
                          First Difference (FD) OLS             0.078*      0.044      0.098**
                          Empl. Change Age 55+                  (0.043)    (0.045)     (0.048)
                                                                 5113       5125        5088
                          Obs
                          FD OLS with Firm FE                   0.107**     0.046      0.119**
                          Empl. Change Age 55+                  (0.050)    (0.047)     (0.059)
                                                                 5113       5125        5088
                          Obs
                          FD OLS (Years 2011-12)                 -0.021     -0.049     0.183**
                          Empl. Change Age 55+                  (0.105)    (0.034)     (0.081)
                                                                  1022       1025       1020
                          Obs
                          FD IV (Years 2011-12)                  -0.225     0.080      1.451*
                          Empl. Change Age 55+                  (0.743)    (0.248)     (0.835)

                          Obs                                    1022        1025       1020
Notes: Estimates of equation 3. All regressions include sector and year fixed effects and the 2010 shares of 35-54 and 55+
workers. Standard errors in brackets clustered at the firm level.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                           54
                              Table A8: Main results obtained on an alternative INPS dataset: years 2012-11
                                                                                                   Unbalanced sample
                                                                        All firms                 Firms less than 50 empl          Firms with 50 or more empl
                                                              Coef          Se       Obs         Coef         Se       Obs           Coef        Se      Obs
                         Net empl var      15-34             0.943***    (0.069)    1489856   0.747***       (0.093)    1423957     1.132***    (0.145)   65899
                         FTE wage var      15-34            -0.021***    (0.004)    937185    -0.023***      (0.003)     875306    -0.018***    (0.001)   61879
                         Net empl var      35-54             2.005***    (0.115)    1489856   1.065***       (0.105)    1423957     2.911**     (0.433)   65899
                         FTE wage var      35-54            -0.020***    (0.007)    1023882   -0.038***      (0.003)     959191      -0.010     (0.006)   64691




55
                         FTE wage var      55+                 0.003     (0.006)    354967    0.025***       (0.006)     299619    -0.032***    (0.007)   55348
                         Capital                             0.070***    (0.017)    411229    0.143***       (0.012)     360730       0.004     (0.023)   50499
                         Labor costs       INPS              0.347***    (0.073)    1395833   0.644***       (0.027)    1330496     0.047**     (0.017)   65337
                         Labor costs       Balance sheet     0.242***    (0.035)    416343    0.470***      (0.0122)     365660     0.075***    (0.015)   50683
                         Value added                         0.152***    (0.021)    415812     0.277**     (0.00866)     465220     0.058***    (0.012)   50592
     Notes: Estimates of equation 3 on the who paid Social Security Contributions for at least one day in the relevant year. Regressions include as additional controls: the share of
     35-54 and 55+ workers in 2010, sector and year fixed effects. Standard errors in brackets clustered at the firm level.
     * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
