                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
                        SCOPE CHALLENGES TO SOCIAL IMPACT
                                        Monica P. Bhatt
                                        Jonathan Guryan
                                          Jens Ludwig
                                          Anuj K. Shah
                                      Working Paper 28406
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28406
                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2021
This paper was made possible by the generous support of the Laura and John Arnold, Edna
McConnell Clark, Crown, Lloyd A. Fry, Joyce, Reva and David Logan, John D. and Catherine T.
MacArthur, Pritzker-Pucker and Spencer foundations, the Chicago Center for Youth Violence
Prevention, EquiTrust, JPAL-North America, the Illinois Criminal Justice Information Authority,
the city of Chicago, grant number 2012-JU-FX-0019 from the Office of Juvenile Justice and
Delinquency Prevention, Office of Justice Programs, US Department of Justice, and award
number 1P01HD076816 from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development of the National Institutes of Health. We are also grateful for operating
grants to the University of Chicago Crime Lab from Susan and Tom Dunn, Ira Handler, and the
MacArthur, McCormick and Pritzker foundations.We would like to highlight the contributions
and thought partnership of the Chicago Youth Violence Project Team: Philip J. Cook, Kenneth
Dodge, George Farkas, Susan E. Mayer, Harold A. Pollack, Julia Quinn, Maitreyi Sistla,
Laurence Steinberg, Nathan Weil, and John Wolf. For vital assistance in making this work
possible, we thank Chad Adams, Roseanna Ander, Barbara Byrd-Bennett, Valerie Chang, Molly
Clark, Akeshia Craven, Rukiya Curvey-Johnson, Gretchen Cusick, Aarti Dhupelia, Tony
DiVittorio, Mayor Rahm Emanuel, Wendy Fine, Jaureese Gaines, Michael Goldstein, Craig
Howard, Tim Jackson, Barbara Kelley, Ed Klunk, Timothy Knowles, Tim Lavery, Stig Leschly,
Jonathan Lewin, Arnaldo Rivera, Janey Rountree, Alan Safran, Leonetta Sanders, Mai Sistla,
Sara Stoelinga, Elizabeth Swanson, Robert Tracy, and Karen Van Ausdal, as well as the staffs of
the Chicago Public School system and Youth Guidance. Thanks to Jeffrey Broom, Sarah
Dickson, Kylie Klein and Stacy Norris for their help in accessing the data we analyze here, and to
Nathan Hess, Stephanie Kirmer, Daniel Kowalski, Khoa Nguyen, Kelsey Reid, Michael
Rosenbaum, Catherine Schwarz, Noah Sebek, Robert Webber, Nathan Weil and David Welgus
for their invaluable contributions to the data analysis. Thanks to Peter Bergman, Ben Castleman,
Josh Goodman, Katy Milkman, Sendhil Mullainathan, Todd Rogers and seminar participants at
the Harvard Business School for helpful comments and suggestions. Points of view or opinions in
this document are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the US
Department of Justice, National Institutes of Health or any other funder. Any errors are of course
our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Monica P. Bhatt, Jonathan Guryan, Jens Ludwig, and Anuj K. Shah. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Scope Challenges to Social Impact
Monica P. Bhatt, Jonathan Guryan, Jens Ludwig, and Anuj K. Shah
NBER Working Paper No. 28406
January 2021
JEL No. A1,Z18

                                          ABSTRACT

Over the past 50 years, social science has increasingly become involved in the business of not just
understanding social problems, but of helping solve them as well. Progress towards this goal will
benefit not just from the growing work on solving the challenge of scale, by which we mean the
capacity to effectively reach large numbers of people, but also from more attention to the less-
appreciated challenge of scope, by which we mean the capacity to change a large share of the
decisions that affect a given person's outcomes. In this essay, we provide a simple framework to
help think about the scope of candidate policies, and highlight some common situations that are
often associated with potential for large scope.

Monica P. Bhatt                                  Jens Ludwig
University of Chicago                            Harris School of Public Policy
Crime and Education Labs                         University of Chicago
33 North LaSalle Street                          1307 East 60th Street
Suite 1600                                       Chicago, IL 60637
Chicago, IL 60602                                and NBER
mbhatt@uchicago.edu                              jludwig@uchicago.edu

Jonathan Guryan                                  Anuj K. Shah
Northwestern University                          Booth School of Business
Institute for Policy Research                    University of Chicago
2040 Sheridan Road                               5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Evanston, IL 60208                               Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                         anuj.shah@chicagobooth.edu
j-guryan@northwestern.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28406
    I.       INTRODUCTION
Fifty years ago the Social Science Research Council (SSRC) published an essay by its then-
president, the distinguished psychologist Henry Riecken, who argued: 1

         "The social sciences, like the physical or biological sciences, are intellectual subjects,
         directed primarily toward understanding rather than action. It would of course be a
         curious kind of `understanding' that had no implications for action, and this is perhaps
         especially true for the social sciences. Nevertheless, there is a difference between
         enlarging one's understanding of human behavior and society on the one hand and trying
         to solve a social problem on the other."

Since then, the social sciences have increasingly tried to help "solve social problems."
Economics, for example, has become an increasingly empirical field over time (Hamermesh,
2013 and Angrist et al., 2017). In 1974, Nobel laureate Robert Solow and others created the
Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation to help implement interventions out in the
world as part of a new experimental program to measure their impacts. This was part of the
leading edge of the `credibility revolution' that has made empirical work increasingly relevant
for policy (Angrist and Pischke, 2010). In 2003, the Poverty Action Lab was founded at MIT
with the mission of "working to reduce poverty." Later, the `behavioral revolution' gave
economists new tools to help inform policy design. In 2010, the UK government launched a
behavioral insights team ­ the "nudge unit" ­ to inform government policy design, followed a
few years later by similar teams in the United States and Australia. Economists are now actively
working on the challenge of how to scale policies and programs found to be successful in
demonstration projects (de Rezende and Eluf, 2016, Al-Ubaydli et al., 2017, Banerjee et al.,
2017. Davis et al., 2017, and Muralidharan, et al., 2017). 2

We argue here that these efforts would benefit from an addition to the conceptual toolkit we use
to judge the potential impact of candidate policies. To see what's missing, consider how we
would decide whether it is worth developing and testing one behavioral science-informed policy
intervention: swapping the location of unhealthy foods with fruit and other healthy snacks in
school cafeterias. What are the questions we would normally ask ourselves about whether to
pursue studying this intervention using our standard economics framework?
    · Is there a real problem here? Yes. Childhood obesity has tripled in the US since the
       1970s, with around one in three children and teens now overweight or obese. There are
       important externalities and internalities associated with obesity.
    · Does theory suggest a promising policy lever? Yes. A large body of behavioral research
       tells us that defaults matter by capitalizing on the fact that switching is effortful, by
       signaling an endorsement by whoever is structuring the choice environment, and through
       reference dependence (Dinner et al., 2011).
    · Does the intervention seem likely to pass a benefit-cost test? Yes. The cost of swapping
       the location of healthy and unhealthy foods in school cafeterias is negligible. Given the
       social costs of obesity, even a modest impact would be enough to justify these costs.

1
  Reickan also served as the first director of the National Science Foundation's social sciences division.
2
  Public health has long been focused not just on identifying health problems but solving them, starting with the
famous identification of a cholera-spreading water pump in London by John Snow in 1849.

                                                          2
    ·     Will the intervention scale? Yes. Like many nudges, this intervention is largely
          mechanical and so easily replicated. We could imagine doing this for every cafeteria
          serving each of the 32 million children who eat school lunch in America.

This candidate policy checks every one of the boxes on our list. Nonetheless, this policy change
would not have more than a modest impact on obesity prevalence.

Where is the breakdown? The following calculation illustrates the problem. Hanks et al. (2012)
report that this intervention increases the share of food consumed by children in the school
cafeteria that is healthy from 33% to 36%, or three percentage points (about 10% of baseline).
Under the usual benefit-cost calculus about whether this is worth doing, we can see that this
looks amazing given that the cost of the intervention is close to zero. It would be crazy not to do
this.

But in a world in which we want to help achieve big changes in major social problems, there is
another set of questions we should ask ourselves. Suppose that children eat, say, 25% of their
weekly meals at school. Changing cafeteria layout policies would increase children's weekly
healthy-food consumption by 3% times 25%, or less than one percentage point. Perhaps the
potential impact could be larger if some children eat school breakfast, not just lunch, or if we
could enlist cafeterias in other settings like malls or museums. But eventually we will run out of
easy opportunities to change healthy eating by changing check-out line options ­ limited by the
modest share of eating children do in cafeterias.

The problem with the usual framework is that it ignores the issue of scope, by which we mean:
of the different decisions an individual makes that affect the outcome of interest, what share of
them are affected by a given intervention? That is, how large of an effect could the intervention
have for a given person's outcome of key policy concern? If scale is the question of an
intervention's capacity to reach across people and serve an increasingly large population, scope
could be thought of as an intervention's potential reach within a given person across the different
decisions that shape the outcome of concern.

In the next section we discuss in a bit more detail what we mean by scope and what features of
settings and/or policies are commonly associated with the potential for large scope. The third
section discusses some challenges that can arise in trying to solve the scope challenge in practice.

    II.      ASSESSING SCOPE

In what follows we provide a bit more description of what exactly we mean by scope.
Forecasting the scope of a candidate intervention is relevant for the goal of focusing on things
that have the potential to have a large impact at the population-level on some policy problem.
This is separate from the question of whether a candidate intervention generates benefits to
society in excess of the intervention's costs. 3 Sometimes it is possible to achieve large

3
 Just as a single outcome might sometimes be a function of multiple decisions, it can be that a single decision might
affect multiple outcomes. In that case we might redefine what we mean by "large impact on a social problem" to be
not just a large change in a single aggregate outcome, but a large change in an index of outcomes where we might,
for instance, dollar-weight the index by the value to society of a unit change in the outcome.

                                                          3
population impacts through the aggregation of small impacts from multiple interventions that all
pass a benefit-cost test. But because this is not always possible, for reasons we discuss below, it
is valuable to assess a candidate intervention's scope above and beyond some benefit-cost
measure.

    A. A simple framework

Figure 1 helps illustrate what we mean by scope, and why it's easy to lose track of the issue of
scope when we are designing or evaluating policies.

        Figure 1. Factors that influence scope




Sometimes we start with a policy-relevant outcome we are trying to change, Y*, such as wealth
or obesity or high school graduation or violent-crime victimizations, which is the sum of
individual-level outcomes across all people within the population,   =      =1    . We then try to
identify a specific decision people make, Di, that affects the outcome and might be responsive to
some intervention, P. If the outcome is obesity, for instance, we might identify a decision related
to eating or exercise. 4

Other times, we start with the decision that we think we can change, Di, and then think about
what outcome(s) it might affect. For example, if we can encourage youth to attend school more
consistently, we might hope this could not only improve schooling outcomes but, by occupying
youth for large parts of every day, keep them out of trouble as well. 5

The key point is that we usually focus on identifying the link between a single, manipulatable
decision Di and a policy-relevant outcome Yi. This focus on individual-level treatment effects ­
even if we later consider how scaling the policy to reach more people might generate an
4
  The relationship between these decisions and the outcomes may vary across people, for example because of
differences in metabolism. The relationship between the decisions and the outcome may also be non-linear and
change with the value of the outcome, if for example metabolism itself changes as people begin losing weight.
5
  See for example, Jacob and Lefgren (2003).

                                                        4
aggregate of individual-level effects ­ can lead us to lose sight of some key questions we might
have asked ourselves during the project-selection stage about the potential scope of our candidate
interventions.

    B. Share of Decisions Affected

The first question we should ask ourselves in trying to assess the potential scope of a candidate
intervention is: What share of all the decisions an individual makes that affect some outcome
might be affected by our intervention? Some key circumstances that give rise to larger decision
coverage, and hence (all else equal) larger scope, include:

        ·    Interventions for outcomes that depend largely on a single one-time decision (just a
             single Di influencing the outcome Yi). 6 Retirement savings is a canonical example,
             which often critically depend upon a one-time enrollment decision like signing up for
             an employer-sponsored 401k plan. Another example is organ donation, which
             depends on one-time enrollment decisions made at key moments like the DMV for
             license renewal (Johnson and Goldstein, 2004), or plan-making interventions that get
             people to go out and vote (Gerber and Rogers, 2009 and Nickerson and Rogers,
             2010). A different type of example involves the decision to purchase a capital good
             that lasts for some time, as when Australia encouraged people during a drought to
             install low-flow shower heads or water tanks for gardens (Walton and Hume, 2011).
        ·    Interventions that target a series of decisions made in the same context. This makes it
             easier to modify a large number of decisions through changes to a small number of
             types of choice environments. For example, checklists for surgeons have been shown
             to generate large reductions in surgery-related infections, injuries and even deaths
             (Treadwell et al., 2014). Another example includes providing doctors with
             information about a patient's overdose, which has been shown to reduce opioid
             prescribing (Doctor et al., 2018), or providing doctors with prescribing practices of
             other doctors (Scarney et al., 2018).
        ·    Interventions that target decisions where there is a high level of habit-formation. For
             example, implementation of intentions to exercise ("what days and times will you
             plan to exercise next week?") could lead to lasting behavior change if exercise is
             habit-forming (Milne et al., 2002 and Gollwitzer, 1999).
        ·    Interventions that target multiple decisions that are all motivated by a shared
             underlying reason (that is, a single Ri links to multiple Di in Figure 1). For example,
             suppose that a wide range of diet decisions ­ such as, choosing between meat and
             vegetables, or sugar and fruits, or how much fats and carbohydrates to eat, or whether
             or not to snack late at night ­ all depend on a single reason: the person's mis-
             understanding of the magnitude of the health consequences of diet. Then a single
             intervention focused on improving this understanding could change a wide range of
             health-relevant decisions.

    C. Importance of Decisions for Outcome

6
  There is a separate point, different from decision coverage, about how complicated versus straightforward the one-
time decision is; as Ben Castleman pointed out to us, for instance, filling out the FAFSA college financial-aid form
is one-time but extremely complicated for most people.

                                                         5
A second question to ask for assessing scope is: How important are the decisions affected by our
intervention for the outcome we care about? The impact on an outcome is not simply a
mechanical function of just the number of decisions affected by some intervention: not all
decisions are equally important for the behavior we are trying to change. The size of the change
in a given person's outcome might depend on the share of that person's decisions that are
affected, weighted by each decision's effect on the outcome for that person. This may vary
across people, so for considering scope it is useful to consider different types of people ­
particularly the question of whether the intervention has the potential for sizable scope for
anyone.

Luckily we often know something about the outcome itself that lets us understand the relative
importance of the decisions we are trying to change.

For example, imagine trying to use behavioral science to address an important policy problem in
America: gun violence. One commonly-discussed contributing factor to this problem is playing
violent video games. While good research on this link is limited, the standardized effect size in
an observational regression of video game playing and teen aggressive behavior has a 95%
confidence interval that ranges from just -0.08 to +0.10, which likely overstates the true causal
relationship because those who choose to voluntarily play lots of violent video games are
plausibly predisposed towards aggressive behavior already (Anderson, 2004 and Przybylski and
Weinstein, 2019). 7 Even a policy intervention that substantially changed the playing of violent
video games would be seem to be very unlikely to have a large impact on gun violence.

Contrast that with a behavioral intervention that tried to address the problem of under-saving by
American households by bolstering retirement savings specifically. This is clearly an important
problem. Fifty years ago, the average American family saved about 10% of their income; today
the figure is closer to 2% (Sullivan, 2018). In 2016, the median household had a total of
$189,000 worth of assets, of which fully $60,000 (32%) was in the form of retirement accounts
(United States, 2017). 8 Given that so much of household savings are in retirement accounts,
increasing participation in employer-sponsored retirement plans could indeed have sizable
impacts on total overall savings.

    III.      PRACTICAL LESSONS

           A. Increasing scope can sometimes compromise scale

One way to expand the effective set of decisions changed by a candidate intervention is to focus
on interventions that target a single underlying reason that shapes multiple decisions an
individual makes. But that effort can sometimes come at the cost of compromising scale.

Let us return to the question of how to reduce the risk that young people are involved in gun
violence. The nationwide protests that occurred in the spring of 2020 in the aftermath of the

7
  Other studies can find larger associations with intermediate outcomes that are easier to measure in laboratory
studies like aggressive affect, aggressive cognition or cardiovascular arousal (see for example, Anderson [2004]).


                                                          6
murder of George Floyd have led to renewed interest in ways of keeping the public safe without
relying on law enforcement. One component of such a policy shift might involve increased
emphasis on social programs that try to change multiple decisions that a person might make ­
what Hertwig and Grune-Yanoff (2017) call "boosts".

For example, the behaviorally-informed Becoming a Man (BAM) program, developed by
Chicago-area non-profit Youth Guidance, tries to help youth identify common cognitive errors
they might make automatically without realizing it in high-stakes settings. One of the key lessons
from behavioral science is that because deliberate cognition is effortful (what psychologists call
"system 2"), we rely as much as possible on automatic responses that we have developed to be
adaptive for dealing with commonly encountered situations ("system 1"). But those normally
adaptive responses can sometimes get us into trouble if they get over-expressed and deployed in
the wrong setting. While this general tendency is common to all people, unfortunately the
consequences can be much more severe for young people growing up in neighborhoods of
concentrated disadvantage where guns, drugs, gangs and crime are more prevalent.

For example, when a teenager grows up in an environment where his well-being depends on not
being seen as a pushover, then it is adaptive for him to learn to retaliate when someone insults
him. In distressed, high-crime areas where sources of formal social control, like police or
schools, are overwhelmed, people are on their own. A person in this circumstance might learn to
automatically push back when threatened to avoid additional victimizations in the future (see for
example Anderson, 1999, or Papachristos, 2009). But if he is holding a gun when confronted,
then (unless he really faces a serious threat to his safety) it may be better to override this
heuristic. Or, if for example a teenager hears a teacher say "sit down and be quiet", he may
instinctively or automatically perceive this as a situation where he should retaliate and act up to
preserve his reputation, although in this case it can lead to suspension or even expulsion from
school with long-term adverse educational consequences.

Learning about these principles might affect how youth approach many decisions, particularly
those involving social conflict. 9 As is the case with many boosts, BAM hires people to coach or
work intensively with participants on decision making. And these programs, which typically
involve 15 or 20 contact hours with participants (sometimes more), often cover a range of
different decision-making scenarios.

In Heller et al., we reported on two large-scale randomized controlled trials (RCT) of BAM with
several thousand youth that showed very large declines in violent-crime arrests of 45-50% during
the program period, as well as sustained gains in high school graduation rates of 12-19% of the
control mean (Heller et al., 2017). The intervention is clearly solving the scope problem, given
these large impacts. (Nor are these types of large behavioral impacts limited to just BAM.) 10

9
  These efforts to change general decision-making processes are in contrast to efforts to change-the-chooser by
educating them about a specific decision, such as the health and other consequences of binge drinking (having more
than five drinks at a time for men or four or more at a time for women).
10
   In Heller et al. (2017), we also report on the results of a CBT-type intervention that was randomly assigned within
the Cook County, Illinois Juvenile Temporary Detention Center (JTDC), which reduced readmission rates through
18 months following JTDC exit by around 16 percentage points (21%). In the same spirit, Blattman et al. (2017)
study a CBT program in Liberia that worked with men between the ages of 18 and 35 and found a reduction in anti-
social behaviors by 0.2 standard deviations. More recently, other members of the University of Chicago Crime Lab

                                                          7
But, as access to the program expanded, the average impact may well have declined. This can be
seen in Figure 2, where we plot the number of youth participating in BAM citywide in a given
academic year on the x-axis against the average effect of BAM on program participants who
were in any of our RCTs in that year. 11 In the later years with substantially larger program
participation levels, we can no longer reject the null hypothesis that impacts equal zero, although
given our statistical sample sizes here, we also cannot reject the null hypothesis that the program
effects are constant at different scales. So, we would consider this suggestive but not conclusive
evidence that effectiveness may have declined as scale increased. While Youth Guidance has
made some changes to the program intended to enhance fidelity and support program quality at
scale which might strengthen its effects, we do not at this point have any evidence on how those
changes have moderated effectiveness. 12




have been studying the Choose to Change (C2C) program for youth at elevated risk for violence involvement and
find the program reduces their risk of violent-crime arrest by around 50%. See Abdul-Razzak and Hallberg (2018),
the results of which were discussed in Kirp, David. "How to end the cycle of violence in Chicago." The New York
Times, September 13, 2018.
11
   Note that not every youth receiving BAM in a given year was in one of our RCTs, but nonetheless from a
program-operations perspective at least the total number of participants citywide in a year is the relevant parameter.
12
   For example Youth Guidance has made significant investments in training and coaching on counselor
competencies and program delivery, and has worked with National Implementation Research Network's (NIRN)
implementation science framework to strengthen consistency and replicability over sites and over time. As of yet
there have been no further studies to establish evidence about the impacts of these adjustments.


                                                          8
Figure 2. BAM impact by scale of BAM delivery city-wide




                                    9
BAM has a number of shared features with the sort of `boosts' or social programs that are often
used to address social problems that can help solve the scope problem but may as a result
exacerbate challenges of scale. For example: 13
        · The program is not mechanical; being a good counselor clearly requires a specific
           skillset. People with those skills who are willing to work at a given wage are
           presumably in finite supply, so to recruit additional skilled counselors as the program
           expands, higher wages would presumably be required. Yet, as the program expanded
           in Chicago, wages (as far as we know) did not substantially increase, so it is possible
           average counselor effectiveness may have declined (even though the crude proxies
           for effectiveness we can measure did not seem to change very much over time).
        · While BAM has a curriculum, by its nature it involves some discretion on the part of
           individual providers about how it is delivered session-to-session and how providers
           tailor specific actions to build relationships with specific participants. This makes it
           difficult to fully write down the "formula" or recipe for how the program works
           (indeed Youth Guidance's own internal implementation measures are weakly
           correlated with one another, and in some cases even negatively correlated).


What is the lesson for project selection? The degree to which a candidate intervention involves a
production process that can be fully described will sometimes require some careful on-the-
ground observation. The degree to which the intervention relies on inputs that will be harder to
obtain as scale increases can be inferred from some combination of introspection on whether the
intervention's inputs seem specialized or not, whether there are other interventions out there that
rely on similar inputs whose experiences can be studied and learned from, and in some cases,
pilot-testing combined with what Davis et al. termed "scale up experiments" (Davis et al., 2017).


        B. Scope and scale challenges as marginal cost questions

As noted above, a key challenge in improving children's healthy eating by swapping the location
of fruit and cafeteria in the school cafeteria comes from the fact that children only eat a modest
share of all their meals each week in a school cafeteria. But of course, that's not the only setting
in which children eat meals where we might swap the locations of healthy and unhealthy food.
What are the practical implications for intervention to have to fall back on some other setting?
How would we even begin to think about this?

The simple idea from economics of marginal costs gives us an easy way to think about this. Let
the x-axis in Figure 3 be the change in the share of consumed food that is healthy; the y-axis is
the marginal cost of achieving a given change. Swapping fruit and candy in the school cafeteria
provides a very low-cost way to increase the share of food consumed by children that is healthy
by about 1 percentage point (per our calculation above from the results presented in Hanks et al.,
13
   As discussed in the technical appendix, changes in the characteristics of program participants and school- or
community-level contexts as the program expands are a partial explanation for why the average effectiveness BAM
seems to have declined as the scale of the program- that is, the number, locales, and types of students and schools
served - increased. These findings are consistent with some heterogeneity in how youth respond to the intervention,
but this is just a partial explanation.

                                                        10
(2012). To achieve larger changes in healthy eating requires changing what they eat in other
settings, where it becomes more difficult (hence costly) to change their eating ­ represented by
the increase in the marginal cost curve for the 2nd percentage point change in healthy eating,
which corresponds to the next-lowest-cost way of changing their eating.

       Figure 3: Marginal costs of changing healthy eating among children (hypothetical
       example)




Of course, it will not always be possible to precisely trace out the marginal cost schedule like in
Figure 3 for a given intervention, but even rough attempts to approximate it can help researchers
and policymakers alike begin to consider questions during the project selection stage like:
       · Over how large a range does the marginal cost curve stay at a low level?
       · How quickly does it begin to increase thereafter ­ that is, by how much does the cost
           of expanding the scope of the intervention begin to increase?

The idea of marginal costs can also be useful in helping researchers and policymakers construct
an optimal portfolio of interventions to address some big problem in situations where there is no
single large-scope intervention to be found. Suppose the first percentage point of healthy eating
for a given person changed through rearranging food in the school cafeteria costs (say) 50 cents,
while the first percentage point of change in healthy eating due to an intervention that provides
nutritional information costs 75 cents. We should obviously do 1 percentage point worth of
cafeteria food substitution for starters. If the cost of changing the next percentage point through
cafeteria food rearranging is less than 75 cents we should do that as well, but if it's more than 75
cents we should combine 1 point of cafeteria re-arranging with 1 point's worth of nutritional
education as well.

Taking seriously the idea of trying to achieve large changes in outcomes can substantially change
our thinking about what intervention, or mix of interventions, is most promising to study and/or
should eventually be adopted. In our job as scientists carrying out studies, we typically focus on

                                                 11
identifying interventions where the marginal costs of reaching the initial subset of participants, or
subsets of relevant decisions, are low. That is, if we think about this curve as relating marginal
cost (y-axis) to number of people or share of relevant behavioral decisions affected (x-axis), our
search for promising interventions to pilot-test focuses on the intercept of this curve (y-axis
location at x-axis value of zero). But for purposes of achieving large, population-level impacts on
social conditions, we need to be focusing much more on the marginal cost curve's slope over a
large range of the x-axis as well.

         C. Scale and scope as interdependent challenges

While scale and scope are conceptually distinct, they interact in important ways. For example,
suppose our intervention involves swapping the location of the fruit and candy at the check-out
line of the movie theatre. Scope involves asking the question: For each person (or "type" of
person), how much of the eating decisions that impact health could be affected by this
intervention? Suppose the data revealed that no one goes to the movies more than once per
month. In this case, considering scope alone is enough to tell us that there is no way for this
intervention to substantially reduce obesity rates.

But suppose the data revealed that some people go to the movies three times a day and do all of
their eating there. In that case, understanding the potential aggregate-level impact of the
intervention requires considering the follow-up scale question: What share of people in the
general population are of the type that go to the movies all the time versus the type that goes
rarely? In that sense, scope questions are asymmetrically informative; they can by themselves
help rule out a candidate intervention's potential for large-scale population-level impact, but by
themselves cannot establish that potential without some additional consideration of scale.

   IV.      CONCLUSION

We have argued that the increased involvement of social scientists to help make big progress on
major social problems will benefit from paying more attention to scope ­ that is, how to affect a
large share of the decisions that shape a given person's behavior. How would this change what
social scientists do in practice?
    · Many RCTs are about developing basic understanding of human behavior, rather than
        identifying solutions to policy problems. That useful enterprise should proceed as is.
    · Some social scientists may be mostly interested in identifying interventions that pass a
        benefit-cost test, regardless of aggregate impact on a problem. That useful work should
        also proceed.
    · For those interested in achieving large changes in outcomes, assessing scope helps
        determine when we can and cannot get to big impact by assembling a portfolio of small-
        impact policies. Assessing scope can help us better understand when this is not possible
        because:
            o the marginal cost of changing some decisions that are necessary to affect the
                ultimate social outcome is high
            o a very large number of interventions would be required and so we might run up
                against constraints on R&D bandwidth or the capacity and patience for innovation
                by external partners

                                                 12
           o even the accumulation of interventions might together have limited scope, so we
               can in those cases also assess the public's willingness to support multiple efforts
               to solve a given problem in order to avoid, or at least understand the potential for,
               "crowd out" across policies (Hagmann et al., 2019).
   ·   In cases where we cannot aggregate up to large impacts through a portfolio of small-
       impact policies, we might prioritize work on interventions where scope challenges are
       less pronounced: those that target outcomes that depend largely on a single one-time
       decision, or on a series of decisions made in the same context, decisions where there is a
       high level of habit-formation, or a single reason that lies behind multiple decisions that
       are relevant for the outcome.

Operationalizing the framework we lay out here is not trivial in practice, but we hope it is a
useful start in prioritizing efforts within social science to promote social progress.




                                                13
REFERENCES

Abdul-Razzak, N. & Hallberg, K. (2018)
      https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/933/history/33957.

About Us. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://www.povertyactionlab.org/about-j-pal.

Al-Ubaydli, O., List, J.A., LoRoe, D., & Suskind, D.L. (2017) Scaling for economists: Lessons
      from the non-adherence problem in the medical literature. J. Econ. Perspect. 31, 125-144.

Anderson, C.A. (2004) An update on the effects of playing violent video games. J. Adolesc. 27,
      113-122.

Angrist, J., Azoulay, P., Ellison, G., Hill, R., & Feng Lu, S. (2017) Economic research evolves:
       Fields and styles. American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 107(5), 293-97.

Angrist, J.D., & Pischke, J. (2010) The credibility revolution in empirical economics: How better
       research design is taking the con out of econometrics. Journal of Economic Perspective,
       24(2), 3-30.

Banerjee, A., Banerji, R., Berry, J., Duflo, E., Kannan, H., Mukerji, S., Shotland, M., & Walton,
       M. (2017) From proof of concept to scalable policies: Challenges and solutions, with an
       application. J. Econ. Perspect. 31, 73-102.

Blattman, C., Jamison, J.C., & Sheridan, M. (2017) Reducing crime and violence: Experimental
       evidence from cognitive behavioral therapy in Liberia. Am. Econ. Rev. 107, 1165-1206.

de Rezende, L.F, & Eluf, J.N. (2016). Population attributable fraction: Planning of diseases
       prevention actions in Brazil. Rev Saude Publica, 50(30). Retrieved from
       https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4902656/.

Davis, J.M.V., Guryan, J., Hallberg, K., & Ludwig, J. (2017) The economics of scale-up. NBER,
       23925.

Dinner et al. (2011). Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 17(4), 432.
       https://doi.org/10.1037/a0026470.

Doctor, J.N., Nguyen, A., Lev, R., Lucas, J., Knight, T., Zhao, H., & Menchine, M. (2018)
       Opioid prescribing decreases after learning of a patient's fatal overdose. Sci., 361, 588-
       590.

Gerber, A.S., & Rogers, T. (2009) Descriptive social norms and motivation to vote:
       Everybody's voting and so should you. J. Politics, 71, 178-191.

Gollwitzer, P.M. (1999) Implementation intentions: Strong effects of simple plans. Am.
       Psychol., 54, 493-503.

                                                14
Hagmann, D., Ho, E.H., & Loewenstein, G. (2019) Nudging out support for a carbon tax. Nat.
     Clim. Change, 9, 484-489.

Hamermesh, D.S. (2013). Six decades of top economics publishing: Who and how? Journal of
     Economic Literature 51(1), 162-72.

Hanks, A.S., Just, D.R., Smith, L.E., & Wansink, B. (2012) Healthy convenience: nudging
       students toward healthier choices in the lunchroom. J. Pub. Health., 34, 370-6.

Heller, S.B., Shah, A.K., Guryan, J., Ludwig, J., Mullainathan, S. & Pollack, H.A. (2017)
        Thinking, fast and slow? Some field experiments to reduce crime and dropout in
        Chicago." Q. J. Econ., 132, 1-54.

Hertwig, R., & Grune-Yanoff, R.T. (2017) Nudging and boosting: Steering or empowering good
      decisions. Perspect. Psychol. Sci., 12, 973-986.

Jacob, B.A., & Lefgren, L. (2003) Are idle hands the Devil's workshop? Incapacitation,
       concentration and juvenile crime. American Economic Review, 93(5), 1560-77.

Johnson, E.J., & Goldstein, D.G. (2004) Defaults and donation decisions. Transplantation. 78,
      1713-16.

Kirp, D. (2018, Sept. 13) "How to end the cycle of violence in Chicago." The New York Times.

Milne, S., Orbell, S., & Sheeran, P. (2002) Combining motivational and volitional interventions
       to promote exercise participation: Protection motivation theory and implementation
       intentions. Br. J. Health Psychol. 7, 163-184.

Muralidharan, K., & Niehaus, P., (2017) Experimentation at Scale. J. Econ. Perspect., 31, 103-
       24.

Nickerson, D.W. & Rogers, T. (2010) Do you have a voting plan?: Implementation intentions,
       voter turnout, and organic plan making. Psychol. Sci., 21, 194-199.

Przybylski, A.K., & Weinstein, N. (2019) Violent video game engagement is not associated with
       adolescents' aggressive behaviour: evidence from a registered report. R. Soc. Open Sci. 6,
       171474.

Sacarny, A., Barnett, M.L., Le, J., Tetkoski, F.,Yokum, D., & Agrawal, S. (2018) Effect of
       Peer Comparison Letters for High-Volume Primary Care Prescribers of Quetiapine in
       Older and Disabled Adults: A Randomized Clinical Trial." JAMA Psychol., 75, 1003­
       1011.

Social Science and Contemporary Social Problems. (2019, August 21). Retrieved from
       https://items.ssrc.org/from-our-archives/social-science-and-contemporary-social-
       problems/

                                               15
Sullivan, B. (2018, August 28). Once again, Americans are not saving enough. Market Watch.
       Retrieved from https://www.marketwatch.com/story/once-again-americans-are-not-
       saving-enough-2018-08-28

Treadwell, J.R, Lucas,S., & Tsou, A.Y. (2014) Surgical checklists: a systemic review of impacts
      and implementation. BMJ Qual Saf., 23, 299-318.

Walton, A. & Hume, M. (2011) Creating positive habits in water conservation: The case of the
      Queensland Water Commission and the Target 140 Campaign. Int. J. Nonprofit Volunt.,
      Sect. Mark. 16, 215-224.

United States. Federal Reserve Board. (2017, September). Changes in U.S, Family Finances
       from 2013 to 2016: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances. Retrieved from the
       Federal Reserve Web site: https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/scf17.pdf.




                                              16
