                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE PRODUCTIVITY CONSEQUENCES OF POLLUTION-INDUCED MIGRATION
                              IN CHINA

                                     Gaurav Khanna
                                     Wenquan Liang
                                  Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak
                                        Ran Song

                                     Working Paper 28401
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28401


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2021




We thank seminar participants at UCSD, UW (Seattle), NBER Summer Institute (Energy and
Enivornmental Economics; and Urban Economics), Stanford SITE Migration Conference, U
Richmond, Cities and Development Conference (Johns Hopkins), Ortygia Business School,
Georgetown University, Barcelona UAB, the World Bank, Harvard, CUHK, HKUST (China
Summer Institute), Nankai-Yale Conference, and Lingnan U for useful comments, and to Ed
Glaeser, Matthew Kahn, David Lagakos, Paulina Oliva and David Yang for insightful
suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Gaurav Khanna, Wenquan Liang, Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak, and Ran Song. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Productivity Consequences of Pollution-Induced Migration in China
Gaurav Khanna, Wenquan Liang, Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak, and Ran Song
NBER Working Paper No. 28401
January 2021
JEL No. E24,J61,O18,Q52,R12

                                           ABSTRACT

Migration and pollution are two defining features of China's impressive growth performance over
the last 30 years. In this paper we study the migration response to pollution in Chinese cities, and
its consequences for productivity and welfare. We document a robust pattern in which skilled
workers emigrate more in response to pollution than the unskilled. Their greater sensitivity to air
quality holds up in cross-sectional variation across cities, panel variation with individual fixed-
effects, and when instrumenting for pollution using distant power-plants upwind of cities, or
thermal inversions that trap pollution. Pollution therefore changes the spatial distribution of
skilled and unskilled workers, which results in higher returns to skill in cities that the educated
migrate away from. We quantify the loss in aggregate productivity due to this re-sorting by
estimating a model of demand and supply of skilled and unskilled workers across Chinese cities.
Counterfactual simulations from the estimated model show that reducing pollution would
increase productivity through spatial re-sorting by approximately as much as the direct health
benefits of clean air. Physical and institutional restrictions on mobility exacerbate welfare losses.
People's dislike of pollution explains a substantial portion of the wage gap between cities.


Gaurav Khanna                                     Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak
University of California, San Diego               Yale School of Management
9500 Gilman Drive                                 135 Prospect Street
La Jolla, CA 92037                                Box 208200
gakhanna@ucsd.edu                                 New Haven, CT 06520
                                                  and NBER
Wenquan Liang                                     ahmed.mobarak@yale.edu
Jinan University
No. 601 West Huangpu Road                         Ran Song
Tianhe District                                   Division of Social Science
Guangzhou                                         Yale-NUS College
P.R. China                                        16 #01-220
liang.wenquan@jnu.edu.cn                          College Ave West
                                                  Singapore, 138527
                                                  songr@nber.org
1    Introduction
    The large productivity gaps across regions or sectors within developing countries (Restuccia
and Rogerson, 2013, 2017) create an enduring development puzzle: Why do workers remain in
low productivity areas when they could experience wage gains elsewhere (Gollin et al., 2014)?
It is important to understand the drivers of worker location choices, as spatial reallocation has
the potential to produce substantial productivity gains (Bryan et al., 2014; Clemens et al.,
2019). The literature proposes a few explanations for the low rates of within-country mobility
observed across the world: Migration costs (Bazzi, 2017; Bryan and Morten, 2019), income risk
at destinations (Bryan et al., 2014; Lewis, 1954), non-transferable location-specific amenities
(Munshi and Rosenzweig, 2016), or urban disamenities (Lagakos et al., 2019) like pollution.
    Pollution can have a large effect on where people choose to live and work (Heblich et al.,
2020). Particulate matter pollution exceeded WHO air quality guidelines for 96% of Chinese
cities in 2015, and on average was four times higher than the level considered safe. Chinese
air pollution reduces citizens' life expectancy and causes elevated rates of heart disease, stroke,
and lung cancer (Ebenstein et al., 2015, 2017; He et al., 2020). We document that the sharp
increases in pollution in China in recent years were concentrated in a few cities, which increased
the cross-city dispersion in pollution, and with it, incentives to migrate between cities.
    We analyze whether workers relocate in response to variation in air quality across Chinese
cities, and then quantify the aggregate productivity consequences of this movement. While
one branch of the literature argues that workers are efficiently sorted (Young, 2014), we show
that asymmetric migration responses of skilled and unskilled workers to pollution can create
losses in aggregate productivity. This is because skilled workers choose to leave polluted places
where they would be more productive, and the production complementarities between skilled
and unskilled workers makes the unskilled less productive when the skilled leave. Migration
costs, both physical and from Chinese hukou policy, differentially restrict mobility by skill. This
exacerbates the productivity and welfare losses from pollution for both types of workers.
    Pollution and the skill-composition of the workforce are jointly determined, and both depend
on other factors such as industrial growth. The first part of our paper is therefore careful to
identify the migration response to exogenous variation in pollution. To build confidence that
our estimates indeed represent the causal effect of air quality on mobility, we assemble several
datasets, and investigate this relationship under multiple independent sources of variation.
We isolate exogenous fluctuations in pollution leveraging variation in wind direction combined
with the historical placement of distant thermal power plants (as in Freeman et al., 2019), a
regression discontinuity around the Huai river (as in Chen et al., 2013), and a meteorological
phenomenon called thermal inversions that traps pollution (as in Arceo et al., 2016; Chen et al.,
2017; Hicks et al., 2015). We also model changes in worker location as a function of changes in
pollution, following individuals over time, and conditioning on individual fixed effects. Across
these research designs, we find robust evidence that college-educated workers leave areas with


                                                1
higher levels of pollution, while the less educated are comparatively less responsive.
    Yet, quantifying the exact migration responses without a model remains a challenge, since
all parts of the country are affected either directly or indirectly by the re-location of workers,
making finding true `control groups' for comparison elusive. Residents of a city experiencing
no change in pollution may still see a change in their incentives to migrate, if in-migration
from other newly-polluted places changes the equilibrium wage rate in that city. Indeed, the
quantities of workers, equilibrium wages, and pollution levels are jointly determined in spatial
equilibrium, making it difficult to interpret certain magnitudes in reduced-form relationships.
    Quantifying the productivity implications of these mobility responses requires a model. For
instance, the differential emigration of skilled workers changes the skilled wage premia across
cities, which in turn also affects the location choices of the unskilled in general equilibrium.
We empirically document that the relative scarcity of skilled workers in polluted cities raises
the marginal product of skill in those locations (Giles et al., 2019). Cleaning up polluted
cities therefore induces a relocation of skilled workers from low marginal product areas to high
marginal product areas, which raises aggregate output, as in Hsieh and Klenow (2009) and
Hsieh and Moretti (2018).
    The model allows us to quantify the magnitudes of these productivity shifts. The differential
response to (exogenous variation in) pollution by skill shifts the labor supply of workers, and
produces a valid estimate of the compensating wage-differential that workers have to be paid
to reside in polluted cities. This traces out the labor demand curve, and allows us to estimate
the elasticity of substitution between the skilled and unskilled, which show that in China, they
are complements in production. To trace out the labor supply curve, we create instruments
based on trade-induced growth from the permanent normalization of trading relations (PNTR)
between the US and China, and the change in world import demand (WID), which differentially
generate variation in the demand for skilled and unskilled workers across Chinese cities.1
    For a more comprehensive and accurate quantification, our model incorporates alternative
mechanisms linking production, pollution and productivity: (a) pollution can directly affect
health and productivity (He et al., 2016; Zivin and Neidell, 2012); (b) production, in turn,
affects air quality (Andreoni and Levinson, 2001); and (c) worker location decisions may af-
fect agglomeration (Au and Henderson, 2006), (d) house prices (Bayer et al., 2009; Glaeser,
2014a), or (e) the pollution-intensity of production (Glaeser and Kahn, 2010; He et al., 2020).
We introduce additional instruments to estimate these elasticities.2 In summary, we quan-
   1
      Pierce and Schott (2016) use the PNTR import shock and Autor et al. (2013) use the WID import shock to
document effects on the United States. Our approach takes advantage of the fact that these are simultaneously
export shocks that had differential effects on skilled and unskilled labor demand in Chinese cities that were
more or less exposed to trade. With unique city-level data on the production of each product for which we have
tariff information, we are able to construct an instrument for export-induced growth across Chinese cities.
    2
      For instance, to estimate skilled-worker agglomeration effects, we leverage a large-scale expansion of univer-
sity seats that rapidly expanded college enrollment by 20% in certain Chinese cities. Our estimated elasticities
are similar to credible estimates in the literature on the direct effect of pollution on productivity (Adhvaryu
et al., 2016; Chang et al., 2019; Kahn and Li, 2019), and of worker location on agglomeration (Gaubert, 2018;
Moretti, 2004). As such, if we were to discipline our model by borrowing elasticities from the literature (instead


                                                         2
tify the productivity effects of pollution via worker re-sorting, accounting for other important
mechanisms through which production, pollution, and migration are related.
    The model allows us to quantify how much of the wage gap across Chinese cities is at-
tributable to pollution differences. For instance, our estimates imply that equalizing pollution
between high-pollution Tianjin and low-pollution Chongqing would bridge the between-city
skilled wage gap by 14%. Companies in China reportedly offer up to 20% wage premiums to
induce workers to relocate to polluted productive cities, so our estimates appear to be in line
with the real-world behavior of firms and workers (AFP News, 2019).
    The fact that pollution explains a meaningful portion of the productivity gaps across cities
sheds some light on the behavioral puzzle we raised at the outset: Concerns about pollution
keep workers away from cities where they could be more productive. This phenomenon is
not limited to China: When 9,000 Delhi residents were asked about their plans to deal with
pollution, the single-most common response was "relocate" (Kapur, 2019). Recent reports of
emigration following wildfires in California suggest that this may not be solely a developing
world phenomenon either.3
    To quantify the productivity loss from pollution, we perform a set of counterfactuals for
Beijing. In one we halve the `exogenous' component of pollution in our model (say, by relocating
upwind coal-fired plants), and in another we halve the amount of total pollution in Beijing
(say, by setting pollution caps for the city), which would also be a function of factors that are
endogenous to our model. In each scenario, GDP per worker rises by more than 12%, mostly
as a consequence of skilled workers moving into Beijing. Unskilled wages in Beijing rise by at
least 16% as more (complementary) skilled workers enter the city. Increased wages are largely
driven by the relocation of workers rather than the health benefits of lower pollution.
    To understand the consequences of policy choices regarding the spatial allocation of pollution
within the country, we conduct counterfactuals where we move pollution away from cities with
more skill-biased capital (i.e., industries with greater demand for skilled work like finance,
technology or skilled manufacturing) to cities with less skill-biased capital. Again, we perform
two versions of this exercise: either setting pollution caps, or relocating `exogenous' drivers of
pollution like coal-fired plants. GDP in the country rises by 6.7% in the former, and 3.67% in
the latter scenario. Again, spatial resorting of workers plays a driving role in income increases,
and relaxing migration costs (e.g. less stringent hukou restrictions) further amplifies the effects.
    Next we use our model to predict the consequences of pollution-control programs that the
Chinese government recently introduced. The 12th Five-Year Plan on Air Pollution Prevention
and Control in Key Regions sets targets for ambient concentrations of particulate matter, with
more stringent targets for high-productivity, polluted regions like Beijing.4 Despite targeting
only a subset of cities, this exercise increases aggregate GDP in China by 3.6%. Our simulations
of estimating them ourselves) we would get similar quantitative results.
   3
     See Lustgarten (2020) and "How Climate Migration will Reshape America," New York Times, Sep 15, 2020,
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/09/15/magazine/climate-crisis-migration-america.html.
   4
     http://www.mep.gov.cn/gkml/hbb/bwj/201212/t20121205 243271.htm, accessed September 17, 2019.


                                                    3
suggest the policy largely benefits skilled workers. Reducing migration barriers in conjunction
with pollution control would result in a more equitable distribution of benefits across skilled
and unskilled workers.
    The model simulations show that relocation of workers is a major driver of these effects,
larger than the direct effect of air pollution on worker health and labor productivity. The
relationship between pollution and health is the subject of a much larger literature in economics
and epidemiology, but we learn that ignoring labor mobility grossly underestimates the overall
consequences of air pollution on an economy's prosperity. It is important to incorporate this
into policy analysis, because increased pollution and migration have been two of the defining
features of the impressive Chinese growth experience over the last 30 years (Brandt et al., 2008;
Tombe and Zhu, 2019; Zheng and Kahn, 2013).
    Whether relocating pollution also affects aggregate welfare (beyond productivity effects)
depends on the precise underlying reason as to why the high and low-skilled react differently to
pollution. Survey data shows that this is partly due to different preferences and environmental
awareness of the rich. Several Chinese cities have adopted a point-based system that exempts
workers with skills or higher education from their hukou restrictions (see Appendix Table C2).
Without the exemption, the system imposes a burden on poor in-migrants to cities by limiting
or prohibiting their access to many government-provided benefits (Combes et al., 2019). With
high mobility costs (physical or institutional), unskilled workers may be trapped in polluted
cities with low wages even as their skilled counterparts leave.
    Once we incorporate migration costs into our analysis, our model shows that the welfare
losses from pollution are magnified. When unskilled workers cannot easily leave with their
skilled counterparts, migration costs exacerbate the mismatch between where workers are sit-
uated. Relocating pollution away from cities with skill-biased capital and lowering migration
costs simultaneously has an amplified effect on welfare.5 These exercises allow us to answer the
question we pose in the first paragraph of this paper: how much of the wage gap across cities
can be explained by pollution-induced spatial sorting of workers?
    Our research confirms anecdotal evidence from news reports about firm and worker location
choices in China.6 Other work documents Chinese households' willingness to pay to avoid
pollution using variation in housing prices (Freeman et al., 2019) and air filters (Ito and Zhang,
2019). As a result, firms in China pay substantial `pollution premiums' to attract workers (New
York Times, 2015).
   5
     While China's hukou policy is unique, institutional restrictions on migration are not without precedent in
other countries. For example, state-level entitlement schemes in India discriminate against out-of-state migrants
and inhibit inter-state mobility (Kone et al., 2018). Furthermore, migration costs are high for the poor in most
developing countries (Bryan and Morten, 2019). Public transportation infrastructure is often of poor quality,
posing a disproportionate burden on the poor.
   6
     See for instance, "Why leave job in Beijing? To breathe." Wall Street Journal, April 14 2013.
https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424127887324010704578418343148947824,
and     also   "Execs fleeing China because of bad air,"                     CBS     news,    Jan     29    2013,
https://www.cbsnews.com/news/execs-fleeing-china-because-of-bad-air/.



                                                       4
    Most closely related to our reduced-form analysis, Chen et al. (2017) also report that workers
migrate in response to air quality. They infer this from data on population changes and find
large mobility responses to pollution even during a period when information on air quality
was not readily available.7 In contrast, the first part of our paper uses the restricted-access
2015 One-percent Population Census of China on actual migration decisions (after information
about pollution was widely disseminated) and a longitudinal panel data which track individual
migration over time from 2008 to 2016 (before and after information about pollution was
widely disseminated) to explore the relationship between pollution and internal migration.
We additionally document similar changes in net populations, but recognize them to be the
consequence of resorting across all cities in general equilibrium. Xue et al. (2020) use firm
financial data to show that polluted Chinese cities experience drops in skilled executives, and
value once pollution data was made public. Very different data and empirical strategies produce
consistent results.
    We describe our data sources in Section 2, describe geographic and time-series patterns
on pollution and migration in Section 3, identification strategies in Section 4 and discuss the
estimates of the causal effect of pollution on migration in Section 5. The quantitative part of
the paper consists of the theoretical framework in Section 6, estimating model parameters in
Section 7, and conducting counterfactual exercises in Section 8. Section 9 concludes.


2       Data and Measurement
2.1     Demographic and Migration Data
    We measure internal migration using the 2015 Population Census of China. The 2015 Census
is the latest census with restricted public access. Importantly, it is the only population census
after both the 2008 disclosure of PM2.5 data by the US Embassy in China and the publication
of city-level PM2.5 data by the Chinese Government in 2012. The census records demographic
and economic characteristics of individuals, including education levels, employment details,
hukou location, and current residential city. We use the 2015 One-Percent Census sample, and
restrict our attention to the working age population.
    We define migration in a few different ways. First, in the Census, migrants are defined as
those who are away from their hukou city for more than six months.8 Hukou status determines
citizens' access to state-provided goods (such as schools for children) and services (like marriage
registries or passport renewals).9 Given the strong (forced) attachment to one's hukou city,
when a person's location of residence differs, it can be reliably characterized as migration.
    7
      The US embassy started disclosing PM2.5 data in Beijing in 2008. In 2012, the Chinese government started
releasing data more widely, and by 2013 most cities had publicly available PM2.5 data.
    8
      This definition is consistent with other recent work on internal-migration in China (Combes et al., 2019;
Tombe and Zhu, 2019). Only 7% of individuals have a hukou city that is not their birth city.
    9
      In China, hukou plays a critical role as an internal-passport which determines one's entitlements to pursue
many activities and eligibility for state-provided goods and services in a specific place. The migrants who do not
hold a local hukou have limited or no access to many government-provided benefits, including public education
for children and medical care.


                                                        5
    Second, we construct an individual-level longitudinal panel using the China Labor-force
Dynamics Survey (CLDS), which records individual histories of location changes for a sample
of 14,226 households across 29 provinces of China. The CLDS is a national longitudinal social
survey, with information on education, work and migration experience. Since the survey asks
retrospective migration histories of each individual, we are able to construct a longitudinal
panel of location histories between 2008 and 2016. We define migration to be an indicator for
whether an individual changed city locations between years, regardless of whether they change
their hukou status. The CLDS allows us to account for individual-specific unobservables, track
those who have moved multiple times and those who have moved and returned home.
    We supplement the migration data with a measure of the stock of workers by skill level
computed using the Census. Migration choices ultimately affect the net number of skilled and
unskilled workers in each city. We show that the number of workers by skill vary systematically
with air quality across cities. These changes in stock are the summary outcome of (net) mi-
gration decisions for all reasons and through all modalities (whether or not individuals change
hukou status), and the object most sensible to use in our structural analysis for the quantifi-
cation of productivity. Our structural quantification helps account for the fact that changes in
the net-stock of workers cannot simply be interpreted as a migration response to pollution.
    Jointly, the three different migration measures we use either follows best practice, or im-
proves on the approaches in the existing literature to measure migration in China.

2.2    Air Quality Measures
   We use satellite data to measure air quality, which has a few advantages over official sources
of pollution data. First, satellite-based PM2.5 measures are available for all cities between
1998 and 2015, whereas official PM2.5 data are only available since 2012.10 Second, official air
quality data may be subject to manipulation by local governments (Chen et al., 2012; Ghanem
and Zhang, 2014; Greenstone et al., 2020). Satellite-based measures seem more reliable: Their
correlation with monitor-based PM2.5 data collected by US Consulates in China is approx-
imately 0.8. City-level annual PM2.5 concentrations are measured using the Global Annual
PM2.5 Grids derived from satellite data by Van Donkelaar et al. (2016).11 This yields a com-
prehensive air quality measure for a wide range of cities in China, covering all the prefecture,
sub-provincial, and provincial cities.
  10
     Fine particles (diameter < 2.5µm) are most hazardous and PM2.5 is considered to be the best
indicator for health risks from air pollution.     For more background information see WHO report:
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2014/air-quality/en/. We use the Air Quality Index (AQI)
released by Ministry of Environmental Protection (MEP) for robustness checks.
  11
     They estimate ground-level PM2.5 by combining Aerosol Optical Depth (AOD) retrievals from the NASA
MODIS, MISR, and SeaWiFS, which are subsequently calibrated to daily global ground-based observations of
PM2.5 using Geographically Weighted Regressions (GWR) at high grid resolution.




                                                   6
2.3    Inputs into Instrumental Variables
    We obtain information on large-scale (capacity>1 million KW) power plants, their coal
consumption, and plant-level electricity generation from China's Electric Power Yearbooks and
Energy Statistical Yearbooks. We supplement this with information on the establishment year
of plants, the angle between their locations and annual prevailing wind direction of each city,
and the distance from each city.
    We collect data on thermal inversions from the Modern-Era Retrospective Analysis for
Research and Applications, Version 2 (MERRA-2), which records the 6-hour air temperature
at different atmospheric layers. For each 6-hour period, we calculate the temperature change
from the first to the second above ground atmospheric layer. If the temperature change is
positive, a thermal inversion occurs and the difference in temperatures measures the strength
of thermal inversions. We calculate the annual occurrence and the annual sum of thermal
inversion strength from the 6-hour data.
    Estimating the structural model requires us to develop a few other instruments. First, we
derive information from a large-scale university expansion in China at the turn of the century
that suddenly expanded college enrollment by 20% in certain cities, to identify skilled-worker
agglomeration effects. Data on the number of college students and graduates at city level
are from the China Regional Statistical Yearbook. Second, we leverage variation in trade
shocks to identify migration responses to wages. Data on Chinese trade are from the UC Davis
Center of International Studies. The quantity and value of exports and imports by Harmonized
System (HS) of product classification are available at the city level. Data are available annually
between 1997 and 2013, covering periods before and after China's 2001 accession to the WTO.
We construct city-level measures of baseline dependence on products more likely to be affected
by tariff changes and trade policy.

2.4    Wages, Controls and City-level Characteristics
    Since the 2015 Census does not record individual-level wages, we use the CLDS to calculate
city-and-education specific average wage. We collect city characteristics, such as population
and GDP, from the City Statistical Yearbooks. Weather data come from the Meteorological
Data Service Center. We gather monthly data on temperature, humidity, sunshine duration,
and other weather amenities. We calculate distances from each city to the three large seaports
(Tianjin, Shanghai and Shenzhen) and employ these variables as controls. Appendix Table C1
reports summary statistics and a full description of the key variables used in the analysis.


3     Descriptive Patterns of Pollution and Migration
   In this section we describe the spatial and temporal patterns of pollution, migration and
wages in the raw data. These patterns motivate the hypotheses linking pollution to migration
and wages, which we then subject to rigorous inquiry in subsequent sections.


                                                7
                 Figure 1: The Distribution in Pollution and Wages Across Cities




(a) Increasing Spread in Pollution Across Cities              (b) Real Wage Distribution Across Cities

Notes: Distributions across cities for different years. Wage distribution across cities drawn from the City
Statistical Yearbooks. Real wages are nominal wages deflated by local housing price. PM2.5 data from the
Global Annual PM2.5 grids.


    Figure 1 shows the increases in both city-level spatial dispersion of PM2.5 and real wages
over time. The left panel documents that pollution not only increased between 1998 and 2015,
but also became more variable across regions. The double-peak in the figure further indicates
that the overall increase in PM2.5 was driven by the emergence of some high polluting cities.
    The right panel shows that both wages and the cross-city variance in real wages rise over
time. If this implies an increase in the spatial dispersion of marginal products of labor, then that
raises the possibility that moving workers from low marginal product cities to high marginal
product cities may increase aggregate output.

              Figure 2: The Distribution in Pollution Across Cities and Over Time
     (a) Change in mean PM2.5 over time                     (b) PM2.5 Concentration in China




Notes: Spatial and temporal distribution of PM2.5 using the Global Annual PM2.5 Grids. The map shows the
geographic spread in 2015. Figure 2a shows the increase in PM2.5 over time for the 100 largest cities in China,
relative to the 1998 PM2.5 value (the difference with respect to 1998). The red line is the unweighted average.



                                                      8
    Figure 2a illustrates the time trend of annual PM2.5 concentrations in Chinese cities since
1998. The mean concentration exceeds WHO air quality guidelines every year.12 The figure
also shows that the increase in the mean coincided with the increase in cross-city dispersion in
pollution documented in Figure 1a. The increase in the overall mean was driven by dramatic
increases in PM2.5 in a subset of cities.
    Figure 2b displays the spatial variation in annual average satellite PM2.5 concentration for
2015. Air quality is unevenly distributed. The coastal areas of north-east and eastern China
experience the severe air pollution. Manufacturing industries are concentrated in the east. The
north-east further suffers from coal-burning for heating needs, exacerbating pollution relative
to high economic growth areas of the south.13

          Figure 3: The Geographic Distribution of the Share of Out-Migrants by Skill
       (a) Share of Low-Skill Out-Migrants                     (b) Share of High-Skill Out-Migrants




Notes: Low-skilled denotes people whose highest degree is high school or below. High-skilled denotes people
whose highest degree is some college or above. Out-migrant shares are ratio of those who leave their hukou
city for more than six months, and the number of people whose hukou location is a given city.


   Correspondingly, we examine the geographic patterns of emigration of low-skill (Figure 3a)
and high-skill (Figure 3b) migrants. Low-skill emigration rates are very high in the south of
China, while high-skill out-migrants are comparatively more populous in the north-east and the
east. Recall from Figure 2b that pollution is also relatively more concentrated in the north-east
than in the south. These three figures therefore jointly indicate that pollution is more spatially
correlated with high-skilled emigration rather than low-skilled.
   Figure 4a explores whether that observed spatial correlation creates a city-level association
between pollution and the share of high-skilled that choose to emigrate. There is a clear positive
association: the high-skilled are more likely to leave polluted areas. We explore this intriguing
correlation more rigorously in subsequent sections, to isolate a causal relationship.
   Finally, Figure 4b examines the association between pollution and the wage returns to skills
  12
    See http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs313/en/ for information on WHO guidelines.
  13
    Dust-storms in southern Xinjiang province are responsible for the isolated area of high particulate matter
observed in the west. This area is otherwise not highly economically active.


                                                      9
                         Figure 4: The Effects of High PM2.5 at Origin Cities




  (a) High-Skill Emigration Share and PM2.5                     (b) Returns to Skill and PM2.5 at Origin

Notes: The share of high-skilled out-migrants denotes the share of some college (or above)-educated out-
migrants from the city-level college-educated hukou population. `Returns to skill' denotes the return to some
college or above education. Each bubble is a city. The bubble size is weighted by the population in 2000.


that emerges in each city.14 Returns to skill are higher in polluted cities. Economic theory
provides a simple explanation for the two related correlations depicted in Figure 4: Higher out-
migration of college workers in response to pollution makes the high-skilled relatively scarce
in those cities, and in equilibrium, creates a compensating differential for poor air quality for
skilled workers. This relationship will endogenously emerge in the general equilibrium model
of pollution, migration and wages that we develop. Figure 4b also highlights a key insight
about the benefits of pollution control policy that will emerge in our model: Reducing PM2.5
in highly polluted cities would induce high-skilled workers to move to the cities where their
skills are relatively scarce (and so their marginal product may be relatively higher), and this
re-sorting could be a mechanism that raises aggregate productivity.


4      Identifying the Causal Effect of Pollution on Migration
  Our main specification studies the effects of PM2.5 concentration in origin city o on the
amount of out-migration by skill group. Our primary regression of interest is as follows:

                                 Mio =  + 1 Log (P M 2.5)o + X +               io   ,                           (1)

where Mio is an indicator for whether or not individual i left origin city o, and X are controls.
That is, we begin our reduced-form analysis with the dependent variable defined as the actual
migration decision. Later, we show results using the net stock of workers by skill group,
recognizing that changes to the net stock are difficult to interpret in reduced form without the
aid of the model, as the quantities of workers are determined in spatial general equilibrium.15
  14
     Our estimates of returns are consistent with recent estimates from other work, such as Giles et al. (2019).
  15
     As other work has noted, in such settings when using net quantities of workers, there is no `control group,' as
all movement out of a polluted city implies movements into a non-polluted city. As such, population quantities


                                                        10
    Before 2012, information about local PM2.5 concentration was not available in most Chinese
cities. The Chinese government started releasing PM2.5 data in 2012, and that unexpected data
disclosure affected the avoidance behavior of Chinese citizens (Jia et al., 2019).16 We therefore
use the most recent census data in China ­ the 2015 One-Percent Population Census, conducted
after the 2012 data disclosure ­ in our preferred specification. In robustness checks, we also
estimate this relationship using longitudinal panels with individual fixed effects.
    Pollution is likely associated with the underlying structure of the economy, as polluted
areas may have bigger manufacturing-bases, which independently affects the skill composition
of the workforce. OLS estimates of equation 1 may be biased as a result. To get around these
issues, we use a few different identification strategies to isolate the causal effect of pollution on
migration: Panel fixed-effects models, as well as two different instrumental variables strategies.
To build confidence in our causal effect of pollution on emigration, our strategy is to examine
the same relationship using multiple data sources, different types of variation, and conduct large
sets of robustness checks (see Appendix A), to examine whether we see consistent patterns.

4.1     Instrument 1: Wind Direction and Coal-Fired Power Plants
   Our first source of plausibly exogenous variation in pollution is based on an insight from
Freeman, Liang, Song, and Timmins (2019). We measure the extent to which each city is
down-wind of a coal-fired power plant located outside the city. The instrument is a function
of wind direction and coal consumption in large-scale thermal power plants located in a 100-
500km radius around the city. The instrument value is penalized if the plant is farther away,
and if it is not located directly upwind of the city, using the formula of our first-stage equation:

                                                  P
                                                             1        1
                     Log (P M 2.5)o = 0 + 1                                  C p + o ,                   (2)
                                                  p
                                                           p + 1    distpo

where p denotes the angle between the annual prevailing wind direction of city o and the plant
p, distpo is the distance between the plant p and city o, Cp is the annual coal consumption in
plant p. We restrict our analysis to all large-scale thermal power plants that are located more
than 100km from a city, but within a 500km radius from the city center. Figure 5a explains the
intuition behind the instrument. The underlying variation is driven by how wind patterns blow
pollutants from distant coal plants to cities. Our first-stage relationship in Figure 5b shows
that cities downwind from, and closer to, higher coal-consumption power plants are more likely
to be affected by poor air quality.
    We expect that our instrumental variable is orthogonal to local economic activity. These
large-scale thermal power plants supply electricity to vast areas of China; many do not even
in all cities are affected, violating the Stable Unit Treatment Value Assumption (SUTVA). A GE model, like
the one we posit, helps properly interpret the magnitudes in such a setting (Bryan and Morten, 2019).
  16
     Appendix B shows that the disclosure of PM2.5 data has meaningful effects on both internal migration and
air purifier purchases in China.



                                                      11
      Figure 5: Wind direction, distance, and coal consumption in thermal power plants




          (a) Depiction of instrument                                (b) First-stage relationship

Notes: In the left panel, the thick arrow represents the annual dominant wind direction of city o. The dark dot
represents a large-scale thermal power plant located at least 100km outside city o and within 500km from the
city. The angle  denotes the angle between the annual prevailing wind direction of city o and the large-scale
power plant. Large-scale thermal power plants are defined as plants whose installed-capacities are larger than
1 million KW. In the right panel, cities are grouped into one hundred groups according to the quantile of the
wind direction IV measure. The y-axis denotes the mean value of PM2.5 in each quantile and x-axis denotes
the mean value of wind direction IV in each quantile.


supply electricity to their nearby cities, but rather to many remote provinces. The allocation
of electricity supply from large-scale power plants is determined by the central government.
Although many reforms have taken place over the past 30 years, there are still strict regu-
lations in the power sector and ownership of the sector largely remains with the state. The
central government owns the grid, and controls the setup and operation of power plants if their
generating capacity is large. Thus, local governments find it difficult to exert influence on the
setup of large-scale power plants, their siting decisions, or the allocation of electricity supply
from them. The impact of distant power plants on local economic activity is extremely small,
and we also chose to focus on plants at least 100km away to be cautious about this.
    We examine possible concerns with this instrument in Appendix A.1.2. We consider whether
the location of power plants may depend on the simultaneous combination of wind direction,
distance to the city, and the amount of coal consumed. For instance, if we are concerned
that newly built plants are placed away from important cities, we show robustness to excluding
power plants in a 200km, and then a 400km radius from cities. Among other specification tests,
we show robustness to excluding richer or capital cities, coal producing regions, using other out-
come measures of air quality, and additional controlling for electrification, demographics and
industrialization. The public's recent concerns around pollution are relatively recent, and we
show robustness to using only old power plants, such as those built more than twenty years
prior to our data. We also conduct numerous falsification tests showing that baseline city char-
acteristics do not predict the future placement of plants, and tests with placebo wind directions
indicate that plants that are downwind are less likely to affect air quality and migration.



                                                      12
4.2     Instrumental Variable 2: Thermal Inversions
   Our second instrument uses the number and strength of thermal inversions, a meteorological
phenomenon where the above-ground temperature is abnormally higher than the ground tem-
perature, trapping pollutants. This has been used as an instrument for air quality in Mexico
(Arceo et al., 2016), the US (Hicks et al., 2015) and Sweden (Jans et al., 2014), among other
places. Most recently, Chen et al. (2017) show that the number of thermal inversions predicts
the movement of people across China as well. We build upon their work by using newer mi-
gration data from the 2015 Census at the individual level, rather than quantifying migration
indirectly from population changes.

                            Figure 6: Thermal Inversions and Air Quality




Notes: In the left panel, we divide cities into the two groups based on whether or not they lie above the
average annual occurrence of thermal inversions. The red line represents the mean value of PM2.5 in cities
where the occurrence of the thermal inversions are above average. The violet line represents the mean value of
PM2.5 in cities where the occurrence of the thermal inversions are below average. The green-dash line presents
the average annual occurrence of thermal inversions. In the right panel, cities are grouped into one hundred
groups according to the quantile of the occurrence of thermal inversions. The y-axis denotes the mean value of
PM2.5 in each quantile and x-axis denotes the mean occurrence of thermal inversions in each quantile.


    We create two measures of inversions in city o. First, we count the number of thermal
inversions in each year. Next, we measure the annual mean strength of these inversions. We
use these measures in both the cross-section and panel form.
    As polluting potential rose over time in China, areas with more thermal inversions trapped
pollutants in the nearby atmosphere. Figure 6 shows that although there is no trend over
time in the frequency of thermal inversions, as cities pollute more over time, areas with more
inversions saw a sharper rise in poor air quality over the decade. The right panel shows a strong
correlation between inversions and PM2.5 indicating a strong first stage. In our specifications
we control for time-varying natural amenities like sunshine and weather, show variants of our
measures of inversions, and show how past pollution does not predict future inversions.
    We use the two instruments described above independently as they capture very different
types of variation in air quality (due to wind direction versus a meteorological phenomenon).
The consistency in the estimated direction of the relationship between pollution and migration

                                                     13
is comforting. In specification checks in Appendix A, we compare the different instruments and
their combinations, lagged panel structures, cumulative pollution over time, relevant controls,
and excluding some cities. Finally, in Appendix A.2 we introduce yet another source of variation
in pollution ­ a Regression Discontinuity (RD) across the Huai-river (Chen et al., 2013).


5     Empirical Results
    Our theoretical model will help quantify the productivity consequences of pollution-induced
migration. First, however, we need to establish that pollution indeed has a causal effect on
(a) high and low-skilled differential migration rates, and (b) on the returns to skill in a city,
because those are key inputs on which the model rests. We discuss reduced-form estimates
of these relationships here, but relegate the more extensive discussion to Appendix A, which
includes a long set of specification tests, falsification tests, sample restrictions, different panel-
data structures, and different types of controls.

                    Figure 7: The Ratio of High-to-Low Skilled Out-Migration




Note: High/low skilled emigration rates is the ratio of out-migration rates for high-skilled (some college or
above) to low-skilled emigrants (high school or below). We plot these ratios in 2015 against PM2.5 levels.



5.1     The Causal Relationship Between Pollution and Migration
    Figure 7 captures the relationship between differential mobility and pollution in the raw
data. The ratio of high-skilled to low-skilled emigration rates increases with higher PM2.5
levels in the city of origin, suggesting that the location choices of high-skilled workers are more
sensitive to pollution than that of low-skilled workers.
    In Table 1 we examine the effect of pollution on an individual-level binary indicator of leaving
one's hukou city. We show results separately for those with some college degree or above, and
those without. We control for demographics, and for distances to three large seaports to account
for the spatial distribution of economic development in China.



                                                     14
                                  Table 1: Pollution and Out-Migration

                                       Dependent variable: Leave hukou city indicator
          Panel A                    OLS Regression                     Wind+coal IV
                            Full sample Low edu High edu Full sample Low edu High edu

          Log(PM2.5)        0.0428***     0.0399*** 0.0501***         0.0772**      0.0609     0.140***
                            (0.00974)     (0.00993) (0.0112)          (0.0389)     (0.0423)    (0.0382)

          Coeff diff pval                            0.00                                 0.00
          Observations       761,548       643,124          118,424    761,548     643,124     118,424
          R-squared           0.029         0.030            0.045      0.027       0.029       0.036
          F-test of IVs                                                 52.53       46.52       41.54


                                       Dependent variable: Leave hukou city indicator
          Panel B                  Number of inversions              Strength of inversions
                            Full sample Low edu High edu Full sample Low edu High edu

          Log(PM2.5)        0.0906***     0.0871***     0.112***      0.0779***   0.0740***    0.107***
                             (0.0202)      (0.0211)     (0.0233)       (0.0228)    (0.0238)    (0.0279)

          Coeff diff pval                            0.00                                 0.00
          Observations       761,548       643,124          118,424    761,548     643,124     118,424
          R-squared           0.035         0.037            0.047      0.037       0.039       0.047
          F-test of IVs       102.5         97.33            84.83      51.09       49.60       40.54

Notes: Individual level regressions in 2015 across 332 cities. Standard errors clustered at the hukou city level
are reported in parentheses. `Coeff diff pval' reports the p-value of a test of equality of coefficients between the
low and high educated groups, using the Fisher's permutation test. The instrumental variables specification in
the top panel uses the interaction between wind direction, distance to coal plant, and coal consumption at
power plant. Instrumental variables specifications in the bottom panel use thermal inversions. All panels have:
(a) City controls which include the log distance to Shanghai seaport, to Tianjin seaport and to Shenzhen
seaport, and (b) demographics which include age, age-squared, gender, marital status, and an urban hukou
indicator. The bottom panel using thermal inversions also have (c) weather controls which include
temperature, wind speed, sunshine duration and humidity.


    The OLS estimates in Panel A suggest that air pollution leads to the out-migration of all
types of workers, and this effect is statistically stronger for those with higher education (p-
val<0.001). Given endogeneity concerns, columns 4-6 employ our first instrument based on
wind direction and distant coal-fired power plants (Freeman, Liang, Song, and Timmins, 2019).
The differential impact by skill level increases in magnitude when using our instruments. A 10%
increase in PM2.5 raises out-migration rates by 0.77 percentage points overall, with the effect
being meaningfully larger for those with higher education attainment (1.4 percentage points)
than those without (0.61 percentage points). The high and low-skilled emigration responses
are statistically different from each other with >99% confidence.
    In Panel B, we study how variation in PM2.5 from our second instrument of thermal in-
versions affects out-migration propensities. We follow the literature, and control for weather
amenities. In the first three columns, we employ the annual occurrence of thermal inversions as


                                                            15
the instrumental variable. Again, the emigration response is more pronounced for high-skilled
workers. A 10% increase in PM2.5 leads to a 1.12 percentage point increase in emigration rates
for those with high education attainment, but only 0.87 for those without. In the last three
columns, we leverage the variation coming from the annual strength of thermal inversions. We
obtain similar results.
    Appendix A.1.1 provides further details on our instrumental variable strategies. Table
A1 shows the (strong) first-stage estimates, Table A2 shows similar result when omitting the
weather controls, and Table A3 combines multiple instruments in the same specification, and
shows we obtain even greater precision.
    Table A4 shows that workers also pay attention to the pollution levels at destinations, in
deciding which city to migrate to. In other words, workers leave polluted areas, and also seek
out less polluted cities. Again, similar to the emigration response, the immigration location
choices are more sensitive to pollution among higher educated workers. As destination choices
are not independent across cities, we derive a model that disciplines these results. These facts
play an important role in our model: Fewer skilled workers in a polluted city will tend to raise
the skill premium. As a result, cleaning up polluted cities will move skilled workers from a city
that has a lower marginal product of skilled labor to a city with a higher marginal product,
increasing aggregate output via relocation.

5.2    Alternative Specifications, Robustness and Heterogeneity
    In Appendix A.1.2 we examine various threats to identification. We summarize the results
of these exercises in Figure 8, where a simple pattern emerges: the high-skilled respond to poor
air quality by emigrating, but the effect on the low-skilled is smaller.
    First, we seriously evaluate the claim that power plants may be systematically built near
poorer, less influential cities, and so the instrument may be correlated with unobservable char-
acteristics of nearby cities. In Table A5, we exclude nearby plants, placed either in a 200km
or a 400km radius of a given city, and find that, if anything, our results are more precisely
estimated. We may also be concerned that newly built plants are subject to more regulation
as the Chinese government only recently paid attention to environmental issues. So, in Table
A6, we restrict our sample to only old plants, and find similar effects. We drop coal producing
regions to address the concern that coal-fired plants may locate near coal production (Table
A7), and show that baseline population, GDP and electricity consumption do not predict future
upwind plants, or future iterations of our IV (Table A10). The results suggest that it is not
that policymakers avoid richer, influential cities when building plants, and that plants are not
built in areas that have a higher need for electricity at baseline, perhaps as most electricity is
directly supplied to the larger grid.
    In Table A11, we extend this by creating various `placebo' instruments, artificially changing
the wind direction and showing that these falsified instruments are less likely to predict pollution
levels and migration decisions. Similarly, for our thermal inversion instruments, in Table A12


                                                16
we show that lagged pollution levels do not predict future inversions. Indeed, even lagged
inversions do not predict future ones ­ suggesting that their occurrences are hard to predict.

                                Figure 8: Different Sources of Variation




Notes: Summary of results using different sources of variation. We compile coefficients from different spec-
ifications. On the left we show both the coefficients on high and low skilled workers. On the right, we concen-
trate on high-skill workers, and include 95% confidence intervals. Instruments include number ("No. Invers"
for short) and the strength of thermal inversions ("Strength Invers") as well as different versions of the wind
direction and coal-fired power plants IV ("Wind IV"). "Wind: 20 yrs ago" relies on plants built before 1995,
and excludes newly built power plants. We do this so as to allay any concerns that newly built plants may be
placed endogenously simultaneously based on wind direction, distance to cities and access to coal. The "Wind
IV 400-900 km" IV excludes any plants built within a 400km radius from a city and instead only captures plants
built 400-900 km away. This is done to allay concerns related to the endogenous placement of plants in close
proximity to the city.


    In Appendix A.2 we exploit an entirely different source of variation in pollution, driven by
China's Huai river heating policy. As Chen et al. (2013) show, the heating policy generated an
artificial discontinuity in air quality on two sides of the Huai river. North of the Huai river, the
government encouraged centralized heating systems for homes, which primarily relied on coal-
fired boilers. Even in the 2000s, there is a sharp discontinuity in the use of boilers for heating,
leading to a discontinuity in air quality across the Huai river. While there is no differential
out-migration in areas immediately north versus south of the Huai river, skilled workers are
discontinuously (and statistically significantly) less likely to migrate into the more polluted
cities just north of the Huai river, relative to cleaner cities just south of the river.
    In Appendix A.3, we turn our attention to studying different model specifications, sub-
samples, and checking the robustness of our estimates to different controls. Figure 9 summarizes
the results of this large set of robustness exercises.
    First, in Appendix A.3.1 Table A13, we use individual-level longitudinal panel data and a
different definition of migration to replicate our results. The longitudinal panel allows us to
track individuals' spatial sorting over time, and control for city and individual-level character-
istics. Importantly, we define migration to be an indicator for whether or not an individual
changed their city between years, regardless of whether they change their hukou location. This
panel data with individual fixed effects approach produces the same pattern of results as the


                                                      17
OLS and instrumental variables approaches: High-skilled workers are more likely to leave pol-
luted cities relative to their low-skilled counterparts.
    We then study the effects of cumulative pollution exposure in Appendix A.3.2. The results
shown in Table A14 and A15 indicate that pollution exposure spread over a longer time period
has a larger impact than shorter time frames. In Appendix A.3.3, we disaggregate education
levels into more fine-grained categories and see a sharp education gradient in out-migration
responses. Those with more education are more responsive to pollution (Table A16). In Table
A17 we exclude large, influential cities, cities that pollute a lot, and major province capitals,
to account for any differences in political influence or outliers in the access to skilled jobs. We
find that youth are more responsive to pollution when making location choices (Table A18).
Table A19 studies heterogeneity across rural and urban locations.
    We next replace PM2.5 with an alternative measure of local air quality. Table A20 uses the
Air Quality Index (AQI) as the endogenous variable of interest, capturing the combined impact
of many pollutants. The AQI is officially reported and widely disseminated, and individuals
may be more likely to respond to it. Appendix A.3.4 Table A21 highlights robustness to a long
list of controls, including the skill-distribution, baseline economic indicators, and industrial
pollutants. These controls do not qualitatively affect the main patterns we observe. Finally, in
Appendix B, we show that the disclosure of official pollution data affected migration decisions.

                          Figure 9: Different Models, Samples and Controls




Notes: Summary of results using different models, samples and controls. We compile coefficients from different
specifications. On the right we show both the coefficients on high and low skill workers. On the left, we
concentrate on high-skilled workers, and include 95% confidence intervals. Individual longitudinal panel accounts
for individual fixed effects ("INDV panel"), and for local weather conditions ("INDV panel+weather") or region-
specific trends ("INDV panel+region trend")


    The striking consistency of the migration response to pollution, especially among the high-
skilled, across a large set of robustness checks, many different, independent sources of variation
in the data, different estimation strategies, samples and variable definitions, gives us confidence
that we are indeed identifying an effect that is real.



                                                       18
5.3     Wage Returns and Pollution

                                Table 2: Pollution and Returns to Skill

                       Dependent variable: City-specific returns to college education
                                            OLS                 Wind+Coal IV

                       Log (PM2.5)     0.248**   0.453***   0.789**       1.570***
                                       (0.125)    (0.135)   (0.309)        (0.539)

                       Observations      130       130        130            130
                       R-squared        0.028     0.090       0.00           0.00
                       City controls     No        Yes         No            Yes
                       F-test of IVs                         44.11          23.31

Notes: City-level regressions of 130 cities weighted by the population in 2000, for the sample of CLDS cities
with non-missing skill-specific wage data. Standard errors at the city level are reported in parentheses.
Instrumental variables specification using the interaction between wind direction, distance to coal plant, and
coal consumption at power plant. City controls include the log distance to Shanghai, Tianjin and Shenzhen
seaports. Returns to college education is calculated as the coefficient on `some college or above' indicator in
Mincer wage regressions controlling for age and gender. These regressions were done for each of the 130 cities
in the CLDS data separately.

    This spatial re-allocation of skilled workers could produce a systematic relationship between
pollution and the returns to skill across cities. Skilled workers are going to be relatively scarce
in cities that they leave, raising their value in the labor market in such cities. Additionally,
given the complementarity between skilled and unskilled workers, cities that lose skilled workers
will have less productive unskilled workers. As such, cities that lose skilled workers would have
higher skilled wages, lower unskilled wages, and therefore higher returns to skill.
    Table 2 documents a simple empirical fact: As in the raw-data plot of Figure 4b, returns to
skill are higher in polluted cities. We estimate the city-specific Mincerian returns to skill using
the CLDS data, and explore the relationship between pollution and skill returns. The first two
columns of Table 2 show the OLS results. The impacts of pollution on skill returns are positive
and statistically different from zero. The effect of pollution on the skill premium increases in
magnitude when we employ the wind direction and coal-fired plants IV to address endogeneity
concerns. Our model will formalize this link between pollution, differential out-migration of
skilled workers, and the relative marginal products of skilled and unskilled work.

5.4     Why are the High-skilled More Sensitive to Pollution?
    For the policy analysis we aim to conduct, it is important to understand precisely why
skilled workers are more willing and able to leave polluted cities than the unskilled. Other
than the typical pecuniary costs of migration, Chinese households must deal with institutional
restrictions to mobility. Administrative records indicate that China's hukou policy explicitly
makes it easier for skilled workers to be mobile. People with higher education are more easily
able to move to certain cities and retain access to jobs and public services. In Table C2 we

                                                      19
show a few examples of such restrictions, highlighting how educational attainment can help a
person gain enough points to be eligible to receive hukou at certain attractive destinations.
    When migration costs (both physical and institutional) make it more difficult for certain
subsets of workers to move, they may create artificial mismatches in the locations of skilled
and unskilled workers who would otherwise complement each other in production. That can
exacerbate productivity losses from worker re-allocation. The effect of poor air quality may
also differ by skill level, as richer households may be able to afford air filters.
    Beyond mobility costs, different preferences may also be important drivers of the differential
mobility responses we observe. Pollution concerns may loom larger for skilled workers, as the
unskilled are focused more on making ends meet with their lower wages. Table C3 documents,
using data from the China General Social Survey (CGSS), that educated workers are more
likely to claim environmental issues in China are "terrible." In Table C4, we use the survey to
explore not just concerns for environmental issues, but also actions taken on such issues. Once
again, across the board, individuals with more education are statistically significantly more
likely to discuss environmental issues, make donations for environmental protection, and make
appeals or raise concerns on environmental problems. The differences in migration patterns
of the high-skilled in response to changes in pollution therefore partly reflect differences in
preferences for environmental quality, and partly differences in mobility restrictions.


6     Theoretical Framework
    We use a simple theoretical framework to aid our quantification of the productivity conse-
quences of pollution-induced migration. Our model captures a few key features necessary for
quantification. First, it endogenizes the compensating differential, by allowing pollution to have
differential effects on the utility of skilled versus unskilled workers. Second, mobility costs vary
by skill level. Together, these contribute to the empirical patterns that show a differential out-
migration by skill level. Third, as college educated workers leave polluted cities, the marginal
product of skilled labor rises. If skilled and unskilled workers are complements, the marginal
product of unskilled work falls. This leads to differences in the skill-wage premium, consistent
with the empirical observation that returns to skill are higher in more polluted regions. An
additional source of geography-specific returns to skill is driven by the fact that some cities
have more skill-biased capital.
    Furthermore, the changing structure of skills in a city affect production and pollution lev-
els. A population influx, or presence of more skilled workers may induce either more or less
pollution-intensive industries to expand, and as such change the quality of air in the city. This
feedback effect of migration patterns on pollution emissions affects subsequent migration, which
in turn affects production, and so on. Additionally, agglomeration forces may increase aggre-
gate productivity if skilled workers converge to high amenity cities, but house prices may also
respond to such movements creating congestion in such cities. Importantly, we allow pollution
to affect the health (and lower the productivity) of all workers.

                                                20
    Our framework accounts for these feedback effects, and generates estimable equations that
we identify using instrumental variables. We use the model to perform quantitative counter-
factuals on the equilibrium effects of pollution control policies.

6.1     Production and Labor Demand
    Aggregate output Yd in destination city d depends on Ld (effective labor), Kd (capital), and
Ad (TFP). TFP may vary across cities, and may depend on air quality Zd , and on agglomeration
forces. Capital is perfectly elastically supplied across cities at rental rate R .17 Effective labor
Ld depends on labor Lsd at each skill level s = {h, u}, the high-skilled h and the unskilled u.
                                                                                   E
                                                                            E -1   E - 1
                                      (1- )                                 E
                       Yd = Ad Ld Kd          where Ld =                sd Lsd                              (3)
                                                                    s

0 < < 1 is the share of output accruing to labor, sd > 0 is the productivity of workers with
skill level s, and E > 0 is the elasticity of substitution across skill groups.
    The skill-biased productivity parameter sd captures the productivity of each skill level.
For instance, hd increases with an increase in high-skill capital khd , such that hd (khd )  0.18
hd also captures other labor demand shocks or policies that raise wages for skilled workers in
certain cities. The value of sd therefore varies across cities because of the variation in skill-
biased capital ksd , and other factors that make workers of a skill-group more productive in d.
The average log earnings for skill s in destination d are:19

                            Yd          1                                  1          1
          log wsd = log             =       log Ad + log + log sd +          log Ld -   log Lsd ,           (4)
                            Lsd                                            E          E

where log  1- log 1R        -
                                  is common across all cities and workers.20 There are a few
components that drive the differences in average earnings when comparing two different skill-
groups s in two different labor markets d.
   Let us consider the determinants of the high-skilled wage whd . First, Ad is the amount of
TFP at the city level, which may raise average earnings of all in the city. Second, hd is the
higher skill-biased productivity associated with more education. Not only are skilled workers
more productive, but variation in the supply of skill-biased capital across cities affect earnings.
Third, earnings differ due to differences in the supply of more educated workers Lhd . As with
any downward sloping demand curve, the more skilled workers there are, the lower the skilled
wage. Yet, Ld captures production complementarities, whereby an increase in the number of
  17
    The perfectly elastic capital assumption is not essential and can be relaxed. See Appendix D.2.
  18
    Skill-biased capital for high-skilled workers captures the presence of industries that may be more likely
to hire college-educated workers, such as finance, technology, skill-intensive manufacturing, and professional
services. For completeness, in Appendix D.2 we explicitly model skill-biased capital within the nested CES
framework and show how incorporating it does not affect the qualitative predictions.
                                                       1       1-
                                                             -
  19
     This is at the optimal value of Kd 
                                         , so that Yd = Ad 1R       Ld .
  20
     For tractability, output is the numeraire. Housing is not traded across cities, and will have price effects
across cities. Since output is not skilled biased, an output price would not change the skill-specific returns.


                                                      21
unskilled workers may actually raise the skilled wage. Equation 4 is the (inverse) labor demand
curve and highlights the importance of elasticities: how much the skill distribution affects the
difference in earnings depends on the elasticities of substitution E . Migration of skilled or
unskilled workers will change these quantities and affect skill-premia.
    Additionally, we assume that economic production produces pollution as well. In equation 5,
each city has some `exogenous' component of pollution Z ¯d , that (say) depends on the occurrence
of thermal inversions. Yet, the equilibrium pollution levels Zd depend on other endogenous
factors as well. As the workforce composition changes, some cities produce more output than
others, which in turn raises pollution. The increase in pollution depends on both aggregate
population (capturing the size of the economy, industrial production and congestion) as well as
the skill mix. The skill mix affects pollution by changing the type of production (industry vs
services), amenities, energy consumption, or even local pollution policies:

                                                         1
                                                   Lhd
                                            ¯d
                                       Zd = Z                 (Lhd + Lud )2                       (5)
                                                   Lud

    We also allow for agglomeration economies, and for pollution to directly affect productivity.
In equation 6, A¯d is `exogenous' city-level productivity (fertile soil, rivers, land etc.). If 1 < 0,
pollution lowers the productivity of all workers. We expect the number of skilled workers to
raise TFP levels in the city via non-excludable innovation (Arrow, 1962), such that 2  0:
                                                  1
                                                     ¯d Z 1 L2
                                                Ad = A                                            (6)
                                                         d   hd



6.2        Migration and Labor Supply
   We assume that workers have preferences over locations, either because of tastes (some
prefer to be closer to home, others prefer big cities), or because it is more `costly' for some to
migrate and leave home. The indirect utility of worker j , with skill group s, in destination d,
from origin city o is:
                                              -s
                             Vjsod = jsd wsd Zd  hp- s
                                                    d asd exp
                                                              -Msod
                                                                    ,                          (7)

where jsd is a random variable measuring preferences for a specific city d by individual j . A
larger jsd means worker j is particularly attached to city d. Msod captures migration costs
between o and d, including hukou costs, and physical costs that increase with distance. As
such, migration costs vary by education level, and Msoo = 0 for natives. hpd are housing prices,
and s are the share of expenditures on housing by skill-level. asd represents other non-pollution
related skill-specific amenities. The compensating differential elasticity will be captured by s ,
and varies by skill level.21 Here, marginal workers are those that are indifferent across cities,
and so are likely to be induced into migration by pollution. Inframarginal workers have higher
utility in the city they live in currently, than in all the other cities.
  21
       If h > u , good air quality is a normal good.


                                                         22
   We assume that jsd are independently distributed and drawn from a multivariate extreme
value distribution (Eaton and Kortum, 2002). The joint distribution of jsd is given by:

                                                                   D
                                                                        -s
                                  F(   s1 , ....   sD ) = exp -         sd    ,                              (8)
                                                                    d


where 1s determines how strong the idiosyncratic location preferences are, and so how responsive
workers are to wage or pollution changes. If location preferences are very strong, then workers
may not migrate even when wages differ widely, or pollution levels are high.
    Workers move to places where their utility is higher, implying that given costs of moving,
there are no further arbitrage opportunities available. Local ties and migration costs (including
hukou and distance-based costs) are captured by jsd and Msod respectively. A person chooses
city d over d if Vjsod > Vjsod . In Appendix D.1 we derive an expression for labor supply and
average city-utility, where the share of workers with skill s from city o that move to d is:
                                                    -s                       s
                                               wsd Zd  hp-s
                                                         d asd exp
                                                                   -Msod
                              sod =                     -s                        s                          (9)
                                           d       wsd Zd  hp-s
                                                             d asd exp
                                                                       -Msod



The supply of workers of skill level s in city d additionally depends on the hukou population
of origin city o, Pos .
                                        Lsd =     Pos sod                                (10)
                                                          o

Taking logs of equation 9, we derive the labor supply curve:

       log sod = -s logVso + s (log wsd - s log hpd ) + s log asd - s s logZd - s Msod ,                    (11)

where Vso captures the average utility of being from city o.22 Note that because of migration
costs, utilities are not equalized across cities, and as such the term has an o subscript. For
instance, if a high-amenity city has a very restrictive hukou policy, it may have a high average
utility as not enough people can enter, lowering wages and raising house prices. Yet, higher
hukou restrictions will lower the utility for all individuals in other cities, as their option value
of moving to a potentially desirable location falls. Therefore, as we show in Appendix D.1, Vso
depends on city-specific mobility costs.
    From equation 11 we see that s is the elasticity of labor supply. If workers are attached to
their location, or migration costs are high, then workers will not move even if pollution is high
or wages are low.
    While we do not explicitly model housing supply, like in Moretti (2011), we assume a simple
                                                   Lhd 4
housing market of the form hpd = (Lhd + Lud )3 L    ud
                                                         , where more people in the city raise house
prices, and wealthier residents raise them further.
                                                                                                    1
                                                                        - s                     s   s
 22
      As we show in Appendix D.1, we can derive: Vso =         d   wsd Zd   hp-s
                                                                              d asd exp
                                                                                        -Msod
                                                                                                        .



                                                          23
6.3     Equilibrium and Elasticities
    Equations 3-11 characterize the model's equilibrium, which can be described as a set of
wages, amenities, house prices, migration costs and labor allocations, such that workers are
paid their marginal product, and workers choose cities to reside in. To be specific, the model is
characterized by a set of exogenous factors: city level producitivities A  ¯d , total populations of the
skilled and unskilled L ¯h and L
                               ¯u , migration costs Msod , amenities sd , skill-biased capital sd , and
exogenous components of pollution Z     ¯d ; and a set of parameters (E , s , s , 1 , 2 , 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 ),
that together determine the quantities Ad , Yd , Lhd , Lud , Zd and prices whd , wud , hpd .
    In equilibrium, the labor market clears for each skill level {h, u}. The supply of Lsd equals
the demand for Lsd for all d, and all skills {h, u}, as in equations 4, 9 and 10. Total population of
the skilled and unskilled in the country is the sum of the city level populations (or, L     ¯h =
                                                                                                    d Lhd
and L ¯u =
                d Lud ). The sum of shares of migrant and non-migrants adds up to one, or

   d hod =    d uod = 1  o. Output produced in a city is consumed in the city d, and there are
no savings. Aggregate output is simply the sum of output in each city Y = D           d Yd . In Appendix
D.3 we describe conditions that determine the existence and uniqueness of the equilibrium.


7     Estimation of Model Parameters
    Section 5 already confirmed two important model results. As (exogenous) air pollution
increases, either skilled labor emigrates out or fewer skilled immigrate in, raising the returns
to skill such that the difference in wages is the compensating differential. Yet, our model
makes clear that the observed empirical relationship between exogenous air quality Z           ¯d and
the supply of workers by skill is not simply the partial migration response to pollution due to
s (which determines the compensating differential). Instead, in general equilibrium it is the
result of corresponding migration changes as wages change, given s (the labor supply elasticity
based on local ties and preferences). The wage changes in turn depend on E , the elasticity
of substitution across skill-levels in production (or the relative labor demand elasticity). And
worker relocation further changes pollution (given 1 and 2 ), and other factors (house prices,
agglomeration, etc.). As such, any empirical relationship between population changes and
pollution, identify a coefficient that is a joint function of many model parameters. These crucial
elasticities determine the productivity consequences of pollution, which we need to estimate.
    We estimate the following city-level parameters: {sd , sd , Msod } and aggregate elasticities:
{E , s , s , 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 1 , 2 } based on city-level relationships for a set of large and medium-
sized cities where we have consistent data on all the variables across years. In our preferred
estimates we control for city characteristics as in our earlier results, and show robustness to
alternative sources of variation. We find estimates of these parameters to be similar to what has
already been estimated in the literature. While we could calibrate our model from parameters
estimated by other researchers, we feel more confident in using parameters estimated within our
own model and data. To generate causal estimates for these parameters, we exploit additional
sources of variation stemming from other policy changes.

                                                   24
7.1     Labor Demand Curve: Estimating E
    Since E determines the change in relative skill-unskill wages in response to changes in
relative skill-unskill workers, we derive a relative demand curve from equation 4, where within
city d, output (and other city-level characteristics) are differenced out, as in equation 12:

                                              whd       hd   1     Lhd
                                        log       = log    -   log                                       (12)
                                              wud       ud E       Lud

The parameter E , can be estimated from this relative labor demand curve, as exogenous
                                    Lhd
shifts in relative labor supply log Lud
                                        trace out the relative labor demand curve and identify
the slope, 1/E . As the relationship between the number of workers and wages is determined
in equilibrium, we leverage exogenous variation in pollution to identify this relationship. For
example, excess pollution from thermal inversions shifts labor supply, and traces out the labor
                                                                             Lhd
demand curve. That is, to estimate equation 12, we derive variation in log L  ud
                                                                                 from equation
13, once again instrumenting for pollution levels:

                                        Lhd
                                  log       = 0 + 1 log P M 2.5d + 1d                                    (13)
                                        Lud


                          Table 3: Estimating Labor Demand Elasticities

                IV:              Coal+Wind IV             No. of inversions       Inversion strength
                                   wh       Lh               wh          Lh           wh         Lh
                                Ln wu
                                        Ln L u
                                                          Ln wu
                                                                     Ln L u
                                                                                  Ln w u
                                                                                              Ln Lu




                Log(PM2.5)      1.000**       -1.238**   0.703***   -1.458***    0.850***   -1.681***
                                (0.438)        (0.617)    (0.244)    (0.366)      (0.316)    (0.554)

                Observations      130            130       130            130      130            130
                City Controls      Y              Y         Y              Y        Y              Y
                Weather            N              N         Y              Y        Y              Y
                F-stat           20.54          20.54     68.84          68.84    45.41          45.41
                E                        1.24                     2.07                    1.98

Note: We combine population census data and CLDS data. City level regressions in 2015 using 130 cities that
have non-missing skill-based wage information from CLDS. Skilled workers denote those whose highest degree
is some college or above, unskilled workers denote those whose highest degree is high school or bellow. City
controls include distance to Shanghai, Tianjin and Shenzhen seaports. Robust standard errors reported in
parentheses. All regressions weighted by the population in 2000. p < 0.10,   p < 0.05,   p < 0.01.

    We perform such an exercise in Table 3, using each of our instruments for pollution in the
different columns. We estimate equation 13 in the columns where our outcome of interest is
                              Lhd
the relative stock of workers Lud
                                  , capturing the net migration for all types of workers (whether
or not they changed hukou location).
    In Table 1 of Section 5, we had used individual-level data to show how the emigration
response to pollution was larger for the high-skilled than the low-skilled, while Table A4 showed
that in-migration was similarly skill-biased. These differential migration rates affect the relative


                                                           25
quantities of skilled and unskilled workers at the city level, as we see in Table 3. In equilibrium,
                                                                                     Lhd
cities that have (exogenously) higher level of pollution, have a lower skill ratio L  ud
                                                                                         .
                                                                   wh
    Along with the columns of Table 3 where the outcome is log wu , we estimate the relationship
in equation 12. We take the ratio of the IV relationship for quantities of workers, and the wages
of workers. For instance, in the first two columns, we find that E = 1.238/1.000 = 1.238. This
suggests that the elasticity of substitution across skill levels is 1.238, an estimate close to the
estimates found in the US (Card and Lemieux, 2001). If we were to calibrate elasticities-of-
substitution from the literature it would produce similar model counterfactuals below.

7.2     The Labor Supply Curve: Estimating (s , s ) and {Msod }
    The labor supply curve in equation 11 captures bilateral migration flows between pairs of
cities as a function of real wages and pollution at possible destinations, and migration costs
between origin-destination pairs. First, we parameterize migration costs Msod as follows:

                         Msod = 1s log Distod + 2s (1M igrantod × hukousd ) ,                               (14)

where log Distod is the log of the distance between cities o and d, 1M igrantod is an indicator
for whether o = d, which is when hukou restrictions can bind. The skill-specific hukou index
hukousd , derived from Zhang et al. (2018), measures the ease with which either skilled or
unskilled workers can move into city d.23 The distance term captures physical and psychic
costs associated with moving far away from one's origin city. The interaction of hukou index
and migration status captures institutional migration costs. Substituting equation 14 in 11
generates an estimable equation for labor supply:

                log sod = - s logVso + s (log wsd - s log hpd ) - s s logZd + Xx
                             - s 1s log Distod - s 2s (1M igrantod × hukousd ) +          3sod   ,          (15)

where the residual 3sod = (s log asd + 2sod ) includes differences in destination city amenities
and other idiosyncratic features determining bilateral flows. Below, we describe how we derive
amenities from the residual by inverting the model. In our estimation, we include origin-city-
by-skill fixed effects to control for s logVso . We include controls, X, including a city's hukousd
index. As such, the interaction with migration status allows us to isolate the part of hukou index
that affects migration costs, while controlling for the index accounts for any differences in city
level characteristics (correlated with the hukou index), that affect migrants and non-migrants
in a similar fashion. Like before, we instrument for pollution using thermal inversions.
    One of the key parameters of interest are labor supply elasticities s for skilled and unskilled
workers. To estimate these elasticities, we need two instruments that shift labor demand curves
  23
    Specifically, the index measures the difficulty of obtaining a local hukou based on one's job, family reunion
motives, local investments, and contribution to the city's workforce. A higher index indicates a more restrictive
policy. The index is highest for Beijing, followed by the other major cities.


                                                       26
and trace out the supply curves. We construct shift-share instruments inspired by China's
export-driven economic development and entry into the world trading system. Pierce and Schott
(2016) and Autor et al. (2013) have studied the effects of these shifts on US manufacturing
employment, but here we focus on their effects on skilled and unskilled wages in China.
   The first instrument, the NTR gap (Pierce and Schott, 2016), relies on the changes to the
Normal Trade Relations (NTR) tariffs. Prior to joining the WTO, the US Congress needed to
continually renew the preferential NTR tariffs bestowed upon China. Joining the WTO reduced
the renewal uncertainty (captured by the NTR Gap) defined to be the difference between the
non-NTR tariff and the NTR tariff. Unlike Pierce and Schott (2016) who focus on effects in
the US, we use this instrument to study what happens to internal migration in China as real
wages change across cities following trade liberalization.
   We create city-level uncertainty, measured by looking at the weighted sum of industry i's
export shares EXdi in 1997, interacted with the industry-level NTR gaps:
                                                1997
                                             EXdi
                   N T R IVud =                   1997
                                                       × (nonNTR tariffi - NTR tariffi )                        (16)
                                      i      j EXdj


Comprehensive details about this trade shock can be found in Khanna et al. (2020), where
they show that the NTR gap instrument better predicts changes to real unskilled wages, rather
than skilled wages, possibly because the industries that benefited most from such tariff changes
were more likely to hire unskilled labor. We use this as an instrument for unskilled real wage
log wud - u log hpd . We `deflate' all our wages by local house prices.24
    For skilled wages we derive variation from the World Import Demand (WID) for skilled
industries.25 Following Autor et al. (2013), we use world-import demand shocks by industry,
and weight them by initial export shares to derive city-level exposures. As we aim to create an
instrument for skilled-wage, in equation 17 we use the share of skill-intensive industries:26
                                             1997
                                          EXsdi          World IMi,2015 - World IMi,2004
                   W IDsd =                    1997
                                                    ×                                                           (17)
                                 i        j EXsdj               World IMi,2004
  24
      We use yearly average data on housing rents from the Xitai Real Estate Big Data depository. Further details
and data sources at http://www.cityre.cn/credata.html. The data has been collected since 2005, and covered
337 cities in China, in collaboration with the China National Bureau of Statistics, and the China National
Development and Reform Commission. We compare these data to the purchase price of residential properties
from the China statistical yearbook, and find a correlation of 0.93.
   25
      We label industries as skill intensive if they are above the median in the ISIC industry data. The skill share
is the share of skilled workers in the industry, based on the Annual Survey of Industrial Production (ASIP)
available in 2004. We aggregate the firm data into 4-digit ISIC industries. For instance, in ISIC 1810, 5% of
the labor force is "skilled". We construct our measure using the Indonesian manufacturing census (Amiti and
Freund, 2010), so as to ensure no confounding effects of using the same sample to construct our skill-intensity
measure and regression estimation.
   26
      Khanna et al. (2020) perform many robustness checks surrounding these instruments. Recent developments
in the shift-share literature discuss additional tests, such as tests for pre-trends, baseline share correlations, and
standard error corrections. Khanna et al. (2020) perform these tests, noting that we rely on the assumption
that in our case, the `shifters' are exogenous (as in Borusyak et al. (2018) and Adao et al. (2019)), rather than
the `shares' being exogenous (Goldsmith-Pinkham et al., 2020).


                                                         27
                             Table 4: Estimating Labor Supply Elasticities

       IV-2SLS Labor Supply                  Low Skill Workers                   High Skill Workers
                                                 Log uod                              Log hod

       Log (P M 2.5)d                  -0.0427***       -0.0488***          -0.506***        -0.513***
                                        (0.0090)         (0.0114)            (0.0958)         (0.0829)
       Log (Real W age)d                1.012***         1.126***            1.301***        1.024***
                                         (0.269)          (0.318)             (0.251)          (0.170)
       Log (Distance)od                -0.0754***       -0.0783***         -0.0308***       -0.0404***
                                        (0.0112)         (0.0129)            (0.0052)         (0.0046)
       Hukou Indexsd × M igrantod        -0.923*          -0.852*           -3.489***        -3.061***
                                         (0.487)          (0.501)             (0.876)          (0.758)

       Observations                     13,570            13,570            13,570            13,570
       Pollution IV                   No. thermal    Strength thermal     No. thermal    Strength thermal
       Wage IV                         NTR IV            NTR IV            WID IV            WID IV
       Controls                           Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
       Hukou City FE                      Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
       First stage F-stat                19.45             15.16             30.97             70.07

Note: Origin-destination pair level regressions across 118 origin cities and 115 destination cities for which we
have data from all sources including population Census, CLDS, hukou index data and trade data. The NTR
IV is the weighted average of the NTR gap, where the weights are the baseline industry level export shares
(Pierce and Schott, 2016). The NTR gap is measured as the gap in Normal Trade Relation (NTR) tariffs and
the non-NTR tariffs. The WID IV is the weighted average of the world import demand, where the weights are
the baseline skill-intensive share of industries Autor et al. (2013). The measure of Hukou Indexsd varies across
cities and skill level (Zhang et al., 2018). We also control for this (non-interacted) measure of the hukou index.
We model distance as inverse hyperbolic sine, to be able to include zero values. All regressions also control for
temperature, humidity, sunshine duration, and wind speed, as before when using thermal inversions as an IV.
High skill workers are those whose highest degree is some college or above, and low skill workers are those whose
highest degree is high school or below. Standard errors clustered at the city level are reported in parentheses.
The first stage relationships are described in Table C5. p < 0.10,   p < 0.05,   p < 0.01.

    Table 4 allows us to estimate s and s for each skill group. Across the columns we vary the
skill groups and the instruments used. The skill-biased trade shocks will raise the demand for
some occupations more than others. This changes the wages by city and skill group in response
to the trade shocks, and helps us identify s , the labor supply response to changes in wages.
Our estimates in columns 1 and 3 suggest that u = 1.012 and h = 1.301. These are similar
to estimates of labor supply elasticities estimated by Tombe and Zhu (2019).
    Equation 15 shows that the coefficients on Log (P M 2.5)d equal s s . The s parameters
capture the marginal utility of clean air, and vary by skill level. Given our estimates of s , we
can infer h = 0.38, and u = 0.042. h > u implies that the skilled are more sensitive to air
quality than the unskilled. Comparing estimated labor supply elasticities with respect to wages
and to pollution levels suggests that both types of workers are far more responsive to changes
in wages than they are to pollution levels.
    Workers also respond to migration costs. Table 4 shows that migration is less likely to
occur over longer distances, and if there are more hukou restrictions. Skilled workers are less
sensitive to distance. They are more sensitive to hukou restrictions, even though they face fewer
restrictions. The responsiveness perhaps reflects stronger preferences for access to amenities

                                                       28
(like housing purchases and children's schooling) only obtainable via accessing local hukou.
    Note that as workers move in response to higher wages, this affects where production takes
place, and as a result, where pollution is located (based on 1 and 2 ). As such, our model
and estimation allow for the fact that trade shocks will also affect the amount of pollution via
production and migration responses.

7.3                                                       ¯d }
        Measuring Amenities and Productivities {sd , sd , A
   We measure sd from data on labor shares in the wage bill and the properties of a CES
function. sd varies at the city level by the amount of skill-biased capital in each city. We use
the following relationship, and information on wages and number of workers to measure sd :
                                                                        E -1
                                                                        E
                                   whd Lhd                          hd Lhd
                                                =            E -1                    E -1                     (18)
                              whd Lhd + wud Lud              E                       E
                                                      hd Lhd        + (1 - hd )Lud

We plot the city-level distribution of hd in Figure C2. Beijing, Shanghai and other urban
centers have high amounts of high-skill capital than the less urbanized, less developed areas.

                                 Table 5: Pollution, Population and TFP

                                      Agglomeration Forces                    Congestion Forces
                                  Log(TFP)        Log(TFP)              Log(PM2.5) Log(House Prices)

             Log(PM2.5)d            -0.0816          -0.0595
                                    (0.256)          (0.285)
             Log(Lhd )             0.0970*          0.0964*
                                   (0.0528)         (0.0519)
             Log(Population)d                                             0.266*            0.259**
                                                                          (0.150)            (0.121)
             Log(Lhd /Lud )                                              -0.00781           0.423***
                                                                         (0.0786)           (0.0583)

             Observations           121               121                    121              121
             Pollution IV       No. Thermal     Thermal Strength
             First stage F-stat    25.61             15.67                   12.66           12.66

Notes: We combine population census data, CLDS data, and data on the college expansion, consistently available
for 121 cities. The first column estimates the relationship between PM2.5, number of skilled workers and TFP.
We use thermal inversions as an instrument for PM2.5, and leverage the higher education expansion instrument
to identify the effect of the number of skilled workers. For our congestion forces we use instruments for population
and the skill ratio that we describe in the text. We control for region fixed effects and distance to seaports. When
using thermal inversions as an instrument, we control for weather amenities (temperature, humidity, sunshine
duration and wind speed). The first-stage relationships are in Table C5. p < 0.10,   p < 0.05,   p < 0.01.


    We follow the literature (Ahlfeldt et al., 2015; Bryan and Morten, 2019) and derive non-
pollution amenities as a residual from the labor supply curve, equation 15. Intuitively, bilateral
migration flows between cities must be driven by wages, house prices, pollution, migration
costs, and other residential amenities. As we measure and account for the effect of all other
components, the remaining portion of the flows are due to amenities. We take the residual

                                                        29
for each skill-specific regression estimated from equation 15, and derive amenities from the
destination fixed effects (i.e., 3sod = sd + 2sod , where s log asd = sd ).
    To quantify changes to output, we create a measure of TFP A     ¯d , which captures features of
the local area (e.g, land quality). We follow the literature (Ahlfeldt et al., 2015) and measure
TFP as the city-level aggregate residual from output. After accounting for the optimal (unbi-
                                                    1         1-
                                                         1-
ased) capital flows, output is simply: Yd = Ad            R
                                                                   Ld . Using our estimates for E and sd ,
                                                                                          1
we are able to create a measure of Ld . We then invert the model to derive Ad .27

7.4     Estimating Agglomeration and Congestion Forces ( and  )
  We use equation 19 to study how our measure of TFP correlates with pollution as instru-
mented with the thermal inversions instrument for pollution.

                          1                ¯d + 1 log Zd + 2 log Lhd + 4d ,
                              log Ad = log A                                                              (19)

where 1 is the elasticity of pollution with aggregate TFP.28 Notice, Ad may capture other
drivers of city-level TFP, like land, housing supply, innovation. Equation 19 also allows the
number of skilled workers to directly affect the amount of TFP in a city. If there are Arrow
(1962) style innovation spillovers, it would be captured by the agglomeration elasticity 2 .29
    In Table 5 we estimate 1 using equation 19, and leveraging our instrumental variables
strategy for PM2.5 emissions. While not precisely estimated, we conclude that 1 = -0.0816.
Chang et al. (2019) document an elasticity of -0.023 in the context of call-center workers in
China, while Kahn and Li (2019) estimate an elasticity of -0.18 for public sector workers in
China. Our estimate lies in between the two.
    We use a sudden expansion of access to universities in China to estimate the effects of
skilled workers on TFP, as a way to capture the parameters associated with agglomeration or
innovation spillovers. The Chinese government instituted a policy to expand college enrollment
in 1999, primarily by lowering the bar for admission.30 Che and Zhang (2018) use this policy
as an instrument for firm productivity, and discuss identification concerns at length. They
establish that the university expansion policy was not targeted at any specific industrial sector.
We use this same instrument to predict variation in the number of skilled workers across cities.
  27
     log ¯  1- log 1R     -
                               is common across all cities and workers. is the labor share of income.
  28
     TFP may also be positively associated with pollution. This may generally be true if more production leads
to more pollution, but we are using an IV for pollution here.
  29
     Agglomeration in this model is represented by the production of non-excludable ideas. Innovators are not
directly compensated for ideas in wages. Instead overall output increases, benefiting all in the local economy.
  30
     In January 1999 the Ministry of Education (MOE) announced an admission plan of 1.3 million for three
and four-year college programs, a 20% increase over 1998. The following June it revised the admission plan to
1.56 million, an unprecedented increase of 44% over the previous year. College admissions grew annually by
more than 40% in both 1999 and 2000, and by about 20% over the next five years. The gross college enrollment
rate among 18­22 year-olds increased from 9.8% in 1998 to 24.2% in 2009. The year 2003 saw the first flow of
four-year graduates into the job market as a result of the expansion. The number of students graduating from
regular higher education institutions was 2.12 million, a 46.2% increase from the previous year.


                                                        30
Figure C1 describes this event graphically. Importantly, it shows no differential pre-trends in
college students and professors (who subsequently make up the skilled workforce) in cities that
subsequently benefited from college expansion.
    We create measures of the number of college graduates by city and year, and use the change
in the number of graduates from 2001 to 2005 (cohorts just before and after the university
expansion policy) as our instrument.31 We find 2 = 0.097 when we estimate equation 19,
which suggesst a meaningful agglomeration effect in line with other estimates in the literature
(Gaubert, 2018; Moretti, 2004; Peri et al., 2015).
    Our model allows for the spatial distribution of population to affect pollution (equation 5).
We need estimates for the effects of changes in the number of workers and skill share in each
city on pollution and house prices. Estimating 1 requires variation in the skill-ratio that is
not driven by air quality. We leverage the college expansion policy (dividing it by the baseline
unskilled population in 2000 to get a ratio) to estimate the effect of changes in skill ratios.
    Simultaneously, we estimate how changes in total population affect air quality, captured
by parameter 2 . Our trick is to leverage any exogenous push factors at the cities of origin
that each destination is linked to through migrant-networks at baseline. We instrument for
population in each destination d using the growth in out-migration between 2005 and 2015
from all provinces in China, weighted by the share of migrants from each province that came
to d in 2000:32

                                         M igrantsdp,2000
       P opulation IVd,2015 =                               ×             M igrantsd p,2005-2015           (20)
                                 p       d M igrantsdp,2000        d =d


    Note that this is different from the instruments introduced by Card (2001) and described
by Jaeger et al. (2018). As we have rich data on outflows of migrants from provinces, we can
leverage `push factors' from sending regions, and completely omit information on inflows into
destinations. The advantage is that identification relies on forces driving the outflows from
provinces to all other cities, and not associated with city d specifically, similar to the shift-
share framework described by Borusyak et al. (2018). We combine this idea with the strength
of the Card (2001) framework, in which sources of migration at baseline determine the migrant
networks that attract more migrants into city d after 2005, whenever there are larger outflows
from the set of origin provinces that d was connected to.33
    Table 5 describes the effect of population and skill ratio on pollution. The first stage
of the 2SLS appears to be strong. Our two-staged least squares estimates tell us that 1
is indistinguishable from zero, and 2 = 0.266. Larger population increases the amount of
  31
      The instrument is number of college graduates in city d in 2005 minus the number of college graduates in
city d in 2001. Figure C1 describes the dynamics of the expansion policy, and pre-trends.
   32
      When calculating the amount of out-migration between 2005 and 2015, we exclude flows to d, so as to not
capture labor demand changes at the destination.
   33
      Indeed, before 2000 internal migration was highly regulated (Kinnan et al., 2018). After 2000, migration
costs have fallen substantially (Tombe and Zhu, 2019), allowing us to estimate the impacts of subsequent growth.


                                                      31
                               Table 6: Summary of Estimated Model Parameters

  Parameter           Value     Definition                                   Identifying Variation
  E                    1.24     Skill-elasticity of substitution           Pollution-driven geographic sorting
                                Relative labor demand elasticity           Changes in skill ratio affect wages
  h                   1.301     High-skill labor supply elasticity         World Import Demand trade shocks
  u                   1.012     Low-skill labor supply elasticity          NTR Gap trade shocks post WTO
  h                   0.506     High-skill migration response to pollution Pollution-driven response by skill
  u                  0.0427     Low-skill migration response to pollution Pollution-driven response by skill
  hd             [0.10,0.73]    Skill-specific productivity                Skill-labor share in wage bill
  1                  -0.008     Pollution response to changing skill ratio   University expansion
  2                   0.266     Pollution response to population             Out-migration from origin provinces
  3                   0.423     House price response to skill ratio          University expansion
  4                   0.259     House price response to population           Out-migration from origin provinces
  1                 -0.0816     TFP response to pollution                    Pollution IV affect TFP residual
  2                  0.0970     TFP response to skilled workers              University expansion
  h                   3.489     High skill response to hukou index           Skill-biased hukou index
  u                   0.923     Low skill response to hukou index            Skill-biased hukou index

Notes: We summarize the parameter estimation using different instruments in this table. The values are from
Tables 3-5 and Figure C2. The top half of our table lists the primary parameters for our main model. The
lower half of the table includes the additional parameters that complete the estimation process.


pollution in a city, but the skill composition of workers has no detectable effect.
    Finally, we consider how house prices may affect our predictions. To do so, we estimate the
elasticity of house prices with respect to population (3 = 0.423), and with respect to the skill
ratio (4 = 0.259), leveraging the same instruments. A larger population raises house prices,
and these prices rise substantially more when there is an influx of skilled workers in the city.

7.5        Model Solution and Validation Exercises
    Table 6 summarizes all parameter values and sources of variation. Output in city d depends
on the set of parameters: {sd , E , , 1 , 2 , 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 }, a set of `endogenous' quantities:
                                                          ¯d , Z
{Yd , Ad , Lhd , Lud , Zd }, and `exogenous' quantities: {A    ¯d , Msod , L
                                                                           ¯u , L
                                                                                ¯h }. Prices, {whd , wud , hpd }
are determined in equilibrium, with the output being the numeraire. Changes in exogenous
pollution Z  ¯d will affect the location of workers and TFP, thereby changing output Yd in this
city, and in other cities. Given our estimated set of parameters, and exogenous quantities, we
create model-predicted measures of our endogenous quantities, like GDP and wages.
    We solve the model starting with the list of parameters and exogenous quantities, and a
set of initial conditions for the endogenous variables. After estimating the parameters, we no
longer use information from the endogenous variables to solve the model. The primary market
clearing condition is the labor market equilibrium, since for tractability, we do not model the
floor space market, or demand for output. We pick different starting points, beginning in the
vicinity of the observed equilibrium, but vary it by as much as changing the starting value by
20% for each endogenous variable. The model converges to the same unique equilibrium.34 We
  34
       This does not necessarily imply the equilibrium is globally unique. The existence of multiple equilibria


                                                          32
solve the model iteratively, ensuring that we clear the labor market. That is, if there is an
excess supply of labor in a city, wages are reduced, and along with the population constraints
(the total number of skilled and unskilled in the country) our model converges to an equilibrium
which determines the distribution of skilled and unskilled workers across cities.
    We conduct tests of model fit in Figure C3, and show that our model's predictions match
the main endogenous quantities in the data. We use the parameters we estimated to calculate
predicted values for all cities. We test model-fit by first plotting the predicted Log (GDP ) and
Log (Lh /Lu ). In the lower panels we plot actual and predicted skill-premia Log (wh /wu ). Notice,
these are not necessarily an out-of-sample test as we use these data when estimating different
parameters of the model, but not when solving for model equilibrium. Last, we plot city-level
GDP per capita Y /(Lh + Lu ) against actual GDP per capita. Across all these measures, our
model replicates the major spatial patterns in the data.


8     Counterfactuals: The Gains from Relocating Pollution
    There are three mechanisms through which pollution can result in productivity losses. First,
and the one this paper seeks to highlight, skilled workers leave cities where they would be more
productive, to avoid pollution. Further, since migration costs are larger for the unskilled and
they are less responsive to pollution, the unskilled do not leave with the skilled. As we estimate
the skilled and unskilled to be complements in production, this creates a mismatch in the
location choices of the two types of workers, further reducing aggregate productivity. Second,
pollution reduces the agglomeration of skilled workers in the most productive cities, lowering
aggregate output. Third, pollution directly affects workers' health and lowers productivity.
    In this section, we use our estimated model to conduct counterfactual exercises to quantify
how large an effect pollution control policies would have on productivity via each of these three
mechanisms. To isolate the health channel, we prohibit workers from changing location when
pollution levels change. To shut down agglomeration, we set 2 = 0 in the TFP relationship.
    There are two types of pollution control policies we consider in our counterfactuals. First,
we change only the steady-state level of pollution Zd in a city. This is similar to policies where
cities are assigned explicit pollution targets that they must meet. In the second type of policy,
we relocate the exogenous component of pollution only, Z   ¯d . This policy is similar to relocating
coal-fired plants from upwind to downwind regions. Note that relocating plants would induce
new residents to move into the city, change production patterns, and a revised pollution level
will emerge in a new equilibrium that will not necessarily equal the modeled change in Z      ¯d .

often depends on the relative strength of agglomeration and congestion forces (Allen et al., 2020). More skilled
workers raise TFP (via 2 ), yet may lead to more congestion, via higher house prices (via 3 and 4 ) and more
pollution (via 1 and 2 ), which in turn may lower TFP (via 1 ). Given the meaningful congestion forces we
may expect a unique equilibrium. Yet, like other work (Ahlfeldt et al., 2015) we envision that if there were
to be multiple equilibria for a different set of parameter values, we would select the counterfactual equilibrium
closest to the observed real-world outcome.




                                                       33
8.1     Changing Pollution in One City: Beijing
    Table 7 describes the effects of changes to pollution and migration policy in a highly produc-
tive and polluted city, Beijing. We first reduce the steady state PM2.5 concentration by 50%,
a policy akin to setting a pollution cap for Beijing. This raises GDP per worker in Beijing by
14.4%. The health channel raises productivity by 5.8%. The pure relocation channel (without
accounting for agglomeration) raises GDP per worker by 4.5%. If we allow for the fact that
more skilled workers imply more agglomeration spillovers, GDP per worker due to relocation
would rise by 8.1%. Productivity gains through the indirect spatial sorting channel are actually
larger than the direct health benefits of air quality improvement. The overall improvements to
GDP are not merely the sum of the channels, as they meaningfully interact with each other.
For instance, the newly relocated immigrants also benefit from better health.
    Second, we examine the effects of reducing the exogenous component of PM2.5, allowing
steady state values of pollution to adjust when the population and skill composition of the city
changes. This is a policy similar to relocating a powerplant up-wind of Beijing to elsewhere. In
this case, we obtain somewhat similar, albeit slightly smaller, outcomes for GDP per worker and
wages. The mildly muted effects reflect the fact that when exogenous pollution is reduced, an
influx of workers may increase pollution and mitigate some positive effects. Again, relocation
effects are larger in magnitude than the direct health benefits.
    In the third and fourth rows of Table 7, we examine the effects of relaxing hukou restrictions
in Beijing by 50%, allowing workers to move in, but holding pollution fixed. The effects of
relaxing mobility restrictions depend on whether we change hukou policy for skilled or unskilled
workers. When we relax the skilled hukou, GDP per worker rises by 8.2%, more than half of
which is driven by the simple relocation channel, and the rest by the agglomeration forces.
Lowering unskilled hukou restrictions lowers GDP per capita, through a compositional change
in the population ­ there are now more low-wage workers in Beijing.
    The last two rows combine the changes in steady-state pollution and hukou restrictions.
Relaxing skilled hukou restrictions in Beijing increases city GDP per capita by 22.96%. GDP
increases by 9.2% due to reallocation of workers, and 16.2% when including the agglomeration
of skilled work. These are much larger than the direct health benefits of clean air, 5.8%.35
    Relocation due to pollution or hukou policy changes affects productivity and wages in the
model through multiple channels. First, immigration changes the skill composition of the city
population. Average incomes rise if skilled workers move in. Second, the effect of skilled workers
on city productivity is larger when the city (like Beijing) has a lot of skill-biased capital. Third,
inflow of skilled workers lowers the skilled wage due to a labor supply effect. However, that
raises unskilled wages because the unskilled are estimated to be complements in the production
function. Finally, agglomeration forces will raise average incomes for all skill groups. When
hukou relaxation is combined with pollution reduction, the consequent skilled immigration
  35
    Appendix Table E1 examines changes to GDP per worker, focusing solely on the main relocation effects and
shutting down agglomeration or congestion effects (endogeonous changes to pollution, house prices and TFP).


                                                    34
               Table 7: The Productivity Effect of Reducing Pollution in One City

                                                               Change in GDP per Worker (%)
                                          Overall Change       Health Channel Relocation Relocation+Agglom
 Reduce steady state PM2.5                       14.370            5.819         4.480           8.080
 Reduce exogenous part of PM2.5                  12.773            5.344         3.777           7.052
 Relax skilled hukou                              8.174            0.000         5.109            8.174
 Relax unskilled hukou                           -3.775            0.000        -4.686           -3.775
 Reduce PM2.5 & relax skilled hukou              22.959            5.819        9.147            16.197
 Reduce PM2.5 & relax unskilled hukou            10.533            5.819        0.036             4.454

Notes: In this counterfactual exercise we reduce the steady state amount of pollution in Beijing by 50% (row
1). We then reduce only the exogenous component of pollution by 50% (row 2). Next, we lower hukou
restrictions for each skill level (rows 3 and 4) by 50%, keeping pollution fixed. Rows 5 and 6 lower the hukou
regulations by 50% while reducing steady state pollution. Column 1 shows the gain to overall GDP per
worker. Column 2 shows the component purely explained by the health-productivity channel. Column 3 shows
the pure relocation channel, and Column 4 also incorporates agglomeration as a consequence of relocation.


raises average incomes substantially.
    We move beyond overall GDP per capita to examine distributional consequences on the
wages of each skill group in Table 8. When we reduce the steady state amount of pollution in
row 1, skilled wages rise slightly. The improved productivity of skilled workers from reduced
pollution is counteracted by the reduction in wages as a consequence of an influx of skilled
workers. Unskilled wages, on the other hand, rise sharply by 18.3%. Most of this is driven by
the relocation channel: When skilled workers enter Beijing, complementary unskilled workers
become more productive. As a consequence, average wages in the city rise by 14.4% (i.e., the
increase we saw in GDP per worker in Table 7). Reducing the exogenous part of pollution (row
2) produces similar distributional effects.

            Table 8: Distributional Consequences of Reducing Pollution in One City

                                                     Skilled Wage                  Unskilled Wage
                                        Overall    Health Relocate+Agglom Overall Health Relocate+Agglom
 Reduce steady state PM2.5               2.702      5.819         -2.945      18.260     5.819      11.757
 Reduce exogenous part of PM2.5          2.589      5.344         -2.616      16.699     5.344      10.779
 Relax skilled hukou                    -4.332      0.000         -4.332      12.462     0.000      12.462
 Relax unskilled hukou                   7.661      0.000          7.661      -6.371     0.000      -6.371
 Reduce PM2.5 & relax skilled hukou     -1.580      5.819         -6.992      33.108     5.819      25.789
 Reduce PM2.5 & relax unskilled hukou   10.438      5.819          4.365      10.559     5.819       4.479

Notes: In this counterfactual we reduce the steady state amount of pollution in Beijing by 50% (row 1). We
then reduce only the exogenous component of pollution by 50% (row 2). Next, we lower the hukou restrictions
for each skill level (rows 3 and 4) by 50%, keeping pollution fixed. Finally (rows 5 and 6) we relax hukou
regulations by 50% while reducing steady state pollution. The first 3 columns show the effect on the wage of
college educated workers, whereas the last 3 columns show the effects on the wage of the non college educated.


    When we relax the hukou restrictions in rows 3 and 4 in each skill group, we see that
allowing in more workers of a particular skill group lower the wages of that group, while raising
the productivity of the other (complementary) worker type. For instance, relaxing skilled hukou
lowers skilled wages by 4.3%, but as skilled workers enter the city, unskilled workers become

                                                          35
more productive and their wages rise by 12.5%. When we combine relaxing hukou regulations
with changes to PM2.5, there are more positive effects on wages, especially for the unskilled.

8.2     Relocating Pollution Away from Skill-biased Capital
    Table 9 considers a different type of counterfactual where we keep the overall levels of
pollution in the country to be the same, but simply relocate pollution from regions that have
more skill-biased capital (high hd ) to regions with less skill-biased capital. This could, for
instance, entail relocating coal-fired plants away from technology hubs, financial centers, and
nodes of professional service activities. Spatial reorientation of coal processing is perhaps more
feasible than reducing production and pollution in the aggregate. In the first row, we relocate
steady state pollution by setting pollution caps based on the amount of skill-biased capital in
the city. Overall GDP in the country increases by 6.7%, and much of this increase is driven by
the relocation of workers. The contribution of the health channel is a 2.6% increase in GDP,
while the relocation channel alone raises GDP by 2.2%. Agglomeration plays a minor role.

              Table 9: The Productivity Effect of Relocating Pollution Across Cities

                                                            Change in GDP per Worker (%)
                                                Overall changes Health Relocation Relocate+Agglom
 Relocate steady state PM2.5                         6.702          2.604       2.205             2.277
 Relocate exogenous part of PM2.5                    3.670          1.484       1.563             1.615
 Relax hukou                                          2.585         0.000       2.340             2.585
 Relax overall mobility constraints                   6.968         0.000       6.421             6.968
 Relocate PM2.5 & relax hukou                        8.329          2.604       3.615             3.844
 Relocate PM2.5 & lower migration costs              13.832         2.604       8.156             8.814

Notes: In this counterfactual exercise we relocate PM2.5 in all cities based on the amount of skill-biased
capital in the city (row 1). In row 2, we relocate only the exogenous component of pollution. In row 3, we
relax the hukou restriction in the 24 top tier cities by 50%, keeping pollution fixed. In row 4 we relax overall
migration costs to the 24 high tier cities by 50%, keeping pollution fixed. Column 1 shows the overall gain to
GDP. Column 2 shows the increase in GDP as a consequence of the health effects only. Column 3 shows the
gain due to the re-allocation of labor channel only. Column 4 shows the gain to GDP accounting for changes
in TFP due to changes in re-allocation and the agglomeration of skilled workers.

    When we relocate the exogenous part of pollution (say, shift an upwind power plant away
from a productive city, to a less productive one), the increase in GDP is smaller. As people
relocate to the more productive cities, pollution levels again rise through the feedback loop in
the model (where pollution is itself a function of population), and dampens the benefits. The
contribution of the relocation channel is slightly larger than the health channel.36
    As a benchmark, in row 3, we relax hukou restrictions in the top-tier cities by 50%. This
raises GDP by less than the pollution changes, but, by construction, is solely driven by worker
relocation. When we lower overall migration costs in these top-tier cities (row 4) by 50%, the
increase in GDP is similar to relocating steady state pollution (about 6.97%). Lowering overall
  36
   The health channel playing a positive role suggests that sources of pollution are concentrated in more
populous cities. Moving pollution away from large cities can improve population-weighted average health.


                                                       36
migration costs can be thought of as a policy mix of relaxing hukou restrictions and building
more transportation infrastructure to connect cities. Combining reductions to mobility costs
to top-tier cities with relocating pollution produces much larger effects on GDP per worker.
    The major lessons from this exercise are: (a) A spatial reallocation of pollution away from
cities that have the greatest potential for skilled productivity (those with most skill-biased
capital) can raise national income as skilled workers relocate to where they are most productive,
(b) Pollution caps produce larger productivity effects than relocating sources of pollution, as
worker re-sorting undermines benefits, and (c) Combining relaxations to mobility restrictions
with pollution reductions can produce large income gains.

              Table 10: Distributional Effects of Relocating Pollution Across Cities

                                                  Skilled Wage                         Unskilled Wage
                                      Overall   Health Relocate+Agglom      Overall   Health Relocate+Agglom
 Relocate steady state PM2.5          17.723    4.493         10.484         1.070     1.638         -1.917
 Relocate exogenous part of PM2.5      8.924    2.402         5.688          0.983     1.014         -0.469
 Relax hukou                           3.861    0.000          3.861         1.933     0.000          1.933
 Relax overall mobility constraints   10.066    0.000         10.066         5.384     0.000          5.384
 Relocate PM2.5 & relax hukou         19.923    4.493         12.649         2.403     1.638         -0.656
 Relocate PM2.5 & lower mig costs     27.784    4.493         19.864         6.701     1.638          3.166

Notes: In this counterfactual exercise we relocate PM2.5 in all cities based on the amount of skill-biased
capital in the city (row 1). In row 2, we relocate only the exogenous component of pollution. In addition to
such relocations of pollution, we also relax the hukou restriction in the 24 top tier cities by 50% (row 3). In
row 4 we relax overall migration costs to the 24 high tier cities by 50%. Rows 3 and 4 keep pollution fixed.
Columns 1-3 show the effects on skilled workers, while columns 4-6 show the effects on unskilled workers.


    Table 10 shows wage effects for skilled and unskilled workers. Relocating pollution away
from cities with more skill-biased capital raises skilled wages, but has little effect on the wage of
the unskilled. This is a consequence of the baseline distribution of skill groups across cities that
see pollution changes. As skilled workers leave cities where pollution increases, skilled wages
rise in those cities and wages of unskilled (complementary) workers fall. As skilled workers
relocate to cities with more skill-biased capital, their overall productivity increases, because
there is now a better matching of workers to capital. The skilled workers who were already
resident in such cities may see a dampening of their wages, but they could also benefit from
agglomeration economies. On net, we find that skilled wages rise by 17.7%, and the relocation
channel raises skilled wages by 10.5%. The health channel also raises skilled wages, because
skilled workers already tended to locate in high skill-biased capital cities which now saw a
reduction in pollution. Wages for unskilled workers improve slightly by 1%.
    Relaxing hukou restrictions and lower migration costs (rows 3 and 4) raise wages for both
the skilled and unskilled, as workers can match better with where their marginal products
are higher. That is, workers locate to where there is more capital, and where there are more
complementary workers. The combination of lowering migration costs and relocating pollution
(row 6) can raise skilled wages by as much as 27.8% and unskilled wages by 6.7%, almost


                                                        37
entirely due to changes in internal migration patterns.

                  Table 11: Welfare Effects of Relocating Pollution Across Cities

                                                   Skilled Welfare     Unskilled Welfare      Average Welfare
 Relocate steady state PM2.5                            29.660                2.258                 4.628
 Relocate exogenous part of PM2.5                       13.122                1.326                 2.306
 Relax hukou                                            9.895                 0.935                 1.710
 Relax overall mobility constraints                     17.458               10.051                 10.692
 Relocate PM2.5 & relax hukou                           42.911               1.502                   5.085
 Relocate PM2.5 & lower migration costs                 55.354               13.289                 16.928

Notes: In this counterfactual exercise we relocate PM2.5 in all cities based on the amount of skill-biased
capital in the city (row 1). In row 2, we relocate only the exogenous component of pollution. In addition to
such relocations of pollution, we also relax the hukou restriction in the 24 top tier cities by 50% (row 3). In
row 4 we relax overall migration costs to the 24 high tier cities by 50%. Rows 3 and 4 keep pollution fixed.
Rows 5 and 6 relocate pollution while relaxing migration costs.


    However, wage effects do not capture the entirety of the welfare consequences, as pollution
and migration costs also directly determine welfare. This is particularly important to acknowl-
edge, as relocating pollution to less productive areas may be undesirable from an environmental
justice point of view, if it makes unskilled workers in poor cities worse off.
    Table 11 examines changes to welfare by skill group. Relocating pollution away from cities
with skill-biased capital raises the welfare of skilled workers by 29.7%, as it raises their wages,
but also lowers their experience of pollution since most skilled workers are already located in
such cities. Unskilled workers, however, see more modest improvements in their overall welfare.
Welfare in the country improves by 4.6%.
    Lowering migration costs (row 4), on the other hand, raises the welfare of both skilled and
unskilled workers, by 17.5% and 10.1% respectively. The combination of relocating pollution
and lowering migration costs improves welfare in the country by a substantial 16.9%. The overall
changes in welfare are not simply the sum of the two counterfactuals conducted separately,
highlighting the interplay between migration restrictions and pollution exposure. For instance,
relaxing migration restrictions directly improves welfare by lowering mobility costs and allowing
access to better wages; but when combined with lower pollution, the individuals who immigrate
also happen to benefit from better air quality.
    The numbers in Table 11 make clear that while the policies we study (relocating pollution
away from the most productive places and relaxing hukou ) are sensible on efficiency grounds,
they raise welfare by primarily benefiting rich, skilled workers. Poor, unskilled workers are also
better off, but their gains are only substantial when we reduce overall mobility costs.
    Once again, in Appendix Table E2, we re-examine the overall changes to GDP from our most
basic formulation of the model, without externalities. That is, without housing, agglomeration,
or pollution responses to changing populations. The results are qualitatively similar to Table
9, with some improvements to GDP being slightly larger in magnitude.

                                                       38
8.3     How Much of the Cross-city Wage Gap is Due to Pollution?

                   Figure 10: Explaining the Wage Gap with Worker Relocation




Notes: We plot the change in the skilled wage, solely due to changes in worker location (the relocation channel
only), when the amount of pollution in the city is changed to be equal to the pollution in the median city.
The horizontal axis plots the baseline amount of pollution in a city. The vertical axis plots the change in the
skilled wage as this baseline pollution is equalized across cities. The size of the bubbles represent the baseline
population in 2000.

    A persistent puzzle animating a large literature in development and macroeconomics is that
despite existent productivity gaps across regions within countries, worker mobility does not
equalize wages. We now use our estimated model to explore: how much of the cross-city wage
gaps is explained by poor air quality?
    We conduct an exercise where we change the amount of pollution in all cities to be that of
the median city in the country, while still keeping the total country-level of pollution the same
as before. This means raising pollution levels in cities with low pollution and low skill-biased-
capital, and lowering them in polluted, productive cities. In Figure 10 we show how wages would
change with this reallocation of pollution, as a way to quantify how much of the wage gap across
cities is due to existing patterns of pollution. We use the numbers for Tianjin and Chongqing ­
two comparable representative provincial-level cities ­ to illustrate. As pollution is lowered in
Tianjin, there is an inflow of skilled workers that lowers the skilled wage. The change in wage is
the same as the (endogenously determined) compensating differential. Conversely, skilled wages
rise in Chongqing as workers emigrate out. On net, the skilled wage gap between Tianjin and
Chongqing is bridged by 18%, due only to the pollution-induced reallocation channel, ignoring
agglomeration or health effects. Once we incorporate the health and agglomeration benefits
of reducing pollution, the Tianjin wage does not fall by as much, while the newly imported
pollution into Chongqing mitigates the rise in wages there. So a smaller, 14.4% of the gap
gets bridged under the new equitable configuration of pollution across Chinese cities, once we
incorporate the full range of effects of pollution on people's productivity. Only adding health
benefits to the resorting effects (ignoring agglomeration) explains 12.5% of the gap.

                                                       39
8.4     Consequences of the 2013 City-level Pollution Caps
    Finally, we quantify the productivity implications of an actual pollution control policy
recently implemented by the Chinese government. On Sep 10, 2013, the State Council of China
issued an Air Pollution Prevention and Control Plan, which states, "by 2017, annual PM2.5
concentration in China's three major economic circles: Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei, Yangtze River
Delta and Pearl River Delta region shall fall by around 25%, 20% and 15% respectively. PM2.5
concentration in Beijing shall be controlled below 60 µg/m3 ." As the logic of our paper would
recommend, this plan sensibly targeted China's three most productive areas. This should
induce skilled workers to re-sort into those areas, and raise aggregate productivity.

                     Table 12: The Productivity Effect of Pollution Regulation

                                                          Change in GDP per Worker (%)
                                              Overall changes Health Relocation Relocate+Agglom
   Control PM2.5                                   3.570          1.519      1.702            1.937
   Control PM2.5 & relax hukou                     6.300          1.519      4.064            4.570
   Control PM2.5 & lower migration costs           10.773         1.519      8.157            8.974

Notes: In this counterfactual we reduce pollution according to the targets set by the 2013 Air Pollution
Prevention and Control Plan (row 1). In addition to pollution regulations, we also relax the hukou restriction
in higher tier cities (row 2), and overall migration costs (row 3) by 50%. Column 1 shows the gain to country
GDP. Column 2 shows the gain to GDP from the health-productivity channel. Column 3 shows the GDP
change from the relocation channel, and Column 4 also accounts for the agglomeration of skilled workers.


    As shown in Table 12, we predict this policy ­ targeted at only a subset of cities ­ to increase
country-level GDP per worker in China by 3.6%, mostly driven by workers relocating to more
productive cities. While this is already impressive, our model further suggests that if China
were to lower migration costs to allow its citizens to take full advantage of the new pollution
controls in productive cities, GDP per worker would rise even more, by as much as 10.8%.
    Our analysis thus suggests that while pollution control is important, ignoring the spatial
re-sorting effects of pollution control leaves some very large bills on the sidewalk. Given how
sensitive (skilled) Chinese citizens are to pollution, and how responsive they are through their
migration choices (as documented in our empirical section), our model clarifies that pairing

                          Table 13: Welfare Effects of Pollution Regulation

                                                Skilled Welfare Unskilled Welfare Average Welfare
    Control PM2.5                                     7.150               1.087                1.611
    Control PM2.5 & relax hukou                      18.425               1.978                3.401
    Control PM2.5 & lower migration costs            26.668               11.224              12.560

Notes: In this counterfactual exercise we reduce pollution according to the targets set by the 2013 Air
Pollution Prevention and Control Plan (row 1). In addition to pollution regulations, we also relax the hukou
restriction in higher tier cities (row 2), and migration costs (row 3) by 50%. To capture the distributional
implications, we examine how this policy affects wages for different types of workers in Table E3.


                                                     40
pollution control efforts with easing hukou restrictions or reducing migration costs could produce
much larger benefits to society. Table 13 shows that a combined policy of both pollution control
and easing mobility would also make the welfare gains more equitable. The 2013 policy of
pollution caps raise the welfare of the skilled by 7.2%, but have little effect on the unskilled,
who are less sensitive to pollution. However, lowering migration costs as a complementary
policy tool would improve welfare for both skilled and unskilled workers.


9    Conclusion
    Our analysis highlights the aggregate macroeconomic consequences of an important new
pattern of mobility. As economies grow and industrial activity pollutes the environment, work-
ers ­ especially those who are more educated and skilled ­ emigrate in search of better air
quality. Not only is this costly for the polluted cities that skilled workers leave, this process
lowers productivity and aggregate economic growth by creating a spatial mismatch between
skilled and unskilled workers, and by inducing skilled workers to move out of areas where they
would contribute more to the economy. A large literature had already documented that pol-
lution lowers productivity by making workers unhealthy (Adhvaryu et al., 2016; Kahn and Li,
2019; Zivin and Neidell, 2012), and our contribution is to quantify the productivity losses stem-
ming from differential mobility of skilled workers in response to pollution, which we find to be
just as important as the pollution-health link. We further document that mobility costs (both
physical, and imposed by hukou policy) exacerbate these economic losses, and that migration
and pollution control policies are interlinked. This evidence directly speaks to the tensions
between environmental regulation and urbanization in the developing world (Glaeser, 2014b).
    Finally, our analysis sheds light on an important puzzle in the development and macroeco-
nomics literature: Why are there large productivity gaps across regions within countries (Bryan
and Morten, 2019; Gollin et al., 2014), and why don't workers move to arbitrage those gaps
(Bryan et al., 2014)? Understanding factors that prevent a more efficient allocation of inputs is
consequential for our understanding of aggregate productivity and growth (Hsieh and Klenow,
2009). We find that skilled workers' distaste for air pollution can account for 14% of the wage
difference across a representative pair of Chinese cities. Pollution control coupled with policies
easing mobility has the potential to bring about large productivity gains in China.




                                               41
References
Adao, R., M. Kolesar, and E. Morales (2019). Shift-Share Designs: Theory and Inference. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 134 (4), 1949­2010.
Adhvaryu, A., N. Kala, and A. Nyshadham (2016). Management and shocks to worker produc-
  tivity. International Growth Center (IGC) . Working Paper.
AFP News (2019, March). Asia's Pollution Exodus: Firms Struggle to Woo Top Talent. Agence-
  France Press News Agency . https://news.yahoo.com/asias-pollution-exodus-firms-struggle-
  woo-top-talent-035837924.html.
Ahlfeldt, G., S. Redding, D. Sturm, and N. Wolf (2015). The Economics of Density: Evidence
  from the Berlin Wall. Econometrica 83 (6), 2127­2189.
Allen, T., C. Arkolakis, and Y. Takahashi (2020). Universal Gravity. Journal of Political
  Economy 128 (2), 393­433.
Amiti, M. and C. Freund (2010, March). The Anatomy of China's Export Growth, pp. 35­56.
  University of Chicago Press.
Andreoni, J. and A. Levinson (2001). The Simple Analytics of the Environmental Kuznetz
  Curve. Journal of Public Economics 80 (2), 269­286.
Arceo, E., R. Hanna, and P. Oliva (2016). Does the Effect of Pollution on Infant Mortality Differ
  between Developing and Developed Countries? Evidence from Mexico City. The Economic
  Journal 126 (591), 257­280.
Arrow, K. J. (1962). Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Innovation. NBER
  working paper c2144 .
Au, C. and V. Henderson (2006). How Migration Restrictions Limit Agglomeration and Pro-
  ductivity in China. Journal of Development Economics 80 (2), 350­388.
Autor, D., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson (2013). The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market
  Effects of Import Competition in the United States. American Economic Review 103 (6),
  2121­68.
Bayer, P., N. Keohane, and C. Timmins (2009). Migration and Hedonic Value: The Case of
  Air Quality. Journal of Environmental Resources and Management 58 (1), 1­14.
Bazzi, S. (2017). Wealth Heterogeneity and the Income Elasticity of Migration. American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics 9 (2), 219­55.
Borusyak, K., P. Hull, and X. Jaravel (2018). Quasi-experimental Shift-share Research Designs.
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Brandt, L., C.-T. Hsieh, and X. Zhu (2008). Growth and Structural Transformation in China.
  China's Great Economic Transformation , 683­728.
Bryan, G., S. Chowdhury, and A. M. Mobarak (2014). Underinvestment in a Profitable Tech-
  nology: The Case of Seasonal Migration in Bangladesh. Econometrica 82 (5), 1671­1748.
Bryan, G. and M. Morten (2019). The Aggregate Productivity Eeffects of Internal Migration:
  Evidence from Indonesia. Journal of Political Economy 127 (5), 2229­2268.
Card, D. (2001). Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts of
  Higher Immigration. Journal of Labor Economics 19 (1), 22­64.
Card, D. and T. Lemieux (2001, May). Can Falling Supply Explain the Rising Return to College
  for Younger Men? A Cohort-Based Analysis. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (2),
  705­746.



                                               42
Chang, T., J. G. Zivin, T. Gross, and M. Neidell (2019). The Effect of Pollution on Worker
  Productivity: Evidence from Call Center Workers in China. American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics 11 (1), 151­172.
Che, Y. and L. Zhang (2018). Human Capital, Technology Adoption and Firm Perfor-
  mance: Impacts of China's Higher Education Expansion in the Late 1990s. Economic Jour-
  nal 128 (614), 2282­2320.
Chen, S., P. Oliva, and P. Zhang (2017). The Effect of Air Pollution on Migration: Evidence
  from China. NBER Working Papers .
Chen, Y., A. Ebenstein, M. Greenstone, and H. Li (2013). Evidence on the Impact of Sustained
  Exposure to Air Pollution on Life Expectancy from China's Huai River Policy. Proceedings
  of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 110 (32), 12936­12941.
Chen, Y., G. Z. Jin, N. Kumar, and G. Shi (2012). Gaming in Air Pollution Data? Lessons
  from China. The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 12 (3), 1­43.
Clemens, M. A., C. E. Montenegro, and L. Pritchett (2019). The Place Premium: Bounding the
  Price Equivalent of Migration Barriers. Review of Economics and Statistics 101 (2), 201­213.
Combes, P.-P., S. Demurger, S. Li, and J. Wang (2019). Unequal Migration and Urbanisation
  Gains in China. Journal of Development Economics 142 (1), 102328.
Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (2002). Technology, Geography and Trade. Econometrica 70 (5),
  1741­1779.
Ebenstein, A., M. Fan, M. Greenstone, G. He, P. Yin, and M. Zhou (2015). Growth, Pollution,
  and Life Expectancy: China from 1991-2012. American Economic Review 105 (5), 226­31.
Ebenstein, A., M. Fan, M. Greenstone, G. He, and M. Zhou (2017). New Evidence on the
  Impact of Sustained Exposure to Air Pollution on Life Expectancy from China's Huai River
  Policy. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114 (39), 10384­10389.
Freeman, R., W. Liang, R. Song, and C. Timmins (2019). Willingness to Pay for Clean Air in
  China. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management , 188­216.
Gaubert, C. (2018). Firm Sorting and Agglomeration. American Economic Review 108 (11),
  3117­53.
Ghanem, D. and J. Zhang (2014). Effortless Perfection: Do Chinese Cities Manipulate Air
  Pollution Data? Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 68 (2), 203­225.
Giles, J., A. Park, and M. Wang (2019, October). The Great Proletarian Cultural Revolu-
  tion, Disruptions to Education, and the Returns to Schooling in Urban China. Economic
  Development and Cultural Change 68 (1), 131­164.
Glaeser, E. (2014a). A World of Cities: The Causes and Consequences of Urbanization in
  Poorer Countries. Journal of the European Economic Association 12 (5), 1154­1199.
Glaeser, E. (2014b). The Supply of Environmentalism: Psychological Interventions and Eco-
  nomics. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 8 (2), 208­229.
Glaeser, E. and M. E. Kahn (2010). The Greenness of Cities: Carbon Dioxide Emissions and
  Urban Development. Journal of Urban Economics 67 (3), 404­418.
Goldsmith-Pinkham, P., I. Sorkin, and H. Swift (2020). Bartik Instruments: What, When,
  Why, and How. American Economic Review 110 (8), 2586­2624.
Gollin, D., D. Lagakos, and M. Waugh (2014). The Agricultural Productivity Gap. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 129 (2), 939­993.




                                             43
Greenstone, M., G. He, R. Jia, and T. Liu (2020). Can Technology Solve the Principal-Agent
   Problem? Evidence from China's War on Air Pollution. American Economic Review: In-
   sights . Forthcoming.
He, G., M. Fan, and M. Zhou (2016). The Effect of Air Pollution on Mortality in China:
   Evidence from the 2008 Beijing Olympic Games. Journal of Environmental Economics and
   Management 79, 18­39.
He, G., T. Lio, and M. Zhou (2020, June). Straw Burning, PM2.5, and Death: Evidence from
   China. Journal of Development Economics 145 (102468).
He, G., Y. Xie, and B. Zhang (2020, June). Expressways, GDP, and the Environment: The
   Case of China. Journal of Development Economics 145 (102485).
Heblich, S., A. Trew, and Y. Zylberberg (2020). East Side Story: Historic Pollution and
   Neighborhood Segregation. Journal of Political Economy . Forthcoming.
Hicks, D., P. March, and P. Oliva (2015). Air Pollution and Procyclical Mortality: Causal
   Evidence from Thermal Inversions. Working Paper .
Hsieh, C. T. and P. Klenow (2009). Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India.
   The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (4), 1403­1448. November.
Hsieh, C. T. and E. Moretti (2018). Housing Constraints and Spatial Misallocation. American
   Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 11 (2), 1­39.
Ito, K. and S. Zhang (2019). Willingness to Pay for Clean Air: Evidence from Air Purifier
   Markets in China. Journal of Political Economy 128 (5), 1627­1672.
Jaeger, D. A., J. Ruist, and J. Stuhler (2018). Shift-share Instruments and the Impact of
   Immigration. National Bureau of Economic Research, WP 24285 .
Jans, J., P. Johansson, and P. Nilsson (2014). Economic Status, Air Quality, and Child Health:
   Evidence from Inversion Episodes. Working Paper .
Jia, Barwick, P., S. Li, L. Lin, and E. Zou (2019). From Fog to Smog: The Value of Pollution
   Information. National Bureau of Economic Research, WP 26541 .
Kahn, M. E. and P. Li (2019). The Effect of Pollution and Heat on High Skill Public Sector
   Worker Productivity in China. National Burea of Economic Research, WP 25594 .
Kapur, M. (2019, November). Many Delhi Residents Want to Escape the Smog. But Where
   Can They Go? Quartz India .
Khanna, G., K. Shih, A. Weinberger, M. Xu, and M. Yu (2020). Trade Liberalization and
   Chinese Students in US Higher Education. Working Paper .
Kinnan, C., S.-Y. Wang, and Y. Wang (2018). Access to Migration for Rural Households.
   American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 10 (4), 79­119.
Kone, Z., M. Liu, A. Mattoo, C. Ozden, and S. Sharma (2018). Internal Borders and Migration
   in India. Journal of Economic Geography 18 (4), 729­759.
Lagakos, D., M. Mobarak, and M. Waugh (2019). The Welfare Effects of Encouraging Rural-
   urban Migration. Working Paper .
Lewis, W. A. (1954). Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor. The Manchester
   School 22 (2), 139­191. May.
Lustgarten, A. (2020, September). How Climate Migration Will Reshape America. New York
   Times .
Moretti, E. (2004). Workers' Education, Spillovers, and Productivity: Evidence from Plant-
   level Production Functions. American Economic Review 94 (3), 656­690.


                                             44
Moretti, E. (2011). Local Labor Markets. Handbook of Labor Economics 4b. Elsevier North
  Holland, Amsterdam.
Munshi, K. and M. Rosenzweig (2016). Networks and Misallocation: Insurance, Migration, and
  the Rural-urban Wage Gap. American Economic Review 106 (1), 46­98.
New York Times (2015,              December).         Companies in South China See
  Opportunity     in    Beijing's    Smog.         The New York Times Company .
  https://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/23/world/asia/beijing-air-pollution-china-smog.html.
Peri, G., K. Shih, and C. Sparber (2015). STEM Workers, H-1B Visas, and Productivity in
  US Cities. Journal of Labor Economics 33 (S1), S225 ­ S255.
Pierce, J. R. and P. K. Schott (2016). The Surprisingly Swift Decline of U.S. Manufacturing
  Employment. American Economic Review 106 (7), 1632­62.
Restuccia, D. and R. Rogerson (2013). Misallocation and Productivity. Review of Economic
  Dynamics 16 (1), 1­10.
Restuccia, D. and R. Rogerson (2017). The Causes and Costs of Misallocation. Journal of
  Economic Perspectives 31 (3), 151­74.
Tombe, T. and X. Zhu (2019). Trade, Migration, and Productivity: A Quantitative Analysis
  of China. American Economic Review 109 (5), 1843­72.
Van Donkelaar, A., R. Martin, M. Brauer, N. C. Hsu, R. Kahn, R. Levy, A. Lyapustin, A. Sayer,
  and D. Winker (2016). Global Estimates of Fine Particulate Matter Using a Combined
  Geophysical-statistical Method with Information from Satellites, Models, and Monitors. En-
  vironmental Science & Technology 50 (7), 3762­3772.
Xue, S., B. Zhang, and X. Zhao (2020, September). Brain Drain: The Impact of Air Pol-
  lution on Firm Performance. Available on SSRN . https://ssrn.com/abstract=3490344 or
  http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3490344.
Young, A. (2014). Structural Transformation, the Mismeasurement of Productivity Growth,
  and the Cost Disease of Services. American Economic Review 104 (11), 3635­67.
Zhang, J., R. Wang, and C. Lu (2018). A Quantitative Analysis of Hukou Reform in Chinese
  Cities: 2000-2016. Growth and Change 50 (1), 201­221.
Zheng, S. and M. E. Kahn (2013). Understanding China's Urban Pollution Dynamics. Journal
  of Economic Literature 51 (3), 731­72.
Zivin, J. G. and M. Neidell (2012). The Impact of Pollution on Worker Productivity. American
  Economic Review 102 (7), 3652­73.




                                             45
Appendix
Table of Contents
  A Robustness of Empirical Specifications                                               A2
    A.1 The Different Instruments and their Sources of Variation . . . . . . . . . . . . A2
    A.2 The Huai River Regression Discontinuity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A10
    A.3 Alternative Model Specifications, Controls and Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . A12

  B Air Pollution Data Disclosure in China                                             A20

  C Additional Tables and Figures                                                      A21

  D Additional Model Derivations                                                       A26
    D.1 Deriving Labor Supply and Welfare . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A26
    D.2 Elasticity of Capital, and Modelling Skill-biased Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . A27
    D.3 A Note on Existence and Uniqueness of the Equilibrium . . . . . . . . . . . . A28

  E Additional Counterfactual Results                                                  A29




                                            A1
A        Robustness of Empirical Specifications
    We conduct a wide-range of meaningful robustness checks to evaluate the concreteness of the
empirical relationship between air quality and migration. We explore threats to identification,
different instrumental variables, alternative model specifications and data sources.

A.1        The Different Instruments and their Sources of Variation
    First, as we describe in the main text, we explore a few different sources of underlying
variation. We employ two different instrumental variables strategies discussed in recent work on
China to address the endogeneity of air pollution. Specifically, we study the variation underlying
the instrument based on wind direction and distant coal-fired power plants (Freeman, Liang,
Song, and Timmins, 2019), and the variation in air quality driven by the number and strength
of thermal inversions (Chen, Oliva, and Zhang, 2017).
    Then, we explore threats to identification for our two main instruments. We test concerns of
the endogenous placements of power plants, whereby policy makers may use the same function
­ the simultaneous interaction between wind directions, distance to a given city and coal con-
sumption ­ to determine where to place new plants. We thus exclude any plants built within
different distance radii around the city, and find a similar empirical pattern. We may still think
that newly built plants are endogenously placed. Yet, our results are robust to relying on old
power plants, and to make it even more conservative the cities near the newly built plants
are in the `control' group. Last, we show that the IV is not predicted by baseline city-level
characteristics.

                             Table A1: The First Stage Across Different Instruments

Panel A: City-level                                                    Dependent variable: Log (PM2.5)

Wind+Coal IV                0.0240***    0.0113***    0.00956***
                            (0.00211)    (0.00235)     (0.00239)
Number of inversions                                               0.00222***   0.00159*** 0.00201***
                                                                   (0.000350)   (0.000329) (0.000293)
Strength of inversions                                                                                   0.000730***   0.000448**    0.000725***
                                                                                                          (0.000214)   (0.000185)     (0.000168)

Observations                   332          332          332          332          332         332           332           332           332
R-squared                     0.297        0.394        0.444        0.212        0.441       0.538         0.097         0.389         0.483
City Controls                  No           Yes          Yes          No           Yes         Yes           No            Yes           Yes
Weather Controls               No           No           Yes          No           No          Yes           No            No            Yes
Panel B: Individual-level                                              Dependent variable: Log (PM2.5)

Wind+Coal IV                0.0200***    0.0136***    0.0130***
                            (3.94e-05)   (3.44e-05)   (3.38e-05)
Number of inversions                                               0.00212***   0.00184*** 0.00227***
                                                                   (6.24e-06)   (6.08e-06) (5.30e-06)
Strength of inversions                                                                                   0.000822***   0.000670***   0.000944***
                                                                                                          (3.85e-06)    (3.77e-06)    (3.29e-06)

Observations                 761,548      761,548      761,548      761,548      761,548     761,548       761,548       761,548       761,548
R-squared                     0.284        0.403        0.447        0.248        0.441       0.551         0.160         0.379         0.491
City Controls                  No           Yes          Yes          No           Yes         Yes           No            Yes           Yes
Demographics                   No           Yes          Yes          No           Yes         Yes           No            Yes           Yes
Weather Controls               No           No           Yes          No           No          Yes           No            No            Yes


Notes: City-level regressions of 332 cities in panel A and individual-level regressions across 332 cities in Panel
B. Standard errors clustered at the hukou city level are reported in parentheses. City controls include distance
to Shanghai, Tianjin and Shenzhen seaports. Weather controls include temperature, wind speed, sunshine
duration and humidity.




                                                                        A2
    We also explore the variation underlying the thermal inversions IV. We fail to find mean-
ingful predictors of future inversions, and as such conclude that such events are random.
    Finally, we explore the variation generated by China's Huai river heating policy (Chen
et al., 2013). Even though we fail to find substantial effects on out-migration rates, they do
help predict differential in-migration by skill.

A.1.1 Instruments Variable Estimates
    In our main text, we use our first instrument based on wind direction and distant coal-fired
plants to deal with the endogeneity of local air pollution. Then we isolate exogenous fluctuations
in air pollution by leveraging the variation in thermal inversions that trap pollutants. In Table
A1 we show the strength of the first stage relationships between our different instruments and
our independent variable of interest. In our main Table 1 there is a strong relationship between
poor air quality and the out-migration of high-skilled workers.

                                        Table A2: Pollution and Out-migration

Panel A: No weather                                       Dependent variable: Leave hukou city indicator
                                     Wind+Coal IV                      Number of inversions               Strength of inversions
                            Full sample Low edu High edu        Full sample Low edu High edu       Full sample Low edu High edu

Log (PM2.5)                  0.0772**      0.0609    0.140***    0.113***    0.108***   0.154***    0.0970***   0.0920**    0.168***
                             (0.0389)     (0.0423)   (0.0382)    (0.0274)    (0.0291)   (0.0358)     (0.0341)   (0.0358)    (0.0553)

Observations                 761,548      643,124    118,424     761,548     643,124     118,424     761,548     643,124    118,424
R-squared                     0.027        0.029      0.036       0.022       0.023       0.033       0.024       0.026      0.030
City Controls                  Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
Demographics                   Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
Weather Controls               No           No         No          No          No          No          No          No         No
F-test of IVs                 52.53        46.52      41.54       52.33       50.27       39.10       19.82       20.24      11.58


Panel B: Weather controls                                 Dependent variable: Leave hukou city indicator
                                     Wind+Coal IV                      Number of inversions               Strength of inversions
                            Full sample Low edu High edu        Full sample Low edu High edu       Full sample Low edu High edu

Log (PM2.5)                 0.0890***    0.0763**    0.155***   0.0906***   0.0871***   0.112***    0.0779***   0.0740***   0.107***
                             (0.0343)    (0.0368)    (0.0359)    (0.0202)    (0.0211)   (0.0233)     (0.0228)    (0.0238)   (0.0279)

Observations                 761,548      643,124    118,424     761,548     643,124     118,424     761,548     643,124    118,424
R-squared                     0.036        0.039      0.039       0.035       0.037       0.047       0.037       0.039      0.047
City Controls                  Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
Demographics                   Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
Weather Controls               Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
F-test of IVs                 47.20        41.91      38.24       102.5       97.33       84.83       51.09       49.60      40.54


Notes: Individual level regressions across 332 cities. Standard errors clustered at the hukou city level are
reported in parentheses. Instrumental variables specification using the interaction between wind direction,
distance to coal plant, and coal consumption at power plant, and using the number of thermal inversions and
the strength of thermal inversions. City controls include distance to Shanghai, Tianjin and Shenzhen seaports.
Demographics include age, age-squared, gender, marital status, and an urban hukou indicator. In Panel B,
weather controls include temperature, wind speed, sunshine duration and humidity.

    In Table A2, we study how variation in PM2.5 from our various instruments affects migra-
tion. Panel A shows the results without weather controls. This replicates the results in the
main text for the coal-fired plants IV in the first three columns. We include distances to three
large seaports to account for the spatial distribution of economic development in China. In the
next three columns, we employ the annual occurrence of thermal inversions as the instrumental


                                                                 A3
                                      Table A3: Combined Instruments

                                         Dependent variable: Leave hukou city indicator
                           Wind and Coal +Number of inversions Wind and Coal +Strength of inversions
                           Full sample Low edu     High edu     Full sample Low edu     High edu

      Log (PM2.5)          0.0892***    0.0836***    0.124***     0.0795***    0.0722***     0.129***
                            (0.0189)     (0.0197)    (0.0228)      (0.0206)     (0.0213)     (0.0263)

      Observations          761,548      643,124     118,424        761,548     643,124       118,424
      R-squared              0.036        0.038       0.045          0.037       0.039         0.044
      Hansen J statistic     0.063        0.407       2.162           0.03       0.041         2.194
      Hansen P value         0.802        0.523       0.142          0.862       0.839         0.139
      City Controls           Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes
      Demographics            Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes
      Weather Controls        Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes
      F-test of IVs          68.36        65.18       54.29          45.91       43.23         36.66

Notes: Individual level regressions across 332 cities. Standard errors clustered at the hukou city level are
reported in parentheses. City controls include the log distance to Shanghai seaport, to Tianjin seaport, and to
Shenzhen seaport. Demographics include age, age-squared, gender, marital status, and an urban hukou
indicator. Weather controls include temperature, wind speed, sunshine duration and humidity.


variable. The results show that the implications of air pollution on emigration are more pro-
nounced for high-skilled workers in comparison with those with lower skills. In the last three
columns, we leverage the variation coming from the annual strength of thermal inversions. The
results remain similar. Since thermal inversions may be affected by local weather conditions,
we further control for a set of weather characteristics. Panel B of Table A2 shows these patterns
with weather controls. We find a similar empirical pattern: high-skilled workers are more likely
to escape from polluted cites to avoid the adverse effects of pollution, compared to their lower
educated counterparts.
    Finally, Table A3 shows combinations of the Wind IV and thermal inversions instruments,
and the corresponding over-identification tests. Across specifications, we find similar results.
    While our earlier results examine the out-migration decision of individuals, we further ex-
amine the association between air pollution and destination choices. We regress city-level
in-migration rate on local air pollution concentration. The results are in Table A4. We use our
instruments to deal with the endogeneity of air quality in destination cities. We find that even
for in-migration decisions, the response of high-skilled workers is greater than that of low-skilled
workers. In other words, high-skilled workers are more likely to move to cities with clean air
when they make location choices. Severe air pollution can not only result in the outflow of
high-skilled workers but also reduce their inflow.

A.1.2 Endogeneity Concerns over Instrumental Strategies
    In this section we test the identification assumptions underlying our main instruments. Our
first instrument is the interaction between the three components: wind direction, distance and
coal consumption. We may expect that policy makers take these components into account
when placing large coal-fired plants near certain type of cities. For example, those plants may
be systematically built near poorer, less influential cities. Thus, there is a concern that the
instrument may be correlated with unobservable characteristics of nearby cities. In Table A5,
we exclude any plants built within 200km of a given city (first two columns), and then within
400km of the city (last two columns). We still restrict the radius to be of 400km widths. Our


                                                     A4
                                     Table A4: Pollution and In-migration

Panel A                                                Dependent variable: Share of In-migrants
No weather                  Wind+Coal IV                         Number of inversions                    Strength of inversions
                   Full sample Low edu High edu        Full sample Low edu         High edu       Full sample Low edu High edu

Log (PM2.5)        -1.856***   -1.853***   -2.259***    -1.204**       -1.137**    -1.645**        -1.404**   -1.275**    -2.152**
                    (0.529)     (0.520)     (0.716)      (0.500)        (0.475)     (0.677)         (0.643)    (0.606)     (0.903)

Observations          329         329        329           329            329         329            329         329         329
R-squared            0.072       0.109      -0.162        0.202          0.235       0.002          0.171       0.219      -0.129
City Controls         Yes         Yes        Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes
Weather Controls      No          No          No           No             No          No             No          No          No
F-test of IVs        41.91       41.91      41.91         39.56          39.56       39.56          16.36       16.36       16.36


Panel B                                                Dependent variable: Share of In-migrants
Weather controls            Wind+Coal IV                         Number of inversions                    Strength of inversions
                   Full sample Low edu High edu        Full sample Low edu         High edu       Full sample Low edu High edu

Log (PM2.5)        -1.833***   -1.825***   -2.266***    -1.204***      -1.181***   -1.451***      -1.359***   -1.301***   -1.794***
                    (0.529)     (0.513)     (0.728)      (0.373)        (0.357)     (0.503)        (0.421)     (0.401)     (0.583)

Observations          329         329        329           329            329         329            329         329         329
R-squared            0.088       0.126      -0.144        0.209          0.239       0.056          0.187       0.224      -0.015
City Controls         Yes         Yes        Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes
Weather Controls      Yes         Yes        Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes
F-test of IVs        33.81       33.81      33.81         91.64          91.64       91.64          47.63       47.63       47.63


Notes: City level regressions of 329 cities. We drop cities with missing in-migration rates. Dependent variable
is the log share of in-migrants in city population. Independent variable is destination city PM2.5. Robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses. Instrumental variables specification using the interaction between
wind direction, distance to coal plant, and coal consumption at power plant, and using the number of thermal
inversions and the strength of thermal inversions. City controls include distance to Shanghai, Tianjin and
Shenzhen seaports. Demographics include age, age-squared, gender, marital status, and an urban hukou
indicator. In Panel B, weather controls include temperature, wind speed, sunshine duration and humidity.


results are similar to before, with a slight increase in precision.
    Even though policy makers may not have modeled the polluting potential of plants built in
the past in the manner that we do, we may expect that newly built plants are subject to more
scrutiny as the conversation about air quality in China has recently escalated. In Table A6
we exclude newly built plants in the construction of IV, and instead include cities with newly
built ones in the `control' group. Although this empirical strategy is more conservative, we find
similar patterns and magnitudes.
    We may also expect that coal-fired plants plants are more likely to be located in coal
producing areas. In as far as coal producing areas may also influence the underlying industrial
structure, this may raise concerns about other unobservable associations with migration rates.
Shanxi is the largest coal producing province in China, we thus exclude Shanxi in our estimation.
As reported in in Table A7, the results are slightly more precisely estimated.
    Our wind-direction and coal-plants IV is constructed using the interaction between wind
direction, distance to coal plants and the capacity of plants. It is natural to ask which of the
three components drives our results. In Table A8 we try different versions of the instrument
in which we exclude each of the three components, respectively. Our results hardly change
when we exclude distance to coal plant and coal consumption at power plant. In contrast,
the coefficient estimates of air pollution become meaningfully smaller when we exclude the
component of wind direction, indicating that our main IV results are primarily driven by the


                                                                  A5
                      Table A5: Different Distance Bins for Selection of Plants

                                         Dependent variable: Leave hukou city indicator
                                    Distance 200-600km                 Distance 400-800km
                             Full sample Low edu High edu Full sample Low edu High edu

            Log (PM2.5)        0.0947***    0.0798**    0.163***   0.0973***   0.0834***     0.168***
                                (0.0365)    (0.0396)    (0.0383)    (0.0304)    (0.0319)     (0.0385)

            Observations        761,548     643,124     118,424     761,548      643,124      118,424
            R-squared            0.025       0.027       0.031       0.024        0.027        0.030
            City Controls         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
            Demographics          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
            F-test of IVs        56.73       50.95       43.11       59.73        53.08        58.44

Notes: Individual level regressions across 332 cities. Standard errors clustered at the hukou city level are
reported in parentheses. Instrumental variables specification based on the interaction between wind direction,
distance to coal plant, and coal consumption of power plant. City controls include distance to Shanghai,
Tianjin and Shenzhen seaports. Demographics include age, age-squared, gender, marital status, and an urban
hukou indicator.


                             Table A6: Excluding Newly Built Power Plants

                                           Dependent variable: Leave hukou city indicator
                                       Plants > 5 yrs ago                Plants > 10 yrs ago
                                Full sample Low edu High edu Full sample Low edu High edu

               Log (PM2.5)       0.0775**     0.0611    0.138***   0.0916**    0.0761*     0.146***
                                 (0.0387)    (0.0421)   (0.0379)   (0.0415)    (0.0451)    (0.0412)

               Observations       761,548    643,124     118,424   761,548     643,124     118,424
               R-squared           0.027      0.029       0.036     0.025       0.028       0.035
               City Controls        Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes
               Demographics         Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes
               F-test of IVs       50.37      44.39       40.57     38.94       33.08       34.42
                                           Dependent variable: Leave hukou city indicator
                                       Plants > 15 yrs ago               Plants > 20 yrs ago
                                Full sample Low edu High edu Full sample Low edu High edu

               Log (PM2.5)       0.0920**    0.0762*    0.150***   0.111***    0.0992**    0.156***
                                 (0.0397)    (0.0432)   (0.0401)   (0.0428)    (0.0469)    (0.0398)

               Observations       761,548    643,124     118,424   761,548     643,124     118,424
               R-squared           0.025      0.028       0.034     0.022       0.024       0.033
               City Controls        Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes
               Demographics         Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes
               F-test of IVs       42.63      35.28       42.99     37.18       30.87       38.36

Notes: Individual level regressions across 332 cities. Cities affected by new plants included in sample (i.e. in
the `control' regions) so as to generate conservative estimates. Standard errors clustered at the hukou city
level are reported in parentheses. Instrumental variables specification using the interaction between wind
direction, distance to coal plant, and coal consumption at power plant. City controls include the log distance
to Shanghai seaport to Tianjin seaport and to Shenzhen seaport. Demographics include age, age-squared,
gender, marital status, and an urban hukou indicator.



                                                         A6
                               Table A7: Without Coal Producing Regions

                                Dependent variable: Leave hukou city indicator
                                              Full sample Low edu High edu

                              Log (PM2.5)           0.0921***   0.0773**     0.148***
                                                     (0.0349)   (0.0375)     (0.0345)

                              Observations           722,306     609,605      112,701
                              R-squared               0.024       0.026        0.034
                              City Controls            Yes         Yes          Yes
                              Demographics             Yes         Yes          Yes
                              F-test of IVs           84.82       77.61        68.94

Notes: Individual level regressions across 321 cities (we drop coal producing regions, like all cities in Shanxi
province). Standard errors clustered at the hukou city level are reported in parentheses. Instrumental
variables specification using the interaction between wind direction, distance to coal plant, and coal
consumption at power plant. City controls include the log distance to Shanghai seaport, to Tianjin seaport
and to Shenzhen seaport and to the nearest big city. Demographics include age, age-squared, gender, marital
status, and an urban hukou indicator.


variation in wind direction across locations. Wind direction is determined by nature and is
stable over long periods of time, thus it can be considered as exogenous to local economies.

                             Table A8: Decomposing the Wind Direction IV

                                             Dependent variable: Leave hukou city indicator
                       IV:Excluding distance       IV:Excluding coal consumption         IV:Excluding wind direction
                 Full sample Low edu High edu Full sample Low edu High edu Full sample Low edu High edu

 Log (PM2.5)      0.0943**    0.0785*    0.163***    0.0905**   0.0765**   0.144***      0.0360     0.0199    0.0911***
                  (0.0392)    (0.0424)   (0.0392)    (0.0358)   (0.0385)   (0.0350)     (0.0343)   (0.0378)    (0.0330)

 Observations     761,548     643,124    118,424      761,548   643,124    118,424      761,548    643,124     118,424
 R-squared         0.025       0.027      0.031        0.025     0.028      0.035        0.029      0.029       0.043
 City Controls      Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes
 Demographics       Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes
 F-test of IVs     46.07       40.52      39.33        79.24     73.06      63.70        55.14      50.21       38.13


Notes: Individual level regressions across 332 cities. Standard errors clustered at the hukou city level are
reported in parentheses. Instrumental variables specification using the interaction between wind direction and
coal consumption at power plant (first two columns), the interaction between wind direction and distance to
plant (next two columns), and the interaction between distance to plant and coal consumption (last two
columns). City controls include distance to Shanghai, Tianjin and Shenzhen seaports. Demographics include
age, age-squared, gender, marital status, and an urban hukou indicator.

     One concern with the exogeneity of wind direction is that the Chinese government might
select thermal plant locations in a way that pollution did not travel to populated or politically
important cities. If that were the case, coal-fired plants are less likely to be located upwind of
such cities. In Table A9, we present the number of large-scale thermal plants located up wind
of five largest metropolitan areas in 2014 along with their total coal consumption. Beijing and
Tianjin are among the most populated and politically important cities in Northern China, but
have high levels of pollution. There are 58 large scale coal-fired plants located upwind of Beijing,
and 59 large scale thermal power plants located upwind of Tianjin. The total consumption of

                                                          A7
them is as large as 2372 million tons and 2123 million tons respectively. We also calculate
the ratio of the upwind large thermal plants to the total number of large thermal plants. As
presented in column 2, this ratio is 22.4% and 50.9% for Beijing and Tianjin, respectively.
The mean of the ratio for all Chinese cities is 37.8%, which is between the values in Beijing
and Tianjin. This may suggest that the Chinese government does not necessarily locate the
coal-fired plants away from populated or politically important cities.

            Table A9: The Coal-fired Plants Located Upwind of Large metropolitans

         City              Number of      Ratio of    Coal Consumption of             Smallest Angle
                          Upwind Plants Upwind Plants   Upwind Plants                   of Plants
         Beijing                58              22.41%                2372                   25
         Tianjin                59              50.85%                2123                   26
         Shanghai               62               1.61%                2067                   16
         Guangzhou              30              16.67%                899                    22
         Shenzhen               25              44.00%                785                    26
         National mean         43.16            37.82%                511                    25

Notes: The statistics are calculated using the large-scale thermal power plants located outside a given city and
within 500km. Following Freeman, Liang, Song, and Timmins (2019), we define the upwind region as a section
of a circular buffer drawn at a distance of 500km from a given city, and the angle between the section and the
annual dominant wind direction of the city being at least 45 degrees.

    To further test whether politicians avoid populated, politically important and rich cities
when building new plants in a manner that simultaneously incorporates the interactions between
wind direction, distance and coal consumption, we explore whether baseline city features predict
newly built plants. In Table A10, we explore whether city-level characteristics in 2004 can
predict (a) the ratio of upwind plants built after 2005, and (b) the IV based on plants built
after 2005. We find no meaningful associations between these variables and possible predictors
of a city's influence, like baseline populations, GDP, total electricity consumption and industrial
electricity consumption. In the following section, we also show that our results are robust to
excluding big cities and major provincial capitals (Table A17).
    In Table A11, we construct placebo instruments, artificially changing the wind direction
angle by 90 degrees, and then 180 degrees. The first two columns report the first stage results.
As the angle is increased, the falsified instrument is less likely to predict PM2.5 or emigration.
    Finally, we turn our attention to the thermal inversions IV, used extensively by researchers
in many different contexts (Arceo et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2017; Hicks et al., 2015; Jans et al.,
2014), and as such, been scrutinized thoroughly. Nonetheless, we examine whether lagged
pollution levels can predict future levels of the strength of thermal inversions in Table A12. We
fail to find any such meaningful associations. Furthermore, we also find that lagged inversions
do not predict future inversions, suggesting that levels of auto-correlation in inversions are low,
and we may consider the data generating process underlying inversions to be close to random.




                                                      A8
                      Table A10: Baseline Economy and the Wind Direction IV

         Dependent variable:              The ratio of upwind plants Wind direction and coal plants IV

         Baseline Population               -0.0106        -0.0132         0.412              0.226
                                          (0.0309)       (0.0279)       (0.489)            (0.440)
         Baseline GDP per capita           -0.0151        -0.0231        -0.132             -0.414
                                          (0.0302)       (0.0289)       (0.526)            (0.522)
         Industrial Elec cons               0.0225                        0.210
                                          (0.0224)                      (0.347)
         Baseline Elec cons                               0.0255                            0.414
                                                         (0.0178)                          (0.269)

         Observations                       281             281           281                281
         R-squared                         0.006           0.010         0.015              0.020
         City Controls                      Yes             Yes           Yes                Yes

Notes: City level regressions for 281 cities. We drop cities with missing values in baseline characteristics.
Dependent variables are based on plants built post 2005, independent variables are measured in the year 2004.
Standard errors clustered at the hukou city level are reported in parentheses. City controls include distance to
Shanghai, Tianjin and Shenzhen seaports.




                                    Table A11: Placebo Wind Directions

                                   Log (PM2.5)                             Leave hukou city indicator
                                                         Coal IV Placebo (+90 degrees) Coal IV Placebo (+180 degrees)
                                                         Low edu        High edu        Low edu        High edu

 Log (PM2.5)                                              -0.0708        0.0235          -0.159         -0.0281
                                                         (0.0594)       (0.0518)        (0.157)        (0.0760)

 Coal IV Placebo                0.00957**
  (wind direction+90 degrees)   (0.00478)
 Coal IV Placebo                              0.00134
 (wind direction+180 degrees)                (0.00173)

 Observations                      332          332      643,124        118,424        643,124         118,424
 R-squared                        0.376        0.365      0.011          0.044          0.000           0.038
 City Controls                     Yes          Yes        Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
 Demographics                       N            N         Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
 F-test of IVs                                            6.324          8.940          0.935           1.521


Notes: Individual level regressions across 332 cities. Standard errors clustered at the hukou city level are
reported in parentheses. Instrumental variables specification using the interaction between wind direction
(falsified), distance to coal plant, and coal consumption at power plant. City controls include the log distance
to Shanghai seaport, to Tianjin seaport, and to Shenzhen seaport. Demographics include age, age-squared,
gender, marital status, and an urban hukou indicator.




                                                            A9
                        Table A12: Lagged Pollution and Thermal Inversions

                                                  Dependent variable: Strength of inversions

                 Lagged Log(PM2.5)                 -11.68     -11.79             -11.38
                                                  (12.88)    (12.77)            (12.80)
                 Lagged number of inversions                                     0.241
                                                                                (0.181)
                 Lagged strength of inversions               0.0332             -0.0373
                                                            (0.0330)           (0.0774)

                 Observations                      3,652      3,652             3,652
                 R-squared                         0.961      0.961             0.961
                 City fixed effects                 Yes        Yes               Yes
                 Year fixed effects                 Yes        Yes               Yes

Notes: Standard errors clustered at city level are reported in parentheses. City level regressions for 332 cities
over 11 years (2005 to 2015). Specifications include city and year fixed effects.


A.2      The Huai River Regression Discontinuity
    Between 1950-1980 China established coal-based free heating systems to residences and
offices north of the Huai River. This policy had long lasting effects, as even today the heating
systems are different between the northern and southern parts of the country. The north
relies on coal boilers which releases a large amount of pollutants. Chen et al. (2013) examine
the effects of this policy on life expectancy using a regression discontinuity design where they
compare cities just north of the river to those just south of it.
    Here, we leverage the same empirical setup to examine migration decisions. Figure A1
shows the RD graphs where the horizontal axis represents the distance between the city and
the Huai river. In our top row we show the discontinuity in PM10 and PM2.5 levels. In the
middle row, we look at out-migration decisions, and fail to find any meaningful changes in
out-migration rates. In the bottom row, we look at in-migration rates, and find that only for
the high-skill workforce, there is less in-migration in cities that have more pollution. This effect
is statistically and economically meaningful in our RD regressions. We find no such differential
response on in-migration for the low-skilled.




                                                      A10
                                    Figure A1: The Huai River RD




Notes: The top row shows the discontinuity in PM10 and PM2.5 at the Huai River. Second row shows the
out-migration by skill level. Bottom row shows the in-migration rate by skill-level. Bubble sizes are baseline
city populations.




                                                    A11
A.3     Alternative Model Specifications, Controls and Samples
    In this section we examine different model specifications, sample restrictions and control
variables. Once again, our aim is to test the robustness of our estimates to various empirical
concerns.
    First, we employ an individual-level longitudinal panel data to estimate the association
between air quality and workers' spatial sorting. The longitudinal data allow us to track
individuals over time and control for individual-level unobservables. Importantly, we use an
alternative definition for migration status regardless of hukou location, and show results similar
to before.
    Then, we turn to the implications of cumulative pollution. We find that workers are more
sensitive to cumulative pollution when they make location choices, compared to short-term
pollution. Once again, the impacts of cumulative pollution are more pronounced for high-
skilled workers than their low-skilled counterparts.
    In the section that follows thereafter, we use alternative samples to examine the effects of
pollution on migration decisions. Using different samples does little to affect our empirical
pattern. Our results are also robust to employing an alternative measure of local air quality.
    Finally, we add a wide range of covariates that may confound the relationship between air
quality and internal migration. Incorporating additional controls hardly change our results.

A.3.1 Individual Longitudinal Panel and Alternative Definition of Migration
    We employ an individual-level longitudinal panel and a different definition of migration
status to explore the spatial sorting of Chinese workers. We use an alternative data source,
the China Labor-force Dynamic Survey (CLDS), which is a national social survey targeted
at labor force dynamics in China. CLDS 2016 asks a retrospective history of locations for
individuals. We use this retrospective location history to create an individual-level longitudinal
panel between 2008 and 2016. Here, we define migration to be an indicator for whether or not an
individual changed city location between years, regardless of whether they change their hukou
location or not. The strengths of the individual-level panel lie in that it allows us to account
for individual-specific unobservables and track those who have moved multiple times and who
have moved and returned home. We combine the longitudinal data with annual information
on PM2.5 at the city level.
    Since data on large-scale coal-fired plants are not available for each year during the sample
period, we employ the instrument of the number of thermal inversions to address the endo-
geneity of air pollution. Table A13 presents the IV estimation of the relationship between air
pollution and the out-migration tendency of individuals, controlling for year- and individual-
fixed effects. Including individual-specific fixed effects allow us to account for individual-level
unobservables (such as taste for clean air, individual preferences for a specific city) that may
be systematically correlated with migration decisions. The results show that once again, the
response of high-skill migration to air pollution is a lot stronger than that of low-skill workers.
A 10% increase in PM2.5 raises out-migration rates by 2.19 percentage points for high-skilled
workers.
    In our main text, migrants are defined as those who are away from their hukou city. Under
this definition, we may miss those who move to a different city and obtain local hukou in the city.
Thus, we may understate high-skilled workers' migration response to pollution, as migrants with
high education attainment find it easier to obtain local hukou than those without. We include
both non-hukou migration (change residential locations without changing hukou locations) and
hukou migration (change both residential and hukou location) in this definition of migration
status. The effects on high-skill migration shown in Table A13 are larger in magnitude than


                                               A12
               Table A13: Individual Longitudinal Panel with Individual Fixed Effects

                                             Dependent variable: Leave city location indicator
                    Full sample   Low edu High edu Full sample Low edu High edu Full sample Low edu High edu

 Log (PM2.5)         0.115**       0.0812    0.219**   0.0960*     0.0644    0.193**     0.0774     0.0385    0.206**
                     (0.0558)     (0.0542)   (0.100)   (0.0540)   (0.0525)   (0.0964)   (0.0539)   (0.0538)   (0.0972)

 Observations        122,841      104,184    18,657    122,841    104,184    18,657     122,841    104,184    18,657
 Individual FE         Yes          Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes
 Year FE               Yes          Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes
 Weather Controls      No           No         No        Yes        Yes       Yes         No         No         No
 Regional trend        No           No         No        No         No         No         Yes        Yes       Yes
 Demographics          Yes          Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes
 F-test of IVs        51.62        43.38      55.60     53.91      43.99     59.93       50.67      42.48     56.85


Notes: Individual-level regressions across 277 cities and between 2008 and 2016. The CLDS asks a
retrospective history of residential locations, which include 277 cities. Standard errors clustered at the city
level are reported in parentheses. Instrumental variables specification using the number of thermal inversions.
Demographics include age, age-squared. Weather controls include temperature, wind speed, sunshine duration
and humidity. Region trend is a region-specific time trend.


our baseline estimates, perhaps as here we measure both hukou and non-hukou migration.
    We control for weather amenities in the next three columns. The coefficient estimates are
quantitatively and qualitatively similar. In China, migrant workers are more likely to move from
the inland to coastal regions to gain access to better economic opportunities. As a result, the
vast majority of migrants are concentrated in large coastal cities. To account for the potential
role played by differential migration patterns between coastal and inland China, we further
add region-specific trends in the last three columns. Including region-specific do not affect our
results meaningfully.

A.3.2 Accumulated Pollution over Time
    As migration decisions are long-lasting, we expect that people are more likely to response to
accumulated pollution, compared to contemporaneous pollution shocks. While we measure out-
migration in 2015, we wish to understand how migration decisions depend on the cumulative
PM2.5 concentration over different time intervals. Since the large-scaled coal-fired power plants
are essentially leveraging the cross-sectional nature of the data, we use the occurrence of thermal
inversions averaged over different time periods to deal with the endogeneity of cumulative air
pollution.
    In Table A14, we use specifications where PM2.5 are averaged over 5, 10, 15 and 18 years,
respectively, leading up to the migration decision. We find that the longer the time period of
PM2.5 exposure, the larger is the response in small increments. As such, pollution exposure
in a short time frame have a slightly smaller impact than the same amount of exposure spread
out over a longer time period. Once again, we see similar empirical patterns as our baseline
estimates. The effects of cumulative pollution on emigration are also more pronounced for
skilled workers, relative to their unskilled counterparts.
    In Table A15, we further add cumulative weather conditions that may confound the associ-
ation between the thermal inversions IV and migration decisions. We consistently find stronger
effects on out-migration for the higher educated group of workers.




                                                         A13
                     Table A14: PM2.5 Measured over Different Time Intervals

                                                  Dependent variable: Leave hukou city indicator
                                       Full sample Low edu High edu Full sample Low edu High edu

         Log (Mean PM2.5: 1998-2015)    0.138***   0.132***   0.202***
                                        (0.0346)   (0.0364)   (0.0493)
         Log (Mean PM2.5: 2001-2015)                                     0.134***   0.128***   0.195***
                                                                         (0.0334)   (0.0352)   (0.0473)

         Observations                   761,548     643,124   118,424    761,548     643,124   118,424
         R-squared                       0.015       0.017     0.019      0.016       0.018     0.021
         City Controls                    Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes
         Demographics                     Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes
         F-test of IVs                   37.87       35.91     27.09      40.25       38.20     28.65
                                                  Dependent variable: Leave hukou city indicator
                                       Full sample Low edu High edu Full sample Low edu High edu

         Log (Mean PM2.5: 2006-2015)    0.126***   0.120***   0.185***
                                        (0.0310)   (0.0326)   (0.0445)
         Log (Mean PM2.5: 2011-2015)                                     0.117***   0.111***   0.173***
                                                                         (0.0290)   (0.0307)   (0.0415)

         Observations                   761,548     643,124   118,424    761,548     643,124   118,424
         R-squared                       0.018       0.020     0.024      0.020       0.021     0.028
         City Controls                    Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes
         Demographics                     Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes
         F-test of IVs                   41.72       39.68     30.12      42.11       40.08     31.10

Notes: Individual level regressions across 332 cities. Instrumental variables using the number of thermal
inversions averaged over different time intervals. Standard errors clustered at the hukou city level are reported
in parentheses. City controls include distance to Shanghai, Tianjin and Shenzhen seaports. Demographics
include age, age-squared, gender, marital status, and an urban hukou indicator.


A.3.3 Alternative Samples, Controls and Alternative Measure of Air Quality
    In this section, we use different samples to explore the relationship between pollution and
out-migration. We then use an alternative measure of air quality as your main independent
variable.
    First, we look at different ways to reformulate the estimation sample. In Table A16, instead
of splitting up the sample into low and high skilled, we split it up into three categories: high
school or below, those with some college education, and those with college or above education.
A steep education gradient is apparent, where the elasticity of migration with respect to PM2.5
is higher for higher levels of education.
    We next examine whether big cities, high polluting cities, or major province capitals are
driving our results. We do this by excluding such cities one at a time in Table A17. This may
help allay concerns about the influence of major cities or province capitals in pollution policy,
placement of plants, or being outliers in terms of pollutants and/or skilled jobs.
    We further conduct heterogeneity analysis. In Table A18, we split up the sample into two
age groups. We see that the implications of pollution on emigration are stronger for younger
workers. There are two reasons for the differential migration pattern by age. First, young
people may have lower mobility costs than their older counterparts. Second, they may have
better knowledge about the adverse effects of air pollution.
    In Table A19 we split up the sample by rural and urban origin locations. We find that the
elasticity for high-skill out-migration is larger in rural areas than it is in urban areas.

                                                      A14
Table A15: PM2.5 Measured over Different Time Intervals: Controlling for Weather Conditions

                                                     Dependent variable: Leave hukou city indicator
                                       Full sample    Low edu High edu Full sample Low edu            High edu

         Log (Mean PM2.5: 1998-2015)    0.113***      0.104***   0.173***
                                        (0.0236)      (0.0235)   (0.0394)
         Log (Mean PM2.5: 2001-2015)                                         0.107***    0.0979***    0.168***
                                                                             (0.0230)     (0.0231)    (0.0387)

         Observations                   761,548        643,124    118,424     761,548      643,124    118,424
         R-squared                       0.032          0.036      0.029       0.032        0.036      0.031
         City Controls                    Yes            Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes
         Demographics                     Yes            Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes
         F-test of IVs                   65.36          63.86      44.57       68.08        66.49      45.59
                                                     Dependent variable: Leave hukou city indicator
                                       Full sample    Low edu High edu Full sample Low edu            High edu

         Log (Mean PM2.5: 2006-2015)    0.122***      0.114***   0.167***
                                        (0.0264)      (0.0273)   (0.0359)
         Log (Mean PM2.5: 2011-2015)                                         0.0913***   0.0850***    0.129***
                                                                              (0.0220)    (0.0231)    (0.0297)

         Observations                   761,548        643,124    118,424     761,548      643,124    118,424
         R-squared                       0.023          0.026      0.031       0.033        0.035      0.043
         City Controls                    Yes            Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes
         Demographics                     Yes            Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes
         F-test of IVs                   80.66          78.19      57.01       91.53        87.48      71.38

Notes: Individual level regressions across 332 cities. Instrumental variables using the number of thermal
inversions averaged over different time intervals. Standard errors clustered at the hukou city level are reported
in parentheses. City controls include distance to Shanghai, Tianjin and Shenzhen seaports. Demographics
include age, age-squared, gender, marital status, and an urban hukou indicator. Weather controls include
temprature, humidity, sunshine duration and wind speed averaged over different time intervals.


    Finally, we turn our attention to an alternative measure of local air quality. As sources of
pollution affect not just PM2.5 but also other pollutants, we may be picking up the combined
impact of many pollutants. Recall that Air Quality Index (AQI) is an overall indicator for air
pollution concentration calculated using multiple atmospheric pollutants including SO2, NO2,
PM10, PM2.5, O3 and CO. Furthermore, the AQI is officially reported and widely disseminated,
and certain individuals may be more likely to respond to it. As shown in Table A20, our
empirical pattern are robust to using the AQI as our independent variable of interest.

A.3.4 Additional Controls
    In this section, we include various sets of controls that may confound the association between
local air pollution and migration decisions. In the first few columns of Table A21 Panel A, we
account for other determinants of the demand for skilled work at baseline. We do this to check
whether the potential for skilled work just so happens to be in places that are correlated with
skill-specific migration. We find our estimates display similar patterns as before if we add
controls for the teacher-student ratio, the number of hospitals and doctors per capita in 2000.
    In the next three columns of Table A21 Panel A, we include controls for local economic
production in 2000. Our economic controls include baseline measures of GDP per capita, as
well as the ratio of product values of services and manufacturing as proxies for the industrial
structure. Our results are not meaningfully affected by these controls.

                                                         A15
                              Table A16: Disaggregated Education Levels

                                           Dependent variable: Leave hukou city indicator
                                        High school or below Some college College or above

                        Log (PM2.5)            0.0609          0.116***         0.176***
                                              (0.0423)         (0.0401)         (0.0409)

                        Observations          643,124            64,598             53,826
                        R-squared              0.029             0.041              0.031
                        City Controls           Yes               Yes                Yes
                        Demographics            Yes               Yes                Yes
                        F-test of IVs          46.52             44.18              34.59

Notes: Individual level regressions across 332 cities. Standard errors clustered at the individual level are
reported in parentheses. Instrumental variables specification using the interaction between wind direction,
distance to coal plant, and coal consumption at power plant. City controls include distance to Shanghai,
Tianjin and Shenzhen seaports. Demographics include age, age-squared, gender, marital status, and an urban
hukou indicator.




          Table A17: Without Big Cities, High Polluters and Major Province Capitals

                         Exclude Beijing                   Exclude Tianjin                   Exclude Shijiazhuang
                 Full sample Low edu High edu      Full sample Low edu High edu       Full sample Low edu High edu

 Log (PM2.5)      0.0761*     0.0609    0.132***    0.142**    0.129**    0.180***     0.0783**    0.0623    0.140***
                  (0.0389)   (0.0424)   (0.0369)    (0.0556)   (0.0619)   (0.0487)     (0.0393)   (0.0426)   (0.0390)

 Observations     752,993    638,529    114,464     745,903    632,324    113,579       758,412   640,631    117,781
 R-squared         0.027      0.029      0.038       0.017      0.021      0.026         0.027     0.029      0.036
 City Controls      Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes       Yes        Yes
 Demographics       Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes       Yes        Yes
 F-test of IVs     52.58      46.35      42.31       31.46      27.67      29.28         51.78     45.94      40.28


                         Exclude Shenyang                 Exclude Zhengzhou                   Exclude Wuhan
                 Full sample Low edu High edu      Full sample Low edu High edu       Full sample Low edu High edu

 Log (PM2.5)      0.0766**    0.0605    0.138***    0.0816**    0.0641    0.155***     0.0775**    0.0612    0.141***
                  (0.0387)   (0.0421)   (0.0377)    (0.0397)   (0.0431)   (0.0377)     (0.0392)   (0.0425)   (0.0390)

 Observations     758,589    641,096    117,493     754,535    637,980    116,555       758,065   640,833    117,232
 R-squared         0.027      0.029      0.037       0.027      0.029      0.035         0.027     0.029      0.036
 City Controls      Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes       Yes        Yes
 Demographics       Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes       Yes        Yes
 F-test of IVs     53.42      47.25      42.65       51.02      45.21      40.14         52.22     46.37      40.90

Notes: Individual level regressions across 331 cities (we exclude one big city at a time). Standard errors
clustered at the hukou city level are reported in parentheses. Instrumental variables specification using the
interaction between wind direction, distance to coal plant, and coal consumption at power plant. City controls
include distance to Shanghai, Tianjin and Shenzhen seaports. Demographics include age, age-squared, gender,
marital status, and an urban hukou indicator.




                                                         A16
                                        Table A18: By Age Groups

                                      Dependent variable: Leave hukou city indicator
                                       Age<35                            Age>=35
                           Full Sample Low edu High edu Full Sample Low edu            High edu

           Log (PM2.5)       0.114**       0.0640    0.193***   0.0604*      0.0572    0.0684***
                             (0.0496)     (0.0627)   (0.0504)   (0.0342)    (0.0368)    (0.0227)

           Observations      270,601      199,958     70,643    490,947     443,166     47,781
           R-squared          0.015        0.023      0.027      0.022       0.023       0.044
           City Controls       Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
           Demographics        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
           F-test of IVs      48.21        33.65      40.70      54.11       49.93       40.62

Notes: Individual level regressions across 332 cities. Standard errors clustered at the hukou city level are
reported in parentheses. Instrumental variables specification using the interaction between wind direction,
distance to coal plant, and coal consumption at power plant. City controls include distance to Shanghai,
Tianjin and Shenzhen seaports. Demographics include age, age-squared, gender, marital status, and an urban
hukou indicator.




                              Table A19: Urban vs Rural Outmigration

                                      Dependent variable: Leave hukou city indicator
                                     Urban hukou                        Rural hukou
                           Full sample Low edu High edu Full sample Low edu High edu

           Log (PM2.5)       0.0589**      0.0386    0.110***    0.106*      0.0899    0.342***
                             (0.0283)     (0.0299)   (0.0313)   (0.0641)    (0.0647)   (0.0932)

           Observations      401,351      302,344     99,007    360,197     340,780     19,417
           R-squared          0.020        0.025      0.012      0.030       0.030       0.027
           City Controls       Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
           Demographics        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
           F-test of IVs      58.20        58.24      38.10      30.70       28.98       35.71

Notes: Individual level regressions across 332 cities. Standard errors clustered at the hukou city level are
reported in parentheses. Instrumental variables specification using the interaction between wind direction,
distance to coal plant, and coal consumption at power plant. City controls include distance to Shanghai,
Tianjin and Shenzhen seaports. Demographics include age, age-squared, gender, marital status, and an urban
hukou indicator.




                                                     A17
                                      Table A20: Air Quality Index

                            Dependent variable: Leave hukou city indicator
                                          Full sample Low edu High edu

                           Log (AQI)            0.0795        0.0581      0.176**
                                               (0.0659)      (0.0682)     (0.0736)

                           Observations         708,482      595,958      112,524
                           R-squared             0.025        0.027        0.035
                           City Controls          Yes          Yes          Yes
                           Demographics           Yes          Yes          Yes
                           F-test of IVs         36.16        34.99        29.59

Notes: Individual level regressions across 238 cities that report AQI in 2014. Independent variable is Log
(Annual mean Air Quality Index). Standard errors clustered at the hukou city level are reported in
parentheses. Instrumental variables specification using the interaction between wind direction, distance to coal
plant, and coal consumption at power plant. City controls include the log distance to Shanghai seaport, to
Tianjin seaport, and to Shenzhen seaport. Demographics include age, age-squared, gender, marital status, and
an urban hukou indicator.


    Fine particle concentration tends to be correlated with local industrial pollutant emissions.
To account for the potential role played local industrial emissions, we add industrial SO2
emission, waste water emission and dust emission as covariates in last three columns of Table
A21 Panel A. The inclusion of these industrial emissions does little to affect the impacts of
PM2.5 concentration.
    In the first three columns of Panel B, we start with all three sets of controls that we have
in Panel A entered simultaneously. After which, we address the concern that power plants may
be built near cities that require more electricity. Even though those plants supply electricity
to vast areas of China including many remote provinces (Freeman, Liang, Song, and Timmins,
2019), we examine this concern by controlling for city-level electricity consumption. We include
total (industrial, commercial and residential) electricity consumption in the next three columns
of Table A21 Panel B, and add industrial electricity consumption in the last three columns.
Accounting for city-level electricity consumption barely changes our empirical patterns.




                                                     A18
                                    Table A21: Additional Control Variables

Panel A                                              Dependent variable: Leave hukou city indicator
Additional Controls:         Baseline skill controls          Baseline economy controls          Industrial emmisions controls
                       Full Sample Low edu High edu Full Sample Low edu High edu Full Sample Low edu High edu

Log (PM2.5)              0.0712      0.0592    0.124***     0.0403      0.0251    0.0984**     0.0539      0.0396    0.119***
                        (0.0433)    (0.0466)   (0.0427)    (0.0422)    (0.0454)   (0.0444)    (0.0435)    (0.0470)   (0.0373)

Observations             674,032     565,239   108,793     674,032     565,239     108,793     674,032     565,239    108,793
R-squared                 0.036       0.037     0.048       0.038       0.038       0.053       0.033       0.033      0.051
City Controls              Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
Demographics               Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
F-test of IVs             55.68       53.73     33.41       51.43       48.91       33.90       60.76       59.45      36.89
Panel B                                              Dependent variable: Leave hukou city indicator
Additional Controls:          All 3 sets of controls         All 3 sets + Total elec cons          All 3 + Industry elec cons
                       Full Sample Low edu High edu Full Sample Low edu High edu Full Sample Low edu High edu

Log (PM2.5)             0.0756**    0.0677*    0.109***    0.0653*      0.0587    0.0959***   0.0643*      0.0574    0.0972***
                        (0.0343)    (0.0362)   (0.0335)    (0.0369)    (0.0393)    (0.0346)   (0.0358)    (0.0380)    (0.0338)

Observations             674,032     565,239   108,793     650,828     544,681     106,147     650,828     544,681    106,147
R-squared                 0.047       0.050     0.060       0.049       0.051       0.063       0.049       0.052      0.063
City Controls              Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
Demographics               Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
F-test of IVs             58.67       58.10     34.15       53.59       52.68       31.95       54.78       54.32      31.76


Notes: Individual level regressions across 261 cities in Panel A, and columns 1-3 of Panel B (cities for which
we have measures of the controls). Individual-level regressions across the 253 cities for which we have
electricity consumption data and the full set of city controls, in columns 4-9 of Panel B. Standard errors
clustered at the hukou city level are reported in parentheses. Instrumental variables specification using the
interaction between wind direction, distance to coal plant, and coal consumption at power plant. Baseline skill
controls include teacher student ratio, log hospitals per capita and log doctors per capita in 2000. Baseline
economy controls include log GDP per capita and industrial structure (the product value at service sector /
manufacture sector). Industrial emissions controls include log industrial SO2 emission, log industrial waste
water emission and log industrial dust emission. City controls include distance to Shanghai, Tianjin and
Shenzhen seaports. Demographics include age, age-squared, gender, marital status, and an urban hukou
indicator. Total electricity consumption includes industrial, residential and commercial consumption.




                                                             A19
B      Air Pollution Data Disclosure in China
    Despite hazardous levels of pollution, Chinese citizens used to have limited or no access to
information about local air quality. Since 2000, the Chinese government released air pollution
data in two waves: First, in 2000, the government started publishing air quality data, includ-
ing an Air Pollution Index (API) and PM10, but only for 42 cities. Although fine particles
(i.e. PM2.5) are more hazardous than larger particles (i.e. PM10) with respect to mortality,
cardiovascular and respiratory endpoints, PM2.5 was not included in the API. The number of
cities in which API and PM10 were available increased to 120 in 2012.

                  Figure B1: The Number of Air Purifier Sales from 2006 to 2014




Notes: Air purifier sales transaction data collected by a marketing firm in China from January 2006 through
December 2014 for 85 major Chinese cities.


   Second, in response to public demand for the publication of PM2.5 data, the Chinese gov-
ernment started to disclose real time PM2.5 data in most Chinese cities from 2012. Information
on real time PM2.5 was made available in all Chinese cities by January 1, 2015.

                        Table B1: PM2.5 Data Disclosure and Outmigration

 Dependent variable:                                             Leave city location indicator
                                             Full sample   Low edu High edu Full sample Low edu            High edu

 Log(PM2.5)ot × Data disclosed indicatorot    0.000902     -0.000585   0.0106**    0.000997    -0.000482   0.0105**
                                              (0.00147)    (0.00139)   (0.00495)   (0.00143)   (0.00130)   (0.00488)

 Observations                                 122,841       104,184     18,657     122,841     104,184      18,657
 Individual FE                                  Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
 Year FE                                        Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
 Demographics                                   Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
 Regional trend                                 No            No          No         Yes         Yes         Yes

Notes: Individual-level regressions across 277 cities. The CLDS lists the history of residential locations, which
include 277 cities. Standard errors clustered at the city level. Demographics include age, age-squared. We
control for the log of PM2.5 and an indicator for PM2.5 data disclosure. Data disclosure indicator=1 if PM2.5
data was officially made available in a given city-year, =0 otherwise.

    The disclosure of pollution information had an important effect on household avoidance
behavior. Figure B1 shows how the sales of indoor air filtration increased sharply in response
to the PM2.5 data disclosure in 2012. Table B1 shows that PM2.5 data disclosure had significant
impacts on the out-migration of the high-skilled.



                                                          A20
C        Additional Tables and Figures

                                                     Table C1: Summary Statistics

                                  Variable name                                Description                       Mean       Std. dev
                                                             Indicator=1 if the person left his/her hukou         0.10        0.30
                         Out migration                       city for more than 6 month, =0 otherwise
                         Female                              Indicator=1 if the person is female                 0.50         0.50
                         Age                                                                                     39.87       10.99
                                                             Indicator =1 if the person holds
                         Urban hukou                                                                              0.53        0.50
                                                             urban hukou, =0 otherwise
                                                             Indicator =1 if the person is married
                         Married                                                                                  0.82        0.39
                                                             Indicator=1 if the highest degree is
                         High-skill                                                                               0.16        0.36
                                                             some college or above, =0 otherwise
                         Pollution Levels                    Annual PM2.5 concentration                           38.95    16.67
                         GDP per capita                                                                         81002.09 61579.87
                         Distance to Tianjin seaport                                                             1223.47  677.02
                         Distance to Shanghai seaport                                                            1289.79  758.51
                         Distance to Shenzhen seaport                                                            1470.92 835.869
                         Temperature                         Annual    mean temperature                          141.79    54.60
                         Wind speed                          Annual    mean wind speed                            45.47   336.07
                         Huminity                            Annual    mean huminity                              66.98    11.91
                         Sunshine duration                   Annual    total sunshine duration                  20305.59 5775.47


Note: Table shows summary statistics for most outcomes, control variables, and determinants of the different
samples. In most regressions we control for distance to the three largest seaports: Tianjin seaport, Shanghai
seaport, and Shenzhen seaport. These seaports are located at the three major economic circles of China:
Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei Metropolitan Region, The Yangtze River Delta, the Pearl River Delta.




            Table C2: Examples of the Points-based Hukou Policy Across Chinese Cities
          City                 Beijing                      Shanghai                             Guangzhou                         Shenzhen
Total hukou points needed      Varies                       72                                   60                                100
                               Doctoral degree: 37 points   Doctoral degree: 27 points           Above college: 60 points          Doctoral degree:100 points
                               Master degree: 26 points     Master degrees: 24 points            Some college: 40 points           Master degrees: 90 points
                 Education     Bachelor degree: 15 points   Bachelor degree: 21 points           High school: 40 points            Bachelor degree: 80 points
                               Some college: 10.5 points                                                                           College: 60 points
                                                            College English Test 6-8: 8 points   Junior workers: 10 points         Junior workers: 20 points
                                                            College English Test 4: 7 points     Middle-level workers: 30 points   Middle-level workers: 40 points
                                                                                                 High-level workers: 50 points     High-level workers: 70 points
                                                                                                                                   Senior technical worker: 100 points
                      Skills
                                                                                                                                   Junior professional: 70 points
                                                                                                                                   Middle professional: 90 points
                                                                                                                                   Senior professional: 100 points


Note: Table shows a few examples of hukou requirements for city workers. Authors' calculations using the official
government websites of the Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou and Shenzen. `Total hukou points needed' show the
number of points required to obtain local hukou, whereas the lower rows show how different qualifications add
to the individual's points.




                                                                            A21
               Table C3: Preferences for Environmental Issues by Education Levels

                        Dependent Variable: The Environmental issue in China is Terrible
                        High school                                                 0.133***
                                                                                    (0.0122)
                        Some college or above                                       0.176***
                                                                                    (0.0145)
                        p-values                                                      0.002
                        t-values                                                      -3.17
                        The average value for below high school                       0.549
                        Demographics                                                    Y
                        City FE                                                         Y
                        N                                                             24538
                        adj. R2                                                       0.115

Note: Individual level regressions from 113 cities. Demographic controls include age, age-squared, gender,
marital status and an indicator for urban hukou. The data source is the China Household Panel Survey 2016
(CFPS). In the CFPS 2016, there is a survey question: In your opinion, how terrible the environment issue is in
China. (0=totally not terrible; 2,···,10=very terrible). Based on this question, we define environmental attitude
dummy: D=1, if the answer is 6-10; =0, if the answer is 0-5. P-value: the p-values of test of Some college or
above=High school; t-value: t-values of test of Some college or above=High school. Standard errors clustered
at the city level are reported in parentheses. p < 0.10,   p < 0.05,   p < 0.01

                 Table C4: Concerns and Actions Taken on Environmental Issues

                                           Panel A: Concerns on Environmental Issues
                                          Discuss environmental Donation for environment      Concern over
                                                  issues               protection          environmental issue
                 High school                    0.134***               0.0585***                0.120***
                                                (0.0171)                (0.0115)                (0.0154)
                 Some college or above          0.231***               0.151***                 0.174***
                                                (0.0188)                (0.0153)                (0.0189)
                 P-value                          0.000                  0.000                   0.001
                 t-value                          -6.01                  -5.71                   -3.56
                 Baseline average                 0.392                  0.106                   0.402
                 City FE                            Y                      Y                       Y
                 Demographics                       Y                      Y                       Y
                 N                                11147                  11147                   11147
                 adj. R2                          0.190                  0.171                   0.192

                                         Panel B: Actions Taken on Environmental Issues
                                               Appeal on       Government environmental    Non-government
                                           Environmental issue         activity         environmental activity
                 High school                    0.0255***               0.119***               0.0690***
                                                (0.00845)               (0.0140)                (0.0118)
                 Some college or above          0.0574***               0.246***                0.156***
                                                 (0.0120)               (0.0169)                (0.0144)
                 P-value                         0.010                   0.000                   0.000
                 t-value                          -2.62                  -8.21                   -6.31
                 Baseline average                0.0597                  0.135                   0.100
                 City FE                            Y                      Y                       Y
                 Demographics                       Y                      Y                       Y
                 N                               11147                   11147                   11147
                 adj. R2                         0.176                   0.186                   0.194


Note: Individual level regressions from 127 cities. Demographic controls include age, age-squared, gender,
marital status and an indicator for urban hukou. The data source is the Chinese General Social Survey
(CGSS). In the CGSS, there is a survey question: whether you participate in the following activity. 1=never,
2=occasionally; 3=often. We define an indicator: D=1 if the answer=2,3; D=0 if the answer=1. P-value: the
p-values of test of Some college or above=High school; t-value: t-values of test of Some college or above=High
school. Standard errors clustered at the city level are reported in parentheses. p < 0.10, p < 0.05, p < 0.01


                                                               A22
    Table C5: First-stage Relationships for Additional Model-based Parameter Estimation

 Panel A: For Labor Supply                          Log (Unskilled Real Wage)                     Log (Skilled Real Wage)

 NTR IV                                          0.161***              0.162***
                                                 (0.0161)              (0.0153)
 WID IV                                                                                      0.00222***            0.00387***
                                                                                             (0.000123)            (0.000111)

 Pollution IV                                No. of Inversions Strength of Inversions     No. of Inversions   Strength of Inversions
 Observations                                     13,570              13,570                   13,570                13,570
 R-squared                                        0.132                0.132                    0.136                 0.153

 Panel B:                                              For Agglomeration                       For House Prices & Pollution
                                                 Log (Number of Skilled Workers)          Log(Skill Ratio)    Log(Population)

 College graduates2001-5                         0.400***              0.395***
                                                 (0.0386)              (0.0390)
 College graduates2001-5 /Baseline Lu,2001                                                   0.835***                  0.127
                                                                                              (0.130)                (0.0915)
 Predicted migration flow                                                                     0.00158              0.00425***
                                                                                             (0.00148)              (0.00102)

 Pollution IV                                No. of Inversions   Strength of Inversions
 Observations                                       121                   121                   121                    121
 R-squared                                        0.672                  0.665                 0.573                  0.546


Notes: We control for number of inversions in Column 1 and 3, and strength of inversions in Column 2 and
4. All regressions weighted by the population in 2000. Panel A: We control for hukou index, the interaction
of hukou index to migration status indicator, the inverse hyperbolic sine of distance from origin to destination
cities. We also control for temperature, humidity, sunshine duration, and wind speed. Standard errors clustered
at the city level are reported in parentheses. Panel B: We control for distance to seaport, region fixed effects,
city area and weather amenities (temperature, humidity, sunshine duration and wind speed). Robust standard
errors are reported in parentheses




                                                                 A23
Figure C1: Event Study of the Number of College Students by Baseline Propensity to Expand
          (a) College Students in City                            (b) University Professors in City




Notes: We test for pre-trends and dynamics of the college expansion policy in an event study frame-
work.    City-by-year level regressions from 1994 to 2010.          Outcome is number of new college stu-
dents, relative to one year preceding the expansion (1998). In Figure C1a, we run the regression:
                       2010
Studentsdt = 0 + t=1994 t (1t-1998 × T reatd,1990 ) + t + c + dt . In Figure C1b the dependent variable
is the number of professors in the city. We plot t . T reatd,1990 is the number of university students in 1990.
Horizontal axis is normalized to the year preceding the expansion (1998).




                   Figure C2: Distribution of hd across cities, from Equation 18




    Graph describes the distribution of hd across cities. Equation 18 describes how we estimate hd .




                                                     A24
                           Figure C3: Model Fit and Validation in 2015




Notes: We plot the actual and predicted relationship between our main variables, where the predictions are
based on model-estimated parameters. Bubbles are weighted by populations in the year 2000.




                                                  A25
D      Additional Model Derivations
D.1     Deriving Labor Supply and Welfare
    In this appendix we derive the labor supply curve from the worker utility function.
                                                          -s  -s       -Msod
                                    Vjsod =      jsd wsd Zd hpd ad exp                                                     (7)

Workers will pick the destination with the highest value of Vjsod = wsod jsd , where we de-
                  -s
fine wsod  wsd Zd    hp- s
                       d ad exp
                                -Msod
                                      to be a composite of wages, costs and amenities. The
probability that someone from origin o picks destination 1 is given by:

                                so1 = P r wso1         s1> wsod sd d = 1
                                                         w s1 s1
                                    = Pr        sd     <         d = 1
                                                         wsod
                                              dF
                                    =              (   s1 , so1 s1 , ......, soD sD ) d s1                              (A.1)
                                              d s1
                            wsp1
where we define sod         wsod
                                   . We assume that the preferences are distributed with the following
Frechet distribution:
                                                                            D
                                                                                     -s
                                   F(   s1 , ....., sD )    = exp -                  sd                                 (A.2)
                                                                           d=1

So the derivative of the CDF is given by:
                                                                        D
                                    dF               -s -1                       -s
                                         = s         s1    exp     -             sd                                     (A.3)
                                    d s1                                d=1

This derivative evaluated at ( s1 , so1 s1 , ......, soD           sD ),    allows us to determine the probability
of choosing destination 1, given by 1os :
                                                 D
                       -s -1                                      -s
           so1 =     s s 1   exp          -            (sod   sd )          d   s1
                                                d=1
                                          D                                                  D
                        1                      -s           -s -1                    -s -1         -s
               =     D      -s
                                               sod          s1    exp   -            s1            sod         d   s1
                     d=1    sod          d=1                                                 d=1
                        1
               =     D      -s
                                      dF ( )
                     d=1    sod
                        1                       (wso1 )s
               =     D          -s
                                   .1 =        D
                                                                                                                        (A.4)
                     d=1    sod                d=1   (wsod )s

The third line comes from the properties of the Frechet distribution, where we know that the
term in the integral of the second line is simply the PDF with a shape parameter  , and a scale
                    -s
parameter D   d=1 sod . Expanding on the definitions for wsod , and scaling up the probability by
the size of the skilled workforce Pos by origin, we derive labor supply by skill and destination:
                                     -s                            s
                                wsd Zd  hp- s
                                          d asd exp
                                                    -Msod
               sod =                  -s   -s                           s       and Lsd =            Pos sod            (9-10)
                            d    wsd Zd  hpd  asd exp-Msod                                       o




                                                             A26
The Frechet assumptions also allow us to measure aggregate welfare. Using equation 7, we can
integrate over the the location preference jsd , conditional on choosing a destination.

              E [Vjsod |d] = (wsod ) E [   jsd |d]
                                         -1
                                                         1
                          = (wsod ) sod  1 -
                                          s

                                                         s
                                                                           1
                                                                           s
                                          -s                           s                1
                          =          wsd Zd  hp- s
                                               d asd exp
                                                         -Msod
                                                                                1-          ,   (A.5)
                                d
                                                                                        s

where  is the gamma function, and is constant across cities.
    Average city utility may depend on hukou costs. For instance, if a high-amenity city has
a very restrictive hukou policy it may have a high average utility as those who originate from
this city already have access to the amenities without paying hukou costs. We define average
utility for those from city o to be:
                                                                               1
                                                                               s
                                                -s   -s                    s
                          Vso              wsd Zd  hpd  asd exp-Msod                            (A.6)
                                     d

The equation shows that the average utility depends on the average option value migrating
to any other city, and the `utility' earned there. This average is scaled by the Frechet shape
parameter s as it captures the dispersion in tastes across locations. The utility of those in city
o is a decreasing function of migration costs to all other cities, as the option value of moving to
those cities fall. We can therefore, rewrite the average utility as a function of hukou restrictions,
and the labor supply as a function of utility in the manner described in the text, by using the
above set of equations:

      log sod = -s logVso + s (log wsd - s log hpd ) + s log asd - s s logZd - s Msod            (11)

D.2     Elasticity of Capital, and Modelling Skill-biased Capital
   So far the model assumes that capital is perfectly supplied at the rate R . If however,
capital was fixed at a value K¯d in a city, it would not change the skill-premia. The average
earnings for a worker with skill s in district d would be:

                      Yd                                           1       1
      log wsd = log           = log sd + log + 1 - 1 -                         log Yd
                       sd                                          E
                                           1         1                       ¯d - 1 log Lsd
                              + 1-                        logAd + (1 - ) log K                  (A.7)
                                           E                                     E

Here the modified term 1 logAd + (1 - ) log K         ¯d is common across skill levels, and not
affect skill premia. It varies across cities, just as TFP in the main model. We can similarly
(re)define a modified TFP term that includes the immobile capital.
    We can explicitly model skill biased capital as affecting the productivity parameter sd .
Below, we explicitly model skill biased capital to show how flexible forms of introducing it do
not influence the estimation. In the following set up, the noticeable changes are where equation
3 has been modified into equation A.10, which includes an elasticity of substitution between



                                                         A27
 labor   sd   and skill biased capital ksd represented by s :
                                                                   (1- )
                                              Yd = A d L d Kd                                               (A.8)
                                                                           E
                                                                E -1       E - 1
                                                                E
                                           Ld =           sd Lsd                                            (A.9)
                                                     s
                                                                                   s
                                                  s -1                     s -1    s -1
                                                  s                        s
                                   Lsd =    s ksd        + (1 - s )    sd                 ,                (A.10)

 where sd is the supply of workers of skill s, and Lsd is now a labor aggregate over workers
 and capital. Given this new set up, earnings can be represented by equation A.11, instead of
 equation 4:

                  Yd         1                                         1          1   1                   1
log wsd = log            =       log Ad +log +log sd (1-s )+             log Ld +   -         log Lsd -     log sd ,
                   sd                                                  E          s E                     s
                                                                                                           (A.11)

 D.3      A Note on Existence and Uniqueness of the Equilibrium
     In Section 6, we present the model and equilibrium. Here we describe the determinants
 behind the existence and uniqueness of the equilibrium that we define in Section 6.3.
     When bilateral migration costs are present we make a few other standard assumptions that
 help meet sufficient conditions for the existence of a spatial equilibrium (Allen et al., 2020):
 Msod are finite, the graph of the matrix of costs is strongly connected, and they are quasi-
 symmetric. The connectivity assumption simply implies that there is a sequential path of finite
 bilateral migration costs that can link any two cities o and d. The quasi-symmetry assumption,
 which is not entirely necessary for existence (but does aid the solution), simply says that one
 portion of the costs is symmetric. That is, Msod = Mso Msd Msod , and Msod = Msdo . So in
 moving from Shanghai to Beijing, there may be a component of the cost that is Beijing specific
 (say, related to Beijing hukou policy), a component related to leaving Shanghai (say, its large
 airport), and a component that is Beijing-Shanghai specific (say, the distance between the two,
 or number of train connections). This last bilateral component is assumed to be symmetric for
 ease of proving the existence of an equilibrium.
     Additionally, our model contains congestion forces (such as pollution and house prices)
 and agglomeration (effects on TFP). The existence of multiple equilibria often depends on the
 relative strength of agglomeration and congestion forces (Allen et al., 2020). An equilibrium
 is unique if congestion forces are at least as large as the agglomeration forces. That is, the
 parameters 1 , 2 , 3 and 4 that determine congestion are meaningful in magnitude, relative
 to 1 and 2 that drive agglomeration. More skilled workers raise TFP (via 2 ), yet may lead
 to more congestion, via higher house prices (via 3 and 4 ) and more pollution (via 1 and
 2 ), which in turn may lower TFP (via 1 ). Given the meaningful congestion forces we may
 expect a unique equilibrium.
     When solving for equilibrium, our model converges to the same unique equilibrium across
 different starting values. This does not necessarily imply the equilibrium is globally unique.
 Yet, like other work (Ahlfeldt et al., 2015) we envision that if there were to be multiple equilibria
 for a different set of parameter values, we would select the counterfactual equilibrium closest
 to the observed real-world outcome.



                                                          A28
E      Additional Counterfactual Results

     Table E1: The Productivity Effect of Reducing Pollution in Beijing (no externalities)

                                                                  Change in GDP per Worker (%)
                                                                 Overal effects Health Relocation
                 Reduce steady state PM2.5                          10.364      5.819            4.295
                 Relax skilled hukou                                 4.931      0.000            4.931
                 Relax unskilled hukou                              -4.654      0.000           -4.654
                 Reduce PM2.5 & relax skilled hukou                 15.116      5.819            8.785
                 Reduce PM2.5 & relax unskilled hukou                5.707      5.819           -0.106

Notes: In this counterfactual exercise we reduce the steady state amount of pollution in Beijing by 50% (row
1). Next, we relax the hukou restrictions by skill level (rows 2 and 3) by 50%. Finally (rows 4 and 5) we lower
the hukou regulation by 50% while reducing steady state pollution. Column 1 shows the gain to overall GDP
per worker. Column 2 shows the component purely explained by the health-productivity channel. Column 3
through the pure relocation channel.



          Table E2: The Productivity Effect of Relocating Pollution (no externalities)

                                                                    Change in GDP per Worker (%)
                                                  Overall changes              Health                    Relocation
      Relocate steady state PM2.5                     7.559                     2.893                       3.097
      Relax hukou                                      2.318                    0.000                       2.318
      Relax overall mobility constraints               6.319                    0.000                       6.319
      Relocate PM2.5 & relax hukou                    9.845                     2.893                       5.216
      Relocate PM2.5 & lower migration costs          14.143                    2.893                       9.105

Notes: In this counterfactual exercise we relocate PM2.5 in all cities based on the amount of skill-biased
capital in the city (row 1). In row 2, we relocate only the exogenous component of pollution. In addition to
such relocations of pollution, we also relax the hukou restriction in the 24 top tier cities by 50% (row 2). In
row 3 we relax overall migration costs to the 24 high tier cities by 50%. Column 1 shows the overall gain to
GDP. Column 2 shows the increase in GDP as a consequence of the health effects only. Column 3 shows the
gain due to the re-allocation of labor channel only.



                      Table E3: Distributional Effects of Pollution Regulation

                                                    Skilled Wage                         Unskilled Wage
                                        Overall   Health Relocate+Agglom Overall        Health Relocate+Agglom
      Control PM2.5                      3.504     1.485          1.896       3.603     1.536            1.958
      Control PM2.5 & relax hukou        7.583     1.485         5.840        5.645     1.536            3.921
      Control PM2.5 & lower mig costs   13.964     1.485         12.115       9.142     1.536            7.368

Notes: In this counterfactual exercise we reduce pollution according to the targets set by the 2013 Air
Pollution Prevention and Control Plan (row 1). In addition to pollution regulations, we also relax the hukou
restriction in higher tier cities (row 2), and migration costs (row 3) by 50%. Columns 1-3 show effects on
skilled wages. Columns 4-6 on unskilled wages.




                                                           A29
