                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     A THEORY OF POWER STRUCTURE AND INSTITUTIONAL COMPATIBILITY:
                      CHINA VS. EUROPE REVISITED

                                           Ruixue Jia
                                          Gérard Roland
                                            Yang Xie

                                       Working Paper 28403
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28403


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2021




We are grateful to Avner Greif and Joel Mokyr for their thorough and constructive feedback. We
have also benefited from thoughtful comments from Gary Cox, Mark Koyama, Zhao Liu,
Zhaotian Luo, Albert Park, Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, Jared Rubin, Larry Samuelson, Tuan-Hwee
Sng, Guido Tabellini, and Xueguang Zhou. We also thank participants in online seminars hosted
by Fudan, UCSD, and USC and the 2021 ASSA meeting for their valuable comments. We thank
Ming Zhang for his excellent research assistance. We appreciate support from EDI grant
"Endogenous Political Fragmentation: The Role of Property Rights in Historical Perspective."
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Ruixue Jia, Gérard Roland, and Yang Xie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Theory of Power Structure and Institutional Compatibility: China vs. Europe Revisited
Ruixue Jia, Gérard Roland, and Yang Xie
NBER Working Paper No. 28403
January 2021
JEL No. N40,O17,P48

                                           ABSTRACT

Despite a large consensus among economists on the strong interdependence and synergy between
pro-development institutions, how should one understand why Imperial China, with weaker rule
of law and property rights, gave the commoners more opportunities to access elite status than
Premodern Europe, for example via the civil service exam and the absence of hereditary titles?
Supported by rich historical narratives, we show that these institutional differences reflect more
general differences in the power structure of society: (1) the Ruler enjoyed weaker absolute
power in Europe; (2) the People were more on par with the Elites in China in terms of power and
rights. Based on these narratives, we build a game-theoretical model and analyze how the power
structure can shape the stability of an autocratic rule. If we read greater absolute power of the
Ruler as conditioning more of the power and rights of the ruled on the Ruler's will, we show that
a more symmetric Elite­People relationship can stabilize autocratic rule. If absolute power is
stronger, this stabilizing effect will be stronger, and the Ruler's incentive to promote such
symmetry will be greater. The theory explains the power structure differences between Imperial
China and Premodern Europe, as well as specific institutions such as the bureaucracy in China
and the role of cities in Europe. It is also consistent with the observation that autocratic rule was
more stable in Imperial China than in Premodern Europe.

Ruixue Jia                                        Yang Xie
School of Global Policy and Strategy              Department of Economics
University of California at San Diego             University of California, Riverside
9500 Gilman Drive #0519                           900 University Avenue
La Jolla, CA 92093                                4128 Sproul Hall
and NBER                                          Riverside, CA 92521
rxjia@ucsd.edu                                    yang.xie@ucr.edu

Gérard Roland
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
627 Evans Hall, #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
groland@econ.berkeley.edu
1    Introduction
The very influential literature on institutions and development has taught us a general les-
son: there is a strong interdependence and synergy between institutional arrangements that
are conducive to sustainable political, economic, and social development such as rule of law,
property rights, and more inclusive access to elite status (e.g., North, Wallis and Weingast,
2009; Besley and Persson, 2011, 2014; Acemo     glu and Robinson, 2012). When we compare
Imperial China and Premodern Europe, however, a contrasting image arises: why did China,
with clearly weaker rule of law and property rights, present the commoners more opportuni-
ties to access elite status, for example through the civil service exam, compared to Europe
where hereditary titles governed elite status? Answering this question would help us better
understand the interaction between these well-studied institutions in the literature.
    This paper addresses the question in three steps. First, by examining rich comparative
historical narratives, we find that China and Europe's difference in rule of law and property
rights reflects a more general difference between the two societies: the absolute power of the
Ruler was weaker in Europe. The difference in the inclusiveness of access to elite status
reflects another general difference: the power and rights relationship between the common
People and the Elites, which include primarily the lords in Europe and the bureaucrats in
China, was less unbalanced in China. Both differences concern how power was allocated
across the Ruler, Elites, and People, i.e., the power structure of society, and were the most
prominent during the 9th­14th centuries, with persistence beyond. Second, based on the
narratives, we build a simple game-theoretical framework to analyze how the power structure
can shape the stability of an autocratic rule. This leads to a comparative institutional theory
where the stronger the Ruler's absolute power, the greater his incentive to promote more
symmetric power and rights between the Elites and People. Finally, we provide further
discussion and stylized facts on the historical relevance of our theory.
    Between the two general differences in the power structure between Imperial China and
Premodern Europe, the one in the Ruler's absolute power has been well recognized by the
political economy literature that emphasizes stronger rule of law and property rights in
Europe (e.g., Acemo    glu and Robinson, 2019; Stasavage, 2020; Greif, Mokyr and Tabellini,
Forthcoming). It was also reflected in the different degrees of the Ruler's ultimate ownership
and control over land and population in the two societies (e.g., Bloch, 1962a; Chao and
Chen, 1982; Levi, 1988; Finer, 1997b). Historical narratives suggest that the essence of the
absolute power of the Ruler concerns how much of the power and rights of the ruled, i.e.,
the Elites and People, is conditional on the Ruler's will.
    The difference in the Elite­People relationship in terms of power and rights has been


                                              2
largely ignored by economists and political scientists, while historians and sociologists have
provided useful insights. For instance, elite status was predominantly hereditary in Europe,
while it was governed by a civil service exam in China, more accessible to the common people,
more meritocratic, and nonheritable (e.g., Levenson, 1965; Finer, 1997b); as serfdom gradu-
ally prevailed in feudal Europe, peasants in Imperial China were mostly free and enjoyed de
facto land user rights (e.g., Chao and Chen, 1982; Wickham, 2009); partly because China
had early adopted partible inheritance while primogeniture spread in Medieval Europe, land
ownership in China was also less concentrated and thus less unequal (e.g., Goody, Thirsk
and Thompson, 1976; Goldstone, 1991; Zhang, 2017).
    The co-existence of these two differences motivates the setting of our theoretical frame-
work. We start with a Ruler, who prefers to maintain a particular status quo of autocratic
rule, and a Challenger, who could try to alter it. Since the Challenger can be interpreted
as an outside aggressor, defiant elite, or group of rebellious common people, since the Chal-
lenger's goal does not necessarily involve dethroning the Ruler, and since the challenge can
be armed or nonviolent, our framework is sufficiently general to cover a wide range of threats
that would destabilize the autocratic rule. In the model, we assume whether the challenge
would succeed to alter the status quo depends on whether the Elites and People would choose
to side with the Ruler. In the model, more symmetric power and rights between Elites and
People is represented by less unequal payoffs, if they have not defied the Ruler; we model
stronger absolute power of the Ruler as less of the payoffs of the ruled would remain if they
defied the Ruler.
    Analysis of the model yields our comparative institutional theory. It starts from our
reading of absolute power of the Ruler as about the conditionality of power and rights of the
ruled on the Ruler's will. Given any non-zero level of such conditionality, the more power and
rights the People enjoy when they have not defied the Ruler, the more they will lose if they
defy the Ruler, and, therefore, the more willing they will be to side with the Ruler during
a challenge. We call this the punishment effect of more power and rights of the People.
Knowing that the now stronger alliance between the Ruler and People has worsened the
prospect of a challenge to the Ruler, the Elites will be more willing to side with the Ruler,
too. We call this the political alliance effect.1 The Challenger would then be deterred from
challenging the status quo, stabilizing the autocratic rule and thus creating an incentive for
the Ruler to promote a more symmetric Elite­People relationship. Since stronger absolute
power of the Ruler implies a greater aforementioned conditionality, it will make the initial
   1
    As remarked by Orwell (1947, p. 17), this idea of the Ruler and the People "being in a sort of alliance
against the upper classes" is "almost as old as history" in Europe; in China the same idea can be traced
to not later than Han Feizi (Watson, 1964, p. 87) from the 3rd century BC, which has been the most
representative text in the Chinese Legalist tradition since then.


                                                    3
punishment effect and, therefore, the total stabilizing effect stronger. The Ruler's incentive
to promote the Elite­People symmetry will thus be greater when she has stronger absolute
power. We can thus explain the correlation between more inclusive access to elite status
and weaker rule of law or property rights across Imperial China and Premodern Europe, as
an application of the general compatibility between the Ruler's absolute power and a more
symmetric Elite­People relationship in power and rights.
    A few additional implications arise from the model. For instance, because a more ab-
solutist Ruler may be willing to grant more power and rights to the People, it is possible
for the People to tolerate a more absolutist Ruler. Our simple model can also be extended
by allowing the current political stability to influence the future power structure, making
possible a dual divergence of the power structure and stability of autocratic rule.
    Given these analytical results, we further explore the historical relevance of our theory.
We first discusses how our theory can help understand specific institutions. For example,
we can interpret the bureaucracy with the civil service exam in China and the important
role of cities in Europe as the Ruler's efforts to reduce the Elite­People asymmetry and
align with the People.2 Second, we examine the auxiliary predictions from our model about
the impact of the power structure on the stability of autocratic rule. We systematically
compare Imperial China and Premodern Europe in the frequency of wars, risk for a Ruler to
be deposed in a given year, and the resilience of unified autocratic rule. Consistent with the
predictions of our model, the data show that autocratic rule was more stable in China than
in Europe over the 9th­14th centuries, when the differences in the power structure were the
most prominent, with persistence in later centuries.
    Our study contributes to the political economy literature on institution and sustainable
development by investigating the relationship between major components of the inclusive
or open-access institution in the literature (e.g., North, 1989; North and Weingast, 1989;
Acemo  glu, Johnson and Robinson, 2001, 2005a,b; North, Wallis and Weingast, 2009; Besley
and Persson, 2011, 2014; Acemo    glu and Robinson, 2012, 2019; Mokyr, 2016; Cox, North
and Weingast, 2019). The literature often analyzes a society by categorizing it into two
estates (e.g., the ruler vs. ruled, state vs. society, elites vs. mass, those with vs. those
without access to political and economic resources and decisions). We extend this two-estate
framework into a three-estate one, helping us to understand the power structure in a richer
way. This helps us show that the more repressive an institution is in the dimension of the
Ruler's absolute power, the more inclusive it may be in the dimension of the power and
rights equality between the Elites and People, and this pattern may well persist. This result
   2
    To be sure, the development of cities in Europe was to a large extent based on autonomous factors and
exogenous shocks, but as we show below, various kings acted to help it.



                                                   4
is, to our knowledge, new in the political economy literature.
     Our comparative institutional analysis also reveals the fundamental role of the strong
conditionality of the power and rights of the ruled in incentivizing the Ruler to grant more
power and rights to the People when the Ruler has strong absolute power. This helps us
clarify the difference between meritocratization pushed by an absolutist Ruler, and other
institutions that promote political inclusiveness given strong rule of law, for example, de-
mocratization as understood in Acemo      glu and Robinson (2000, 2001). Democratization can
serve as a credible commitment to redistribution because when the democratic procedure is
binding, it transfers absolute power from the rich to the poor, i.e., changing redistribution
from being conditional on the will of the rich to being conditional on the will of the poor;
the political stability it achieves is thus the stability of democracy. In contrast, meritocrati-
zation promoted by an absolutist Ruler can co-opt the People in a paternalistic way, without
changing where absolute power lies; the political stability it achieves is thus the stability of
the Ruler's autocratic rule.
     The political divergence between China and Europe has been well documented: the
unified autocratic rule of a dominant state could hardly be maintained in Europe since the
fall of the Roman Empire, while in Imperial China it was relatively resilient. Moreover, the
literature has argued that this divergence has been highly consequential, for example, making
economic and scientific innovations more likely in Europe than in China (e.g., Rosenthal and
Wong, 2011; Mokyr, 2016). On its origin, a few inspiring explanations are fundamentally
geographical or environmental (e.g., Wittfogel, 1957; Jones, 1981; Turchin, 2009; Dincecco
and Wang, 2018; Ko, Koyama and Sng, 2018; Scheidel, 2019; Roland, 2020; Fern´             andez-
Villaverde, Koyama, Lin and Sng, 2020). On the institutional front, Acemo      glu and Robinson
(2019) argue that the German­Roman tradition of a balanced state­society relationship put
Europe in the narrow corridor of social, political, and economic development, whereas the
state has been too dominant since the early history of China. Stasavage (2020) underscores
that a strong bureaucracy in ancient China led it to a path different from Europe, favoring
a stronger autocratic regime. Greif and Tabellini (2010, 2017) show that the cooperation-
supporting institutions were fundamentally different in premodern China and Europe, and
Greif, Mokyr and Tabellini (Forthcoming) make a forceful argument for the complementarity
between the evolution of social organization and that of political institutions in the two
societies.
     In line with these efforts, we focus on the interaction between different dimensions of
institutions, and provide a power structure approach to the stability of autocratic rule,
which is to our knowledge unique in the literature. With dynamic extensions of the model,
we can also understand the political divergence as part of a dual divergence of the power


                                               5
structure and its political consequences. Without explicitly modeling details of various
specific institutions in history, our model can be useful in interpreting their roles, such as the
bureaucracy in Imperial China and cities in Medieval Europe. We also provide a systematic
comparison using different measures of the stability of autocratic rule, documenting the
higher stability in Imperial China.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents briefly historical narratives on
the two differences in the power structure between Imperial China and Premodern Europe.
Section 3 presents the theoretical framework and comparative institutional analysis. Section
4 explores the historical relevance of the theory with further discussion and stylized facts.
Section 5 concludes the paper.


2     Power Structure in Historical Narratives
In this section, we provide historical narratives on differences in the power structure between
Imperial China and Premodern Europe. When doing so, we sometimes refer to "Europe" as
if it were a single entity or discuss a specific country as an example for Europe. Admittedly,
there exists important variation across geographical locations within Europe and within
China. We focus on, instead, identifying the "ideal type" of Imperial China and Premodern
Europe's power structures, which can help interpret the variations within each of the two
societies.
     As institutions evolve over time, we follow the longue dur´    ee approach by focusing on
significant, persistent features of the power structure. The most relevant period of our
narratives was the 9th­14th centuries, with persistence beyond. This period covered the
rise and decline of feudalism in Europe (e.g., Ganshof, 1952), with the Black Death taking
place in the middle of the 14th century; in Imperial China, it was since the Tang dynasty
(618­907) that the theme of political institutions had largely been stable, after the swings
during the 800 years before (e.g., Yan, 2009). We summarize the historical narratives in
Table 1 and elaborate on them below.


2.1    Absolute Power of the Ruler
The first difference we emphasize in the power structure between Imperial China and Pre-
modern Europe is that Chinese Rulers enjoyed greater absolute power than their European
counterpart, by which we mean that the power and rights of the ruled were more dependent
of the Ruler's will in China compared to Europe. This difference is first reflected in the
strength of rule of law, and then in the ultimate ownership and control over the most impor-


                                                6
                                      Table 1: Power Structure in Imperial China and Premodern Europe

                                           China                        Europe                       Examples of references

    Absolute power of the Ruler
                                                                                                     Bloch (1962b), Unger (1977), Mann (1986)
                                           Ruler less constrained       Ruler constrained            Finer (1997a,b), Tamanaha (2004)
    Strength of rule of law
                                           by law                       by Church and law            Fukuyama (2011), Acemo   glu and Robinson (2019)
                                                                                                     Greif, Mokyr and Tabellini (Forthcoming)

                                           Reserved for Ruler;          Confiscation highly
                                           confiscation legitimate      constrained; Ruler           Chao and Chen (1982), Levi (1988)
    Ultimate ownership of land
                                           when Ruler deemed            expected to "live of         Finer (1997b), Wang (2000)
                                           it necessary                 his own"

                                           Ruled considered Ruler's     Limited control; much
                                                                                                     Bloch (1962a), Lander (1961)
    Ruler's control over population        subjects; harsh penalty      less harsh punishment
                                                                                                     Mann (1986), Finer (1997a,b)
7




                                           for disloyalty               for disloyalty

    Asymmetry in power and rights
    between Elites and People
                                                                        Elites a supreme class;
    General comparison                     Much less unbalanced                                      Bloch (1962b), Finer (1997b)
                                                                        oppressive to the poor

                                           Through the Civil                                         L¨
                                                                                                      u (1944), Ho (1959), Levenson (1965)
    Access to elite status                                              Hereditary nobility
                                           Service Exam                                              Wickham (2009), Yan (2009)

                                                                        Serfdom common in
                                           Mostly free and landowning                                Esherick (1981), Chao and Chen (1982)
                                                                        Middle Ages; land
    Inequality in land ownership           peasantry; land ownership                                 Beckett (1984), Finer (1997a), Wickham (2009)
                                                                        ownership much more
                                           less concentrated                                         von Glahn (2016), Zhang (2017)
                                                                        concentrated

                                                                                                     Goody, Thirsk and Thompson (1976)
                                                                        Primogeniture increasingly
    Inheritance rule                       Partible inheritance                                      Goldstone (1991), Bertocchi (2006)
                                                                        more common
                                                                                                     von Glahn (2016)
tant assets in historical societies: land and population. Next, we summarize the narratives
and explain how we model the degree of absolute power based on these narratives.

Strength of rule of law. As noted by many scholars, Chinese emperors were less con-
strained by rule of law (Finer, 1997a,b; Stasavage, 2016; Ma and Rubin, 2019, p. 227;
Acemo   glu and Robinson, 2019; Greif, Mokyr and Tabellini, Forthcoming).3 As put by Fin-
er (1997a,b, p. 455, 836), all the ruled, including the top bureaucrats, were "subjects not
citizens" and had only "duties not rights;" as observed by Fukuyama (2011, p. 290) and
Unger (1977, p. 104), "law was only the positive law that [the emperor] himself made" and
it "could be as general or as particular as the policy objectives of the rulers might require."4
    In contrast, European Rulers faced strong constraints from the Christian church (Man-
n, 1986; Fukuyama, 2011; Johnson and Koyama, 2019; Scheidel, 2019; Greif, Mokyr and
Tabellini, Forthcoming). Given the Pope's threat to delegitimize and excommunicate them,
"[k]ings . . . could not defy the Pope for very long," as shown in many examples (Southern,
1970, p. 130).5 The king also faced much tighter legal constraints. In the famous words
of Bracton (1968, vol. 2, p. 33), "[t]he king must . . . be under the law, because law makes
the king." Having emerged from the 9th-century customary law, a man's right to judge and
resist when his king had acted unlawfully had been repeatedly recognized by significant legal
documents through the Middle Ages (Bloch, 1962b, p. 172­173).6 Importantly, this right
was "not subject to the king's justice" and "not upon the desires of the king" (Tamanaha,
2004, p. 26).7
   3
      The Chinese Ruler had the obligation to act benevolently towards the ruled and to follow the "Mandate
of Heaven," but as noted by Stasavage (2016, p. 148), "the concept of a Mandate of Heaven never extended
to obtaining consent, nor did it involve assembling representatives to achieve this goal." Finer (1997a, p.
462) also notes: "[i]deally, government must be of the people, for the people: but, emphatically, Mencius
never for a moment hints that it can ever be by the people. Very much the reverse. . . . Nor did a dissatisfied
populace have the right to rebel."
    4
      For example, the founding emperor of the Ming dynasty created "law beyond the law" when he was
frustrated by the Great Ming code of his own, while insisting that only he could use the newly created law
(Brook, 2010, p. 87). Unger (1977, Ch. 2) discusses the characteristics of law in Imperial China in detail.
    5
      Famous examples include the dramatic scenes of Henry IV of Germany at Canossa, Henry II of England
at Canterbury, and King John of England at Dover, and the destruction of Holy Roman Emperor Frederick
II's family.
    6
      Bloch (1962b, p. 173) raises examples of "the English Great Charter of 1215; the Hungarian `Golden
Bull' of 1222; the Assizes of Jerusalem; the Privilege of the Brandenburg nobles; the Aragonese Act of
Union of 1287; the Brabantine charter of Cortenberg; the statute of Dauphin´      e of 1341; the declaration of
the communes of Languedoc (1356)."
    7
      For more extensive discussion on the rule of law, see Finer (1997b), Tamanaha (2004), Fukuyama (2011),
Vincent (2012), Fern´ andez-Villaverde (2016), Acemo   glu and Robinson (2019), and Greif, Mokyr and Tabellini
(Forthcoming).




                                                      8
Ultimate ownership of land. While land could be owned by individuals in normal times
in China, the ultimate legitimacy of land ownership was always reserved for the Ruler,
so the emperor could re-centralize the ownership when he deemed it necessary (Chao and
Chen, 1982; Wang, 2000). Since even before the Qin dynasty unified China in 221 BC,
land confiscation from the noble families and landed gentry had been a common practice
of the Chinese Ruler to raise revenue for military projects (Ebrey and Walthall, 2013).8
Depending on the emperor's will, systematic persecutions against Buddhism, Manichaeism,
and other religions also repeatedly happened, regularly entailing large-scale confiscation of
temple properties (Zhang, 2015; von Glahn, 2016, ch. 5).
    In contrast, when European Rulers needed revenues, they could usually not confiscate
land from the Elites or the Church. Instead, they had to exchange rights or resources with
revenues. Levi (1988, p. 99) states it clearly: "[d]uring the medieval period, a monarch was
expected to `live of his own' (vivre du sien ). That is, funds for the monarch were to come
from royal lands and customary dues. . . . Should monarchs need more, even if it was to fund
a campaign on behalf of the country as a whole, they had to obtain assent to some form
of `extraordinary' taxation. They could neither expropriate property at will nor rely on a
regular levy."9

Ruler's control over population. As the population were subjects of the Ruler in China
(Finer, 1997a, p. 455), he could reward or punish anyone arbitrarily, which precisely reflected
his absolute power. Consistent with the emphasis of Confucianism on the loyalty of the ruled
to the Ruler (Greif, Mokyr and Tabellini, Forthcoming), one person's rebellion, treason, or
even slight disobedience, regardless of her social status, would be punished extremely harshly,
usually leading to eradication of the whole family line (Finer, 1997b, p. 778).10 Sometimes
mere suspicion from the Ruler could guarantee the calamity, as shown in the fall of Princess
Taiping in 713.11 Following the Legalist tradition in Chinese political philosophy, the harsh
   8
      Among famous early examples, Duke Xiao of the Qin state confiscated land from the feudal nobles in
the 340s BC, sharing it among the peasants; in 114 BC, Emperor Wu of Han confiscated land from nobles
and merchants to raise additional revenue to fund the Han­Xiongnu War.
    9
      See also Finer (1997b, p. 887) for a similar observation. Besides, when Louis XIV managed to tax the
nobility for the first time, the taxes happened only at the end of his reign and were insignificant in size and
subject to numerous exemptions (McCollim, 2012). Even when Philip IV of France coveted properties of
the Templars, he had to have them disbanded by Pope Clement V first and acted under the Pope's name,
not overtly expropriating. Expropriations did happen but mostly under Eminent Domain (Reynolds, 2010);
in case of serious crimes like treason, the nature of the crime had to be determined by law, not merely the
Ruler's will (Lander, 1961).
   10
      In a famous case, when Fang Xiaoru, a prominent minister, refused to write an inaugural address for
Emperor Yongle of Ming, the emperor sentenced 873 people to death, including Fang's family, kinfolk,
friends, and students, before having Fang himself executed.
   11
      In 713, Emperor Xuan of Tang, merely suspecting that his aunt Princess Taiping had been planning a
coup, forced her to commit suicide and executed several dozens of her extended family and allies. Literary


                                                      9
punishment was the Ruler's most effective way to grip control of the population (Watson,
1964).
    In feudal Europe, on the contrary, the peasants were controlled by their overlords so that
the king, in practice, did not have direct control over these peasants. The peasants could,
as a rule, be punished by local courts controlled by their overlords, and the king did not
have control over these local courts (Bloch, 1962a). Although loyalty was also emphasized in
Europe and enforced through mechanisms like oaths, treason was punished much less harshly
than in China. First, although execution of the traitor and attainder could apply, killing the
family was seldom entailed, and the attainder would often be reversed later (Lander, 1961).12
Second, it was common in the feudal system that a vassal had two or more overlords (Bloch,
1962a) and when in conflict, he could simply choose which superior or more likely to win
to follow (e.g., Cantor, 1964, p. 202; Tuchman, 1978; Mann, 1986). Eventually, as Finer
(1997b, p. 881) observes, the Ruler's control over the population was "abysmal" and he
"could not always count on the fidelity of the vassal," precisely because his lack of ability
to punish them: "after all, [they were] in possession of his lands and what could he do if
defeated?"

Formalization in our model. Motivated by these narratives, we assume that the Ruler,
the Elites and the People are sharing a surplus of size  ; when the Ruler has survived after
the ruled had not sided with him, he can punish the defier by having her enjoy only  of her
share of the surplus. The parameter  then measures negatively the conditionality of the
power and rights of the ruled on the Ruler's will. Given the initial distribution of the surplus,
the Ruler who has stronger absolute power, i.e., a lower  , is thus capable of exerting much
severer punishment on the ruled for defiance.


2.2     Asymmetry in Power and Rights between Elites and People
The differences in power structure between Imperial China and Premodern Europe lied
also in the relationship between the Elites and the People. In Bloch's words, the disparity
between "[a] subject peasantry" and "the supremacy of a class of specialized warriors" was
one of "the fundamental features of European feudalism" (Bloch, 1962b, p. 167), and his
final verdict on the system concerns only its bindings on the Rulers and its oppressiveness
to the poor (Bloch, 1962b, p. 173). In contrast, in Imperial China there was much less class
inquisitions for merely potentially subversive attitudes to the Ruler were also conducted at a frequency and
scale much more significant than in Europe (e.g., Xue and Koyama, 2020).
  12
     For example, during the reigns from Henry VI to Henry VII of England, 64% of the attainders were
eventually reversed (Lander, 1961, p. 149).



                                                    10
difference in practice among the ruled and between the Elites and People (Finer, 1997b, p.
836). The difference in the Elites­People relationship was reflected by differences in, for
example, access to elite status, inequality in land ownership, and the inheritance rule. As
above, we summarize the narratives and then explain how we formalize them in our model.

Access to elite status. As pointed out by Levenson (1965, p. 39), the infinite power of
the Chinese Emperor was his ability to "raise and lower his subjects at will" that rendered
the relative symmetric Elites­People power structure. L¨      u Simian, a prominent historian,
summarized the Chinese scenario elegantly: "when fathers and elder brothers possess the
Empire, younger sons and brothers are low common men" (L¨          u, 1944, p. 347). As early
as during the 5th­4th century BC, accompanied by reforms that strengthened the absolute
power of the Ruler, the Warring States in China had started to abolish hereditary titles
and make elite status dependent solely on military merit and open to the common People
(Yan, 2009, p. 23­24). As an important institution to facilitate the fluid change between the
Elites and the People, China invented the civil service exam to regulate elite status in the
6th century and greatly developed it during the Tang dynasty (618­907), and elite status
gained via success in the exam could not be inherited.
    Different from China, the difference between the Elites and the People in Europe was
much more rigid, since elite status mostly relied on hereditary nobility. Government posi-
tions, especially in courts and in the army were reserved for aristocrats. While in the early
Middle Ages, ordinary peasants routinely performed military service, which was seen as a
privilege, this stopped to be the case later and was reserved for the nobility (knights and
higher titled nobles ­ see Wickham, 2009 for more discussion).
    One may wonder how much of the de jure difference in access to elite status was trans-
formed into de facto difference. As a response, first, it is important to note that the de jure
access to elite status can shape the belief in society about the de facto access, affecting the
stability of the autocratic rule. For example, Bai and Jia (2016) show empirically that Chi-
na's abolition of the civil service exam in 1905 caused an increase in revolutionary activities
against the Qing court, contributing to the end in 1912 of not only the Qing dynasty but
also the imperial era. One interpretation for such evidence is that the People's belief in the
alliance with the Ruler was temporarily broken when abolishing the civil service exam shut
down the main access of the commoners to elite status.13
    Second, statistics on de facto social mobility, despite being scarce, appears consistent
with the difference in access to elite status. Ho (1959) provides a comprehensive description
  13
    Recently, Huang and Yang (2020a) also argue that the civil service exam contributed to China's imperial
longevity by restricting aristocrats and other wealth-holders from accessing power.



                                                    11
of social mobility in China between the 13th and the 19th century based on data from the
civil service exam. It is difficult to find comparable data in Europe. He compares China
with Cambridge students during 1752­1938. With such an unfair comparison, he still finds
a higher social mobility in China: 78%­88% of Cambridge students came from elite families
whereas only 50%­65% of the highest degree holders (Jinshi) came from elite families in
China.

Inequality in land ownership. Circumstances on land ownership inequality are also
suggestive. In Imperial China, peasants "were mostly free" (Finer, 1997a, p. 205), "land-
owning peasantry had been the main agent and form of agricultural production," and they
"had mostly enjoyed the freedom of choice" (Chao and Chen, 1982, p. 192­193).14 In
contrast, in the early-Medieval Europe, mostly between the eighth and tenth century, small
peasants became gradually expropriated by rich aristocrats as well as by the Church, making
peasants gradually fall entirely under the control of landlords. This happened in many ways,
as documented by Wickham (2009): First, in the aftermath of the Viking incursions, some
landlords became richer and acquired more land, usually from poor peasants, either through
payment or expropriation. Tenant peasants faced higher rents and greater control over their
labor. They became gradually submitted to the judicial control of landlords and completely
lost their freedoms to become feudal serfs. The only escape route for encaged peasants was
to flee to the cities, a process that accelerated with the Black Death, but those living in the
countryside remained heavily under the control of landlords until much later on.15 In the
17th century in England, around 70% of the land was still owned by landlords and gentry
(Beckett, 1984). Almost all scholars on China would agree that the corresponding number
remained below 45% from the 6th century to modern China (e.g., Esherick, 1981; Chao and
Chen, 1982).16

Inheritance rule. The differences in land ownership concentration are partly related to
differences in inheritance rules. China gradually switched from primogeniture to partible
inheritance in the Qin and Han dynasties, while primogeniture became more common in
Europe during the Middle Ages (Goody, Thirsk and Thompson, 1976; Bertocchi, 2006; von
Glahn, 2016, ch. 2, 8). The consequence of these rules on elite privilege is intuitive: partible
inheritance makes it more difficult for elite families to accumulate assets over generations.
  14
     See von Glahn (2016, ch. 6, 8) for a similar observation from the mid-late Tang dynasty on.
  15
     It is important to note that the stronger property rights of land in Europe documented by historians in
reality concern mainly whether the rights of landlords were independent of the arbitrary will of the Ruler,
not whether small peasants enjoyed certain rights in their normal, everyday life.
  16
     For extensive discussion on the many works on England and China, see Zhang (2017).



                                                    12
As Goldstone (1991, p. 380) observed, in China, "land was generally divided among heirs,
and over a few generations such division could easily diminish the land holdings of gentry
families. At the same time, peasants, who could purchase clear and full title to their lands,
might expand their holdings through good luck or hard work. Thus the difference between
the gentry and the peasantry was not landholding per se, but rather the cultivation, prestige,
and influence that came from success in the imperial exams."

Formalization in our model. Motivated by these narratives, we capture the relative
power of the Elites and the People by a simple parameter  . With the surplus of size 
mentioned above, the Elites will get a and the People will get a, if they have been loyal
to the Ruler, where 0    1 and a higher  indicates a more symmetric Elites­People
relationship.

Remarks. To be sure, both China and Europe experienced changes and challenges of the
power structure over the centuries. It should not be surprising that multiple Rulers in Europe
attempted to make the Elite­People relationship more balanced. For example, Louis XIV in-
sisted on depriving the nobility of actual power after the rebellions of the Fronde, attempted
to choose ministers and officials on merit, and used commoners to replace aristocrats. Nev-
ertheless, the weaker de facto power of the Ruler and the multiple checks on executive power
by the Elites in Europe generally made it less possible for the Ruler to consistently succeed
in these kinds of endeavors. For instance, even though Louis XIV succeeded temporarily,
access to nobility through a judiciary and administrative office became practically barred in
the 18th-century France. In Appendix C, we show that our main model can be extended
to accommodate this interpretation, where we allow the current political stability to affect
the future power structure. In Section 4, helped by our theory, we discuss further the rise
of cities in Medieval Europe, another phenomenon related to the Ruler's hope to enlist the
People as allies against the Elites by granting more power and rights to urban commoners.


3    Comparative Institutional Analysis
Now we introduce the setting of our model. We assume that there is a Ruler (R), who
prefers a certain status quo of autocratic rule. The nature of the status quo is open to
interpretation: for example, it can be a peaceful, unified autocratic rule across the territory.
There is also a Challenger (C), who is unhappy about and can challenge the status quo.
She could be an outsider, one or a group of nobles, lords, or bureaucrats, or some common
people; her challenge may or may not seek to dethrone R or be violent. With such flexibility


                                              13
in interpretation, the model is sufficiently general to accommodate different types of threat
to autocratic rule, such as external conflict, elite revolt or secession, popular uprising, in-
dependence war, and other apparently non-violent attempt to alter the status quo, with or
without a competing claim over the ruling position.
    Besides R and C, we assume that there are also the Elites and the People, which represents
the nobles, lords, and bureaucrats, and the People (P), which includes peasants and urban
commoners, who are relevant to whether R can preserve the status quo.17 Depending on
the identity of C, we exclude the initial challenger from E and P. For example, if C were a
group of elites, then E would be the other elites; if C were a group of members of the people,
then P would be the other members of the people. Naturally, unanimous actions were rare
in reality both within E and within P. Therefore, we interpret their actions as whether all
significant members of each estate actively side with and fully support R to preserve the
status quo or not, focusing on the alliance across R, C, E, and P.
    The four players play a game of two stages. Stage 2 is about the stability of the status
quo of autocratic rule, where C, E, and P play a subgame while taking as given the power
structure. Stage 1 is about R's design of the power structure, where R foreseeing Stage 2
and chooses the degree of asymmetry between E and P in terms of their power and rights,
while taking as given the level of her absolute power. Across the two stages, we assume
all payoffs are von Neumann­Morgenstern utilities so that all players maximize their own
expected payoff. Given the two-stage structure, we now introduce in detail and analyze
Stage 2, and then move back to Stage 1.


3.1     Stage 2: Stability of Autocratic Rule
3.1.1    Setting

Figure 1 presents the setting of Stage 2. Nature (N) first randomly draws a state of the
world x  0, following the exogenous cumulative distribution function F (x). The state of
the world x will appear later in the game as the cost born by P if she sides with R.
    Given x, C will decide whether to challenge the status quo, which is maintained by the
rule of R. If C does not challenge, then C will get her default payoff 0; E will get her status
quo payoff a > 0, which is exogenous; P will get a, where   [0, 1] measures the power
symmetry between E and P in the status quo and is exogenous at this stage; R will get the
exogenous total surplus  net of the sum of E and P's status quo payoffs (1 +  )a, which is
 - (1 +  )a in total. Stage 2 then ends there.
  17
    Appendix E provides narratives on the relevance of the Elites and the People in determining the outcome
of a conflict, an important type of threat to the stability of the Ruler's rule.


                                                    14
                           Nature (N) .
                                          Draws state of the world
                                          x per c.d.f. F (x)
                       Challenger (C)

              Does not challenge              Challenges the status quo, which
               the status quo                   is maintained by Ruler (R)

                                                      Elites (E)
       R gets  - (1 +  )a
            E gets a                Sides                  Does not side
           P gets a                with R                    with R
            C gets 0
                                                                   People (P)
                 R gets  - (1 +  )a
                      E gets a                 Sides                    Does not side
                     P gets a                 with R                      with R
                     C gets -y

                                                                            N
                            R gets  - (1 +  )a
                                 E gets a             W.p. 1 - p,                 W.p. p,
                              P gets a - x            status quo                 status quo
                                C gets -y                ends                     survives


                                                          R gets r         R gets  - (1 +  )a
                                                        E gets a + w            E gets a
                                                         P gets a              P gets a
                                                          C gets z             C gets -y

      x  0, a > 0,  - 2a > r, 0    1, 0    1, 0 < p < 1, w > 0, y > 0, z > 0
                       Figure 1: Stage 2: Stability of Autocratic Rule


    If C instead does challenge, then E will decide whether to side with R. If E sides with R,
then the status quo will survive. Stage 2 will end there with R, E, and P all getting their
status quo payoffs, respectively, while the failed challenge will incur an exogenous loss y > 0
to C, leaving her the payoff -y .
    If E instead does not side with R, then it will be P's turn to decide whether to side with
R. If P decides to side with R, then the state of the world x comes in as the cost incurring
to P for the choice, while the status quo will survive. In this scenario, C will still get -y for
the failed challenge; R will still get her status quo payoff  - (1 +  )a; P will get her status
quo payoff a but net of the cost x, which is a - x in total; E will now suffer a punishment


                                                 15
because she has not sided with R, getting only a instead of her status quo payoff a, where
  [0, 1] is exogenous. A lower  measures the stronger absolute power of R to punish its
subjects who have defied her. Stage 2 then ends there.
    If P does not side with R either, then R will be left on her own. N will then determine
randomly whether the status quo will survive. With exogenous probability p  (0, 1), the
status quo will survive, so C will still get -y for the failed challenge; R will still get her
status quo payoff  - (1 +  )a; E will be punished, getting a; P will be punished, too,
getting a. Stage 2 then ends there.
    With probability 1 - p, the status quo will end, leaving C with an exogenous prize z > 0
and R an exogenous reservation payoff r, where we assume, intuitively,  - 2a > r so that,
given any   [0, 1], R would prefer the status quo to survive. P will still get her status quo
payoff a, while E will now get an exogenous incentive w > 0 for having not sided with R,
in addition to her status quo payoff a, so her total payoff will be a + w. Stage 2 then ends
there.
    About the random elements, we assume that N's draws of x and whether the status quo
will survive on R's own are mutually independent. About the informational environment,
we assume that Stage 2 has complete and perfect information. We will thus use backward
induction to solve for its subgame perfect equilibria.
    For simplicity, we assume that E and P will side with R if indifferent, respectively, and
C will not challenge if indifferent, ruling out mixed strategies. Appendix A shows that the
insights from our results would remain robust if mixed strategies were allowed.
    Before analyzing Stage 2, we make a few remarks on the conceptual and technical issues
around the current setting.

Remarks. First, as discussed in Section 2, we interpret that China has a high  and a low  ,
while Europe has a low  and a high  . The  ­ characterization of power structure captures
the idea that power and rights are specific to estates and scenarios, as  measures the E­P
asymmetry and  measures how much the power and rights of the ruled depend on whether
they have defied R. As we will show, first recognizing the estate- and scenario-specificness
and then characterizing power structure this way are instrumental in understanding how
power structure determines stability, since both  and  shape P, E, and C's strategies in
equilibrium, affecting the fate of the status quo of autocratic rule. In this sense,  and
 indeed characterize the structure of R's power over the others: as Dahl (1957, p. 203)
famously puts, "A has power over B to the extent that he can get B to do something that
B would not otherwise do."
   Second, as mentioned, C can be an outsider or an elite member or part of the people; the


                                             16
incentive for E not to side with R also depends on the specific context.18 Thus, for generality
and simplicity, we have left C's identity unspecified and modeled incentives of C and E via
exogenous parameters, i.e., w, y , and z . This treatment makes these incentives independent
of the  ­ power structure and the strategies of all the players in equilibrium. To address
this limitation, in Appendix D, we collapse C and E into one player E from the inside of
the status quo, make her look forward infinitely in a Markov game, and allow her to replace
R. The  ­ power structure thus determines the punishment upon E in case her challenge
fails, and her aspiration for challenge is thus the difference between the equilibrium values of
being R and being E, in turn determined by all players' strategies in equilibrium. Therefore,
Appendix D can be seen as the fullest yet simplest extension of the current setting. We
show parallel results in Appendix D to all results in the current framework. Relatedly, note
that R does not make any decision at Stage 2. That said, in Appendix D, as we endogenize
the incentives of C and E at Stage 2, R's payoff in equilibrium at Stage 2 will affect other
players' strategies in equilibrium at the same stage.
    Third, having the random variable x is a simple yet useful way to model the incentive
for P's choice. P's incentive not to side with R depends also on the specific context, for
example, P's level and prospect of income, R's level of legitimacy, whether and how severely
R is in a crisis, and whether P has an opportunity to revolt, all of which can be affected in
turn by many random factors. We thus model this component of her incentive as a single,
exogenously drawn, state-of-the-world variable, i.e., the random cost for siding with R, x.
Modeling it alternatively as a reward for not siding with R would not affect our analysis.
    Fourth, in the current setting, we have assumed that C, E, and P move sequentially. As
we will show, this has the advantage of simplicity when we highlight the political alliance
channel through which  and  affect E's equilibrium strategy by affecting P's equilibrium
strategy, and they also affect C's equilibrium strategy by affecting E and P's equilibrium
strategies. Assuming an alternative sequence of moves or simultaneous moves would not
affect the insights of our analysis.
    Finally, we have chosen not to focus on the possibility of contracting among R, C, E, and P
at Stage 2. It is not too unreasonable in reality, since any threat R or C can exert upon E and
P depends on the status quo's own survival or the success of C's challenge, respectively, and
any reward R or C can promise to E and P is not too credible, since the need for cooperation
will disappear once the status quo survives or C's challenge succeeds, respectively. That
said, when considering R's preference about  at Stage 1, one can interpret a higher  as an
  18
    For example, E could hope to replace R in the challenge, or simply to get more power, rights, or other
economic interests, or even to secede from the Ruler, without necessarily taking the ruling position; similarly,
C could hope to replace R, or to secede from the Ruler, or simply to loot a great fortune in the challenge.



                                                      17
implicit contract between R and P where R grants more rights to P in exchange for support
in scenarios where P would not support R with a lower  . At the same time, the severity
of the credibility problem may be endogenous to the  ­ power structure. A more explicit
exploration on the contracting across R, C, E, and P could be an interesting direction for
future research.

3.1.2   Equilibrium Characterization

We start the backward induction from P's strategy. In any subgame perfect equilibrium, P
will not side with R if and only if

                               a - x < (1 - p) · a + p · a,                                (1)

i.e., the cost of siding with R is not greater than the probability-adjusted punishment for
not siding with R in case that C's challenge fails:

                                    x  p · (1 -  )a  x
                                                     ^.                                    (2)

   Now consider E's strategy while expecting this strategy of P in equilibrium. When x  x^,
P would side with R, so E will side with R; when x > x ^, P would not side with R, so E will
not side with R if and only if

                                a < (1 - p) · (a + w) + p · a,                             (3)

i.e., the incentive for not siding with R is greater than the probability-adjusted punishment
in case that C's challenge fails:

                                          p
                                    w>       · (1 -  )a.                                   (4)
                                         1-p

    This analysis implies that if this condition does not hold, then in any subgame perfect
equilibrium, E will always side with R so that it will be impossible for the status quo to end.
Such equilibria are empirically irrelevant, as in reality the chance for the status quo to end
was always strictly positive; such equilibria are also theoretically trivial, in the sense that
E and P will always side with R regardless of the state of the world. Therefore, to narrow
our focus onto empirically more relevant and theoretically less trivial scenarios, we assume
w > a · p/(1 - p) so that for any   [0, 1], in any subgame perfect equilibrium, E will not
side with R if and only if x > x
                               ^.
    Under this assumption, now consider C's strategy while expecting these strategies of E


                                              18
and P in equilibrium. When x  x  ^, E would side with R, so C will not challenge the status
quo; when x  x  ^, E and P would not side with R, so C will challenge the status quo if and
only if
                                    0 < (1 - p)z - py,                                   (5)

i.e., the prize from a successful challenge is greater than the probability-adjusted loss from
a failed challenge:
                                                p
                                         z>         · y.                                    (6)
                                              1-p
    This analysis implies that if this condition does not hold, then in any subgame per-
fect equilibrium, C will never challenge the status quo. Similar to the equilibria of little
relevance we mentioned above, such equilibria are empirically irrelevant and theoretically
trivial. Therefore, to further narrow our focus onto empirically more relevant and theoreti-
cally less trivial scenarios, we further assume z > y · p/(1 - p) so that in any subgame perfect
equilibrium, C will challenge the status quo if and only if x > x   ^.
    Note that under the two assumptions we have introduced, we have found the unique
strategy of each player in any subgame perfect equilibrium, so these strategies constitute a
unique subgame perfect equilibrium. To summarize:

Proposition 1. If
                                   p                      p
                             w>       ·a      and   z>       · y,                           (7)
                                  1-p                    1-p
then for any   [0, 1] and   [0, 1], there exists a unique subgame perfect equilibrium at
Stage 2, in which C will challenge the status quo if and only if x > x
                                                                     ^, E will not side with R
if and only if x > x
                   ^, and P will not side with R if and only if x > x^, where

                                      ^  p · (1 -  )a.
                                      x                                                     (8)

    This equilibrium is indeed theoretically non-trivial, since in the equilibrium, whether C
will challenge the status quo and start a challenge and whether E and P will side with R
all depend on the state of the world; this equilibrium is also empirical relevant, since in the
equilibrium, a challenge of the status quo can happen and E and P may not side with R, i.e.,
the probability of challenge 1 - F (^
                                    x) can be strictly positive and the survival probability of
the status quo
                                         (          )
                                 S = 1 - 1 - F (^ x) · (1 - p)                              (9)

can be strictly lower than one. Therefore, to focus on this equilibrium, from now on we
assume that the condition in Proposition 1 holds, i.e., w > a · p/(1 - p) and z > y · p/(1 - p).



                                              19
3.1.3     Impact of Power Structure on Stability of Autocratic Rule

How does the  ­ power structure shape the probability of challenge and the survival prob-
ability of the status quo in equilibrium?

Proposition 2. At Stage 2, a higher  and a lower  decrease the probability of challenge
and increase the survival probability of the status quo of autocratic rule in equilibrium.

Proof. By Proposition 1, the probability of challenge is 1 - F (^
                                                                x) and the survival probability
                            (         )
of the status quo is S = 1 - 1 - F (^
                                    x) · (1 - p), so a higher x^ lowers 1 - F (^
                                                                               x) and raises S .
Since a higher  and a lower  increase x ^  p · (1 -  )a, the proposition then follows.

    The intuition of Proposition 2 deserves more discussion. In the model,  and  influence
the stability of the status quo in equilibrium by their impacts on P, E, and C's equilibrium
strategies. We discuss each of these impacts. First, the impacts of  and  on P's strategy
in equilibrium are straightforward: by Equation (2), P's strategy hinges on the comparison
between her cost x for siding with R and the probability-adjusted punishment x     ^  p(1 -  )a
for not siding with R in case C's challenge fails; both a higher  and a lower  impose a
heavier punishment (1 -  )a, making P more willing to side with R in equilibrium. We can
say that these impacts work through a generic, punishment channel.
    Second, the impact of  on E's strategy in equilibrium generally has two channels. The
first is again the punishment channel: a lower  imposes a heavier punishment (1 -  )a on
E in case C's challenge fails, making E more willing to side with R given any strategy of P,
including the one in equilibrium. The second, which is new, is a strategic, political alliance
channel: a lower  makes P more willing to side with R in equilibrium, lowering the chance
for C's challenge to succeed and, therefore, making E more willing to side with R in the first
place.19 Therefore, through both channels, a lower  makes E more willing to side with R
in equilibrium.
    In the specific case of Proposition 2, under the condition w > a · p/(1 - p), E always prefers
"both herself and P not siding with R" to "herself siding with R", and further to "herself
not siding with R while P siding with R." Meanwhile, P will always either side with or not
side with R, and her decision solely depends on x, so E does not face strategic uncertainty
about P. Therefore, a heavier punishment upon E brought by a lower  would not change
the fact that E's best response to P's strategy in equilibrium is to "follow" P's strategy, i.e.,
  19
      To see the point, observe that when deciding whether to side with R, E compares (         the payoff of doing
                                                                                                                  )
so,
(    i.e., a, versus the payoff
                            )   of not doing so, i.e., P[P sides with R | x,  ] · a +   1 - P[P sides with R|x,  ] ·
  (1 - p) · (a + w) + p · a , where P's strategy is represented by P[P sides with R|x,  ]. There are two chan-
nels via which  can influence this comparison: first,  can affect a in the payoff of siding with R, which is
the punishment channel; second,  can affect P[P sides with R|x,  ], which is the political alliance channel.


                                                        20
to switch between to side or not to side with R at x = x ^. Therefore, the punishment channel
is muted and we observe only the political alliance channel.20
    Third, the impact of  on E's strategy in equilibrium has only the political alliance
channel: a higher  imposes a heavier punishment (1 -  )a on P for not siding with R in
case C's challenge fails, but does not change the punishment (1 -  )a on E. Therefore, it
would make P more willing to side with R, lowering the chance for C's challenge to succeed,
and making E more willing to side with R in the first place.
    Finally, the impacts of  and  on C's strategy in equilibrium has only the political
alliance channel, too: a higher  and a lower  will not affect C's payoffs at any of the
five ending nodes in the game, but they will encourage E and P to side with R, therefore
lowering C's chance to succeed in her challenge. Expecting this, C will be more reluctant in
equilibrium to challenge the status quo.
    To summarize, Proposition 2 reveals that both a higher  and a lower  will make P more
willing to side with R, thus E more willing to side with R, and, therefore, C more reluctant to
challenge the status quo in the first place. The probability of challenge is then lowered and
the status quo becomes more stable. In our specific setting, a generic punishment channel
appears in  and  's impacts on P's strategy; it exists in  's impact on E's strategy but is
muted, with only a strategic political alliance channel visible; in  's impact on E's strategy
and  and  's impacts on C's strategy, only the political alliance channel exists. All these
make the impacts of  and  on political stability come from only their impacts on P's
switching threshold x ^, providing much simplicity for the result.
    Proposition 2 thus highlights that how well R can form an alliance with P is critical in
shaping the stability of autocratic rule.21 This proves crucial in R's design of the power
structure at Stage 1, which comes below. Also, by Proposition 2, compared with Europe,
both a higher  and a lower  make an autocratic rule more stable in China. We will come
back to this implication in Section 4.
  20
      If E faced strategic uncertainty about P, the punishment channel would not be muted. For example,
suppose E did not observe x when deciding whether to side with R. She would then compare a versus
x ^                (                             )
 0
    a · dF (x) + x  ^
                        (1 - p) · (a + w) + p · a · dF (x). As a lower  will strictly lower the latter sum by
lowering a, its impact on E's decision via the punishment channel would be visible.
   21
      Chapter 17 in Han Feizi argues that "too much compulsory labor service" upon the People (low  )
would make it easy for the Elites to shelter the People in exchange for their financial and political support
against the Ruler (low x  ^), damaging the Ruler's "long lasting benefit" (low S , Watson, 1964, p. 87). This
argument follows exactly the modeled impact of  on the stability of autocratic rule via the political alliance
channel in this analysis and Appendix D.




                                                     21
3.2     Stage 1: Design of Power Structure
3.2.1   Setting

This stage characterizes how R's incentive to promote the symmetry between E and P can
depend on the level of her absolute power. We assume that R at this stage simply chooses
 , while foreseeing the equilibrium at Stage 2 and taking  as given. R's program is thus

                   max    V R = ( - (1 +  )a) · S + r · (1 - S ), subject to                (10)
                    

                                    (         )
               0    1,       S = 1 - 1 - F (^
                                            x) · (1 - p),     ^ = p · (1 -  )a,
                                                              x                             (11)

where V R is R's expected payoff from Stage 2. Without losing generality, we also assume
that the state of the world x's probability density function is always strictly positive while
                                                          ¯]  (0, ) over x  [0, pa].
finite in the relevant range, i.e., satisfies f (x)  [f , f

3.2.2   Institutional Compatibility

How will R choose  by the program? There is a political­economic trade-off: a higher 
will increase the survival probability S of the status quo at Stage 2, which is political; at the
same time, it will decrease the status quo payoff  - (1 +  )a at Stage 2, which is economic.
    The economic side of the trade-off is straightforward: a higher  will decrease the status
quo payoff at a marginal rate of a. The political side is less so, as it depends on the impact
of  on the survival probability, i.e., dS/d . Intuitively, this impact is largely governed by
 : a higher  suggests that P will not lose much of her status quo payoff after she has not
sided with R and C's challenge has failed, so any additional status quo payoff would not
make her much more loyal to R and, therefore, it will not make E much more loyal toward
R, and neither would C be much more reluctant to challenge.
    The key assumption that leads to this intuition is that the punishment upon P, i.e.,
(1 -  )a, is multiplicative between 1 -  and  . We find this assumption uncontroversial,
since in reality, given the punishing institution against defying behaviors, the ones who own
more would often be more concerned about losing it.
    We can formalize this intuition by showing that the impact of  on the survival probability
of the status quo can be approximated by two positive and increasing functions of 1 -  :

Lemma 1 (Impact of  on stability governed by  ). There exist c  (1 - p)pf > 0 and
           ¯ > c such that
¯  (1 - p)pf
c

                                               dS
                               ca · (1 -  )       c
                                                  ¯a · (1 -  ).                             (12)
                                               d

                                               22
Proof. By Proposition 1, the marginal impact of  on S is

                     dS             dF (^
                                        x)
                        = (1 - p) ·        = (1 - p)pf (^
                                                        x) · a · (1 -  ),                (13)
                     d               d

                                               ¯] over x  [0, pa], the lemma follows.
      ^  (1 -  )p · a  [0, pa]. By f (x)  [f , f
where x

    The proof of Lemma 1 also suggests that the approximation would be exact if and only
if the state of the world x followed a uniform distribution, i.e., f (^
                                                                      x) is a constant. Such
an assumption could be arbitrary. Therefore, our approximating result captures the most
robust part of the intuition.
    Lemma 1 suggests that R's trade-off around  is largely governed by  , too:
                                                                              /
Proposition 3 (Institutional compatibility). At Stage 1, if  <   1 - 1 ( - 2a - r)c,
                                                                           /
then R will prefer  to be as high as possible, i.e.,   = 1; if  > ¯  1 - p ( - a - r)¯ c, then
                                               
R will prefer  to be as low as possible, i.e.,  = 0, where  <   ¯ < 1 and, if  > 2a + r +1/c,
then  > 0.
Proof. The marginal impact of  on R's expected payoff in equilibrium at Stage 2 is

                           dV R (               ) dS
                               =  - (1 +  )a - r ·   - aS.                               (14)
                            d                      d

By Lemma 1,   [0, 1], and S  [p, 1], we have

                        dV R (                 )
                              - (1 +  )a - r · ca · (1 -  ) - aS
                         d
                             (                            )
                             ( - 2a - r) · c · (1 -  ) - 1 · a,                          (15)

so if
                              ( - 2a - r) · c · (1 -  ) - 1 > 0,                         (16)

i.e.,
                                               1
                                 <1-                      ,                              (17)
                                         ( - 2a - r) · c
then dV R /d > 0. At the same time, we have

                        dV R (                 )
                              - (1 +  )a - r · c  ¯a · (1 -  ) - aS
                         d
                             (                            )
                             ( - a - r) · c
                                          ¯ · (1 -  ) - p · a,                           (18)

so if
                              ( - a - r) · c
                                           ¯ · (1 -  ) - p < 0,                          (19)

                                             23
i.e.,
                                               p
                                  >1-                    ¯,                                 (20)
                                          ( - a - r) · c
                                                       ¯
then dV R /d < 0. Finally, note  < ¯ < 1, and  > 0 is equivalent to  > 2a + r + 1/c.
The proposition is then proven.

    The intuition of Proposition 3 is as follows. When  is sufficiently low, a higher  will
increase the punishment P will face in case C's challenge fails, so the increase in the stability
at Stage 2 will be significant; therefore, the political side of R's trade-off at Stage 1 will
always be dominant; R then prefers the highest possible  . If  is sufficiently high, the
opposite will happen, and the economic cost of a higher  will dominate the political gain.
    Proposition 3 explains the institutional differences in Imperial China and Premodern
Europe: as in the European history, a high  , which represents weak absolute power of the
Ruler, for example, strong rule of law and property rights, and a low  , which represents a
highly unbalanced relationship between the Elites and People's rights and power, for example,
limited access of the People to elite status, are compatible, while as in the Chinese history,
a low  and a high  are compatible.
    One may wonder why we did not show a result for   [,        ¯ ]. It is not straightforward to
derive such a result without further restrictions on the distribution of x. To see this point,
observe that

        dV R (               ) dS                    dS
            =  - (1 +  )a - r ·   - aS         and      = (1 - p)pf (^
                                                                     x) · a · (1 -  ).      (21)
         d                      d                    d

A lower  increases S , 1 -  , and x                          x) depends on properties of f (·).
                                     ^, but its impact on f (^
Therefore, any unambiguous result about the impact of   [,          ¯ ] on R's preference over
 would rely on further restrictions on the distribution of x, which would have to be more
or less arbitrary. As an example, Appendix B derives a result that R will generally prefer
a higher  given a lower  with an additional restriction on the distribution of x. For
theoretical robustness, Proposition 3 only touches upon the extreme cases and, therefore,
the first-order implications of  .
    That said, we provide a numerical example in Figure 2. We plot R's choice   against  :
consistent with Proposition 3,   = 1 if  <  , while   = 0 if  >         ¯ ; silent in Proposition
3, given the specification of the example,   weakly decreases with  over   [,          ¯ ].




                                               24
Specification: F (x) = 1 - e-x , p = 0.8,  = 20, a = 0.6, r = 5. Under this specification,  - 2a > r.
The Ruler's expected payoff in equilibrium at Stage 2 is denoted as V R . The blue line plots   when
  [0,  )  (¯   , 1], which is consistent with Proposition 3. The red line plots   when   [,       ¯ ],
about which Proposition 3 is silent.

                      Figure 2: Ruler's choice   a function of   [0, 1]


3.3     Additional Implications from Extensions
Extensions of our model can provide a few additional implications. Here we introduce two
examples.

People's perspective on Ruler's absolute power. Proposition 3 shows the institu-
tional compatibility between  and  , while taking  as exogenous. One may argue that 
would eventually depend on the legitimacy that P has granted to R in the first place. Along
this argument, if before Stage 1 P has an opportunity to choose  , how would her preference
of  look like?

Corollary 1. If P could choose  before Stage 1, then P would prefer any  <  over any
>  ¯.

Proof. Given the  ­ power structure, P's expected payoff at Stage 2 is
                              (         )           (    (      ) )
                     V P = a · 1 - F (^
                                      x) · p + a · 1 - 1 - F (^
                                                              x) · p
                           (  (         )             )
                         = 1 - 1 - F (^
                                      x) · p · (1 -  ) · a.                                      (22)



                                                 25
By Proposition 3, if  > ¯ , R will choose  = 0; if  <  , R will choose  = 1. Therefore,

                                VP   <, =1
                                             >0=VP     >¯ , =0
                                                                 .                         (23)

The corollary is then proven.

    The intuition is as follows. On the equilibrium path at Stage 2, P will never side with
R when called upon. Therefore, she will receive either her status quo payoff a or her post-
punishment payoff a. Given a sufficiently high  >         ¯ , R will prefer the lowest possible
 = 0 at Stage 1, so P will receive exactly a zero payoff eventually; any sufficiently low  < 
will induce R to choose  = 1, granting P a strictly positive payoff eventually. P will then
prefer any sufficiently low  <  over the sufficiently high  >    ¯ before Stage 1.
    To clarify, we focus on the extreme case to highlight that it is not always the case that
P will prefer a high to a low  , and P may tolerate a quite absolutist R. We will come back
to this insight in Section 4 when discussing the bureaucracy with the civil service exam in
China.

Allowing current stability to shape future power structure. On the institutional
compatibility, one may also argue that the European Rulers might have wanted to raise 
but were not able to do so. Appendix C provides a response to this argument in several
steps. First, it is easy to see that before Stage 2, R will prefer  to be as low as possible,
since a lower  stabilizes the autocratic rule without sacrificing the status quo payoff, as seen
in Equation (10).
    Second, Proposition 2 implies that, if the total surplus  is sufficiently big, then the
political side of R's trade-off with respect to  will be dominant, as long as the conditionality
of the power and rights of the ruled exists, i.e.,  < 1. In that case, any R would prefer  to
be as high as possible, as in Corollary 3 in Appendix C.
    Third, the last two results suggest that when the total surplus is sufficiently big, any R
would like to invest in a lower  and a higher  at the same time. Given this preference,
we can consider an alternative setting in which Stage 2 gets played repeatedly over different
periods and, instead of letting R choose  only once, we can justify a mechanical link from
the current stability of autocratic rule in equilibrium to the future power structure: the more
stable R's autocratic rule is today, the more successful she would be in investing in the power
structure toward the direction that she would favor, so the higher the degree of R's absolute
power and the more symmetric the Elite­People relationship tomorrow. This effect on the
future power structure, by Proposition 2, would eventually lead to a higher future stability,
creating a dynamic complementarity.


                                              26
     Finally, given this dynamic complementarity, multiple stable steady states of (, , S ),
i.e., the power structure and stability of autocratic rule, may exist, and, among these steady
states, the stronger the absolute of R and the more symmetric the Elite­People relationship,
the higher the stability of autocratic rule, as derived in Proposition 6 in Appendix C. A dual
divergence of the power structure and stability of autocratic rule from slightly different initial
conditions can thus appear, as shown in Proposition 7 in Appendix C. Here we summarize
the implication as follows:

Corollary 2. Compared with Premodern Europe, Imperial China could have been given a
slightly lower  , a slightly higher  , or a slightly higher S at very early times. This slight
difference could have led the two societies to diverge into different stable steady states, where
compared to Europe, China had a lower  , a higher  , and a higher S .


4      Further Discussion and Stylized Facts
4.1     Understanding Specific Institutions
Bureaucracy and civil service exam in China. Our model can help us understand
specific institutions without explicitly modeling their details. One such example is the bu-
reaucracy with the civil service exam in Imperial China, the hallmark of the Chinese institu-
tion (e.g., Finer, 1997a,b). Following our model, we can read it primarily as the Ruler raising
 by generalizing access to elite status between the Elites and People.22 By Proposition 3,
Chinese Rulers had a great incentive to do so because they enjoyed a low  , i.e., strong
absolute power. Given the bureaucratic system, the Elites became mainly bureaucrats who
were appointed by the Ruler, so they became further relying on the Ruler for legitimacy,
making their power and rights more conditional on the Ruler's will, i.e., further lowering  .
Not only did the Ruler favor the stability of autocratic rule, i.e., a high S , as the result of the
combination of a consolidated generalized access to elite status and strong absolute power,
i.e., a higher  and a low  , but by Corollary 1, the People might also have been satisfied
with the power structure and the resulted stability, without too much urge for stronger rule
of law or property rights.
  22
    Our reading of the civil service exam is different from that by Huang and Yang (2020b), who argue that
the civil service exam in China revealed the competence of the Elite (bureaucrats) to the Ruler, while the
representative system in Europe revealed information about the Ruler to the Elites (lords); both institutions
reduced information asymmetry between the Ruler and Elites, facilitating political stability while distributing
rents differently. Besides our difference in understanding the civil service exam, as we show below, autocratic
rule was largely more stable in Imperial China than in Premodern Europe.




                                                      27
Cities in Medieval Europe. In a similar vein, we can also read part of the rise of cities in
Medieval Europe in relation to the Ruler's effort to raise  , by issuing charters that granted
certain rights to the People in cities against other local Elites. This effort could eventually
help stabilize the Ruler's autocratic rule. For example, "Philip [II of France] knew that in
recognizing a commune, he was binding the citizens of that town to him. At critical moments
in the reign the communes . . . proved staunch military supporters [of Philip II] . . . From the
point of view of the communes . . . the king was their natural ally, a counter to the main
opponents of their independence, the Church or the magnates" (Bradbury, 1998, p. 236).23
    By Lemma 1 and Proposition 3, however, this stabilizing effect was not guaranteed when
the Ruler's absolute power was as weak as in Medieval Europe. As an European Ruler was
generally constrained by his own charters, he would find it difficult to punish the cities by
retracting the granted rights. Exactly because of this, granting more power and rights to
cities might not help the Ruler much in creating the political alliance with urban commoners
and securing his position. In this sense, when a Ruler in Europe freed a city from its local
lords, he ran the risk of having freed it also from himself. For example, in May 1215,
facing rebelling barons, John of England chartered the right of Londoners to elect their own
mayor, together with other rights, "[i]n a last attempt to win the city" (Williams, 1963,
p. 6). This proved futile: in June, still, "discontent citizens joined the barons in enforcing
the signing of Magna Carta; the Mayor [of London] was the only commoner whose name
appeared among the signatories" (Porter, 1994, p. 25­26). Given the uncertainty of this
stabilizing effect under the Ruler's weak absolute power, together with the dual divergence
of the power structure and stability as in Corollary 2 and Appendix C, the population that
enjoyed cities' privileges was eventually relatively small in Europe at the eve of the modern
times, reflecting the limited success of the Ruler's effort to raise  in Premodern Europe
(Cantor, 1964; de Vries, 1984, p. 76).


4.2     Comparing Stability of Autocratic Rule
Proposition 2 states that stronger absolute power of the Ruler and a more symmetric re-
lationship between the Elites and People, as in Imperial China compared to Premodern
Europe, imply a higher stability of autocratic rule. As the nature of the challenge and the
status quo of autocratic rule in our model are open to flexible interpretation, Proposition 2
can generate several auxiliary predictions that we could bring to data from historical China
and Europe.
  23
    Philip II's practice followed Louis VII, who "gave encouragement to the commune movement and received
reciprocal support from the communities, at the expense of local lords" (Bradbury, 1998, p. 32). Relatedly,
on the economic consequences of cities freeing peasants from local lords, see Cox and Figueroa (Forthcoming).


                                                     28
Number of wars. First, if we interpret the challenge in our model as an armed conflict,
Proposition 2 then predicts that anyone in Europe who preferred an alternative to the
status quo she was facing would be more willing to start a war than her counterpart in
China. Note that this prediction does not depend on the challenger's identity and her status
in the respective status quo: she could be either a foreign power, a rebellious local lord or
regional governor, or a group of commoners. We also find it difficult to argue for a systematic
difference in the number of all these possibly relevant entities between China and Europe
in either way. Therefore, we should compare the total number of wars fought in Europe,
regardless of the type of the war, with the number for China.
    We are not aware of systematic evidence on this subject that covers the period of our
interest. That said, Brecke (1999) provides comprehensive information on wars in Europe
from 900 and that in China from only 1400. We complement the data with information
from the Chinese Military History (2003) project from 900.24 We visualize in Figure 3a the
retrospective 100-year moving-averages of the number of wars that started in each given year.
For robustness, for each retrospective 100-year window, we calculate the Olympic average
in the window, i.e., taking the average in the window after removing one of the highest and
one of the lowest values in the window.
    Figure 3a first shows that Brecke (1999)'s data and our data give comparable numbers of
wars in China during 1400­1700, strengthening our confidence on our data. The figure also
shows that the number of wars in Europe was consistently higher than that for China from
900 to 1700. These patterns remain robust when we restrict attention in Figure 3b to more
significant wars that lasted three years or longer. We conclude that there were significant
more wars in Europe than China during 900­1700, consistent with Proposition 2.

Risk of deposition. Second, if we interpret the challenge in our model as to depose the
Ruler, Proposition 2 then predicts that a Chinese Ruler should have faced a lower risk of
deposition in each given year than a European Ruler. On the data, the historical information
of all monarchies in the world has been compiled by Morby (1989) and some of it has been
used in a few studies (e.g., Blaydes and Chaney, 2013; Kokkonen and Sundell, 2014). Using
the same data, to compare the risk of deposition between China and Europe, we first calculate
for each given year a measure of the risk of deposition in that year, i.e., the share of the
Rulers who were deposed in that year among all the Rulers who had been in power in that
  24
     The original data in the Chinese Military History (2003) project are at the level of individual battles.
We first compare the battle-level data from the Chinese Military History (2003) project with the war-level
data from Brecke (1999), finding out Brecke (1999)'s criteria of categorization. Complementing the criteria
with information from Wu (2016) and Tian (2019), we finally manually categorize the battles recorded in
the Chinese Military History (2003) project into wars.



                                                     29
                                          (a) All wars




                                (b) All three-year or longer wars
Olympic average within each retrospective 100-year window. Data sources: Brecke (1999) for the
"Brecke data," Chinese Military History (2003) for the "Chinese data."

     Figure 3: Number of wars of all types started in a given year, China vs. Europe




                                               30
year; we then visualize in Figure 4 the comparison between China and Europe by plotting the
retrospective 100-year moving-averages of the measure. For robustness, again, the Olympic
average is used.




    Olympic average within each retrospective 100-year window. Data source: Morby (1989).

       Figure 4: Risk for a Ruler to be deposed in a given year, China vs. Europe

    As shown in Figure 4, the risk for a Ruler to be deposed in a given year was generally
lower in China than in Europe during the 9th­14th centuries, when the two differences we
emphasize in the power structure between the two societies were the most prominent. That
said, there existed a short period around 970 where the risk in China appeared to be higher,
when China entered the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period. In light of this, we
conduct a Kolmogorov­Smirnov test to check whether the differences in the risks between
China and Europe are systematic. The test reports that at a significance level of 0.1%, we
can accept the claim that the risk for a Ruler to be deposed in a given year was generally
lower in China than in Europe during 800­1400, whereas the opposite claim must be rejected.
These results are consistent with Proposition 2.

Resilience of unified autocratic rule. Finally, if we interpret the status quo of auto-
cratic rule in our model as a unified one across the territory, Proposition 2 then predicts
that a unified autocratic rule should have been more resilient in China than in Europe. As

                                             31
discussed, the literature has well documented that China had been more unified than Europe
in history. Among many other measures, here we present in Figure 5 only a replication of the
comparison by Scheidel (2019, fig. 1.11) as an example, plotting the share of the population
in Europe that was controlled by the largest polity in the continent, together with the same
measure for East Asia, where China is located.




                          Replicated from Scheidel (2019, fig. 1.11).

 Figure 5: Percentage of population claimed by the largest polity, Europe vs. East Asia

    As shown in the figure, since 800, in East Asia, the population share in the largest
polity, which was the dominant empire in China, had usually been above 75%, except for
short subperiods of turbulence. In contrast, the number for Europe had been below 20%,
consistent with a more fragmented pattern. This comparison is consistent with Proposition 2.
Therefore, our model provides a power-structure approach to the unification­fragmentation
cleavage between Imperial China and Premodern Europe.


5    Conclusion
In recent years, economists have made a lot of progress in understanding the importance of
institutions and the relationship between major components of pro-development institutions.


                                              32
In this paper, we address the correlation between more inclusive access to elite status and
weaker rule of law or property rights in the comparison between Imperial China and Pre-
modern Europe. Historical narratives reveal that the correlation reflects two fundamental
differences in the power structure between the two societies: Chinese Rulers had stronger
absolute power, while the relationship between the Elites and People in terms of their power
and rights was more asymmetric in Europe.
    By building a model and analyzing how the power structure can shape the stability of
an autocratic rule, we show that, once we recognize that the Ruler's absolute power is about
the conditionality of the power and rights of the ruled on the Ruler's will, a more symmetric
Elite­People relationship will strengthen the political alliance between the Ruler and the
People, thus creating more loyalty to the Ruler, and deterring potential challenges, stabiliz-
ing the autocratic rule. This effect and, therefore, the Ruler's incentive to promote a more
symmetric Elite­People relationship depend on the Ruler's absolute power. This compar-
ative institutional analysis explains the coexistence of the two power-structure differences
between Imperial China and Premodern Europe. Besides guiding us to understand specific
institutions, the model also suggests higher stability of autocratic rule in Imperial China.
Data on the number of wars, risk of deposition, and resilience of unified autocratic rule
support the implication.
    Admittedly, our theory is highly stylized as we capture the power structure with only two
parameters, and we only examine the stability of autocratic rule as the outcome. The benefit
of doing so is that we can deliver our key insights in a simple manner. That said, there can
be more insights to gain if one applies our framework of power structure to other parts of
the world, e.g., the Muslim world, or if one employs different frameworks to link the power
structure with other political, economic and social outcomes (e.g., taxation, social mobility,
and innovation).25 We thus hope that our study opens new avenues for future research.



References
Acemo  glu, Kamer Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2001. The colonial origins
  of comparative development: An empirical investigation. American Economic Review 91:
  1369­1401.
  25
    For example, Blaydes and Chaney (2013) show that Christian kings in Western Europe enjoyed higher
political stability than Muslim sultans during the 9th­15th centuries. This difference can be explained in our
framework: lords in feudal Europe owned land and military forces on a daily basis, suggesting a high status
quo payoff a to the Elites, while Mamlukism in the Muslim world was designed to remove elite Mamluks
"from the luxuries of settled life" (Blaydes and Chaney, 2013, p. 23), suggesting a low a; one can show in
our model that a higher a would increase the stability of autocratic rule.



                                                     33
Acemo glu, Kamer Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2005a. Institutions as a
  fundamental cause of long-run growth. Handbook of economic growth 1: 385­472.

Acemo glu, Kamer Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2005b. The rise of
  Europe: Atlantic trade, institutional change, and economic growth. American Economic
  Review 95: 546­579.

Acemo  glu, Kamer Daron, and James A. Robinson. 2000. Why did the west extend the
  franchise? democracy, inequality, and growth in historical perspective. Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 115: 1167­1199.

Acemoglu, Kamer Daron, and James A. Robinson. 2001. A theory of political transitions.
  American Economic Review 91: 938­963.

Acemoglu, Kamer Daron, and James A. Robinson. 2012. Why Nations Fail: The Origins of
  Power, Prosperity and Poverty. New York: Crown Publishing Group.

Acemo glu, Kamer Daron, and James A. Robinson. 2019. The Narrow Corridor: States,
  Societies, and the Fate of Liberty. New York: Penguin Books.

Bai, Ying, and Ruixue Jia. 2016. Elite recruitment and political stability: The impact of
  the abolition of China's civil service exam. Econometrica 84: 677­733.

Beckett, J. V. 1984. The pattern of landownership in England and Wales, 1660­1880. Eco-
  nomic History Review 37: 1­22.

Bertocchi, Graziella. 2006. The law of primogeniture and the transition from landed aris-
  tocracy to industrial democracy. Journal of Economic Growth 11: 43­70.

Besley, Timothy, and Torsten Persson. 2011. Pillars of Prosperity: The Political Economics
  of Development Clusters. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Besley, Timothy, and Torsten Persson. 2014. The causes and consequences of development
  clusters: State capacity, peace, and income. Annual Review of Economics 6: 927­949.

Blaydes, Lisa, and Eric Chaney. 2013. The feudal revolution and Europe's rise: Political
  divergence of the Christian West and the Muslim world before 1500 CE. American Political
  Science Review 107: 16­34.

Bloch, Marc. 1962a. Feudal Society, Volume I: The Growth of Ties of Dependence. London:
  Routledge, 2nd edition. Translated by L. A. Manyon from La Soci´   et´
                                                                       e F´
                                                                          eodale, Volume
  I: La Formation des Liens de D´                         ´
                                  ependance, 1939, Paris: Editions Albin Michel. Reprint,
  2004.

Bloch, Marc. 1962b. Feudal Society, Volume II: Social Classes and Political Organization.
  London: Routledge, 2nd edition. Translated by L. A. Manyon from La Soci´   et´
                                                                               e F´
                                                                                  eodale,
                                                                          ´
  Volume II: Les Classes et le Gouvernement des Hommes, 1940, Paris: Editions Albin
  Michel. Reprint, 2005.


                                            34
Bracton, Henry de. 1968. Bracton on the Laws and Customs of England. Cambridge: Belknap
  Press. Translated with annotations by Samuel E. Thorne from Bracton De Legibus et
  Consuetudinibus Angliæ, George E. Woodbine (ed.), 1915, New Haven: Yale University
  Press.

Bradbury, Jim. 1998. Philip Augustus: King of France 1180­1223. London: Routledge.
  Reprint, 2013.

Brecke, Peter. 1999. Violent conflicts 1400 AD to the present in different regions of the
  world. Paper prepared for the 33rd Peace Science Society (International) North American
  Meeting, Ann Arbor, October 8­10, 1999.

Brook, Timothy. 2010. The Troubled Empire: China in the Yuan and Ming Dynasties.
  Cambridge: Belknap Press.

Cantor, Norman F. 1964. The Civilization of the Middle Ages. New York: Harper Perennial.
  Reprint, 1994.

Chao, Kang, and Chung-yi Chen. 1982. A History of China's Land Institutions. Taipei:
  Linking Publishing. Reprint, 2006, Beijing: New Star Publisher.

Chinese Military History. 2003. Chronicle of Wars in the Chinese History. Beijing: People's
  Liberation Army Publishing House.

Cox, Gary W., and Valent´
                        in Figueroa. Forthcoming. Political fragmentation, rural-to-urban
  migration and urban growth patterns in western Eurasia, 800­1800. European Review of
  Economic History .

Cox, Gary W., Douglass C. North, and Barry R. Weingast. 2019. The violence trap: A
  political-economic approach to the problems of development. Journal of Public Finance
  and Public Choice 34: 3­19.

Dahl, Robert A. 1957. The concept of power. Behavioral Science 2: 201­215.

de Vries, Jan. 1984. European Urbanization, 1500­1800. Cambridge: Harvard University
  Press.

Dincecco, Mark, and Yuhua Wang. 2018. Violent conflict and political development over the
  long run: China versus Europe. Annual Review of Political Science 21: 341­358.

Ebrey, Patricia Buckley, and Anne Walthall. 2013. East Asia: A Cultural, Social, and
  Political History. Boston: Cengage Learning, 3rd edition.

Esherick, Joseph W. 1981. A note on land distribution in prerevolutionary China. Modern
  China 7: 387­411.

Fern´
    andez-Villaverde, Jes´
                         us. 2016. Magna Carta, the rule of law, and the limits on govern-
  ment. International Review of Law and Economics 47: 22­28.



                                            35
Fern´andez-Villaverde, Jes´
                          us, Mark Koyama, Youhong Lin, and Tuan-Hwee Sng. 2020. The
  fractured-land hypothesis. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
  27774.

Finer, Samuel Edward. 1997a. The History of Government from the Earliest Times, Volume
  I: Ancient Monarchies and Empires. New York: Oxford University Press.

Finer, Samuel Edward. 1997b. The History of Government from the Earliest Times, Volume
  II: The Intermediate Ages. New York: Oxford University Press.

Fukuyama, Francis. 2011. The Origins of Political Order: From Prehuman Times to the
  French Revolution. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

Ganshof, Fran¸
             cois-Louis. 1952. Feudalism. London: Longmans, Green and Co. Translated
 by Philip Grierson from Qu'est-ce que la F´
                                           eodalit´
                                                  e? 1947, Bruxelles: Office de Publicit´
                                                                                        e,
 S.C., 2nd edition.

Goldstone, Jack A. 1991. Revolution and Rebellion in the Early Modern World: Popula-
 tion Change and State Breakdown in England, France, Turkey, and China, 1600­1850.
 Berkeley: University of California Press.

Goody, Jack, Joan Thirsk, and Edward Palmer Thompson (eds.) . 1976. Family and Inher-
 itance: Rural Society in Western Europe, 1200­1800. Cambridge: Cambridge University
 Press.

Greif, Avner, Joel Mokyr, and Guido Tabellini. Forthcoming. Two Paths to Prosperity:
  Culture and Institutions in Europe and China, 1200­2000.

Greif, Avner, and Guido Tabellini. 2010. Cultural and institutional bifurcation: China and
  Europe compared. American Economic Review 100: 135­140.

Greif, Avner, and Guido Tabellini. 2017. The clan and the corporation: Sustaining cooper-
  ation in China and Europe. Journal of Comparative Economics 45: 1­35.

Grummitt, David. 2014. A Short History of the Wars of the Roses. London: Bloomsbury
  Publishing.

Ho, Ping-ti. 1959. Aspects of social mobility in China, 1368­1911. Comparative Studies in
  Society and History 1: 330­359.

Huang, Yasheng, and Clair Yang. 2020a. A longevity mechanism of Chinese absolutism.
 Working paper.

Huang, Yasheng, and Clair Zhuqing Yang. 2020b. Political divergence between East and
 West in the 8th and 9th centuries. Working paper.

Johnson, Noel D., and Mark Koyama. 2019. Persecution and Toleration: The Long Road to
  Religious Freedom. New York: Cambridge University Press.



                                           36
Jones, Eric. 1981. The European Miracle: Environments, Economies and Geopolitics in the
  History of Europe and Asia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Ko, Chiu Yu, Mark Koyama, and Tuan-Hwee Sng. 2018. Unified China and divided Europe.
 International Economic Review 59: 285­327.

Kokkonen, Andrej, and Anders Sundell. 2014. Delivering stability ­ Primogeniture and
 autocratic survival in European monarchies 1000­1800. American Political Science Review
 108: 438­453.

Lander, Jack Robert. 1961. Attainder and forfeiture, 1453 to 1509. Historical Journal 4:
  119­151.

Levenson, Joseph Richmond. 1965. Confucian China and Its Modern Fate, Volume 2: The
  Problem of Monarchial Decay. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Levi, Margaret. 1988. Of Rule and Revenue. Los Angeles: University of California Press.

L¨
 u, Simian. 1944. A General History of China, Volume 2. Shanghai: Kai Ming Bookstore.
  Reprint, 1992, Shanghai: East China Normal University Press.

Ma, Debin, and Jared Rubin. 2019. The paradox of power: Principal-agent problems and
 administrative capacity in Imperial China (and other absolutist regimes). Journal of
 Comparative Economics 47: 277­294.

Mann, Michael. 1986. The Social Sources of Power, Volume 1: A History of Power from the
 Beginning to AD 1760. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

McCollim, Gary B. 2012. Louis XIV's Assault on Privilege: Nicolas Desmaretz and the Tax
 on Wealth. Rochester: University Rochester Press.

Mokyr, Joel. 2016. A Culture of Growth: The Origins of the Modern Economy. Princeton:
 Princeton University Press.

Morby, John E. 1989. Dynasties of the World: A Chronological and Genealogical Handbook.
 New York: Oxford University Press.

Morton, Arthur L. 1938. A People's History of England. London: Lawrence and Wishart.
 Reprint, 1999.

North, Douglass C. 1989. Institutions and economic growth: An historical introduction.
  World Development 17: 1319­1332.

North, Douglass C., John Joseph Wallis, and Barry R. Weingast. 2009. Violence and Social
  Orders: A Conceptual Framework for Interpreting Recorded Human History. Cambridge:
  Cambridge University Press.

North, Douglass C., and Barry R. Weingast. 1989. Constitutions and commitment: The
  evolution of institutions governing public choice in seventeenth-century England. Journal
  of Economic History 49: 803­832.

                                            37
Orwell, George. 1947. The English People. London: Collins.

Porter, Roy Sydney. 1994. London: A Social History. London: Hamish Hamilton.

Reynolds, Susan. 2010. Before Eminent Domain: Toward a History of Expropriation of Land
  for the Common Good. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

Roland, G´erard. 2020. The deep historical roots of modern culture: A comparative perspec-
  tive. Journal of Comparative Economics 48: 483­508.

Rosenthal, Jean-Laurent, and Roy Bin Wong. 2011. Before and Beyond Divergence: The
  Politics of Economic Change in China and Europe. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Scheidel, Walter. 2019. Escape from Rome: The Failure of Empire and the Road to Prosperity.
  Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Seward, Desmond. 1978. The Hundred Years War: The English in France 1337­1453. Lon-
  don: Penguin. Reprint, 1999.

Southern, Richard William. 1970. Western Society and the Church in the Middle Ages.
  Baltimore: Penguin Books.

Stasavage, David. 2016. Representation and consent: Why they arose in Europe and not
  elsewhere. Annual Review of Political Science 19: 145­162.

Stasavage, David. 2020. The Decline and Rise of Democracy: A Global History from Antiq-
  uity to Today. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Tamanaha, Brian Z. 2004. On the Rule of Law: History, Politics, Theory. Cambridge:
  Cambridge University Press.

Tian, Zhaolin. 2019. History of Warfare in China. Nanjing: Jiangsu People's Publishing.

Tuchman, Barbara W. 1978. A Distant Mirror: The Calamitous 14th Century. New York:
  Alfred A. Knopf.

Turchin, Peter. 2009. A theory for formation of large empires. Journal of Global History 4:
  191­217.

Unger, Roberto Mangabeira. 1977. Law in Modern Society: Toward a Criticism of Social
 Theory. New York: The Free Press.

Vincent, Nicholas. 2012. Magna Carta: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
  sity Press.

von Glahn, Richard. 2016. An Economic History of China: From Antiquity to the Nineteenth
  Century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Wang, Jiafan. 2000. A General History of China. Shanghai: East China Normal University
 Press.

                                            38
Watson, Burton DeWitt. 1964. Han Fei Tzu: Basic Writings. New York: Columbia Univer-
 sity Press.

Wickham, Chris. 2009. The Inheritance of Rome: A History of Europe from 400 to 1000.
 London: Penguin.

Williams, Gwyn Alfred. 1963. Medieval London: From Commune to Capital. London:
 Athlone Press.

Wittfogel, Karl August. 1957. Oriental Despotism: A Comparative Study of Total Power.
 New Haven: Yale University Press.

Wu, Guoqing. 2016. History of Warfare in China. Beijing: People's Press.

Xue, Melanie Meng, and Mark Koyama. 2020. Autocratic rule and social capital: Evidence
 from imperial China. Working paper.

Yan, Buke. 2009. Peaks and Troughs: Political Civilization from the Qin Dynasty to the
  Southern and Northern Dynasties. Beijing: Peking University Press.

Zhang, Jian. 2015. A Comprehensive Study of the Four Anti-Buddhist Persecutions in China.
  Beijing: World Publishing Corporation.

Zhang, Taisu. 2017. The Laws and Economics of Confucianism: Kinship and Property in
  Preindustrial China and England. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.




                                           39
Online Appendix

A     Allowing for Mixed Strategies
In this section we allow for mixed strategies at Stage 2 by dropping the earlier assumption
that E and P will side with R when indifferent and C will not challenge when indifferent. We
then characterize all the subgame perfect equilibria that are empirically relevant (possible for
C to challenge and for the status quo to end) and can involve mixed strategies at a strictly
positive share of the states of the world. We then examine whether the main insights from
the main text would maintain.
    When doing so, we adopt a few additional assumptions without losing much generality.
We consider only the empirically relevant, nontrivial case  < 1. We also assume that x is a
continuous random variable so that its distribution does not have any mass point, and that
F (ap) < 1 so that 1 - F (^x) > 0 always holds.
    By backward induction, in any subgame perfect equilibrium at Stage 2, P will side with
R when x < x  ^ and not side with R when x > x   ^.
    Taking this into consideration, in any subgame perfect equilibrium, E will side with R
when x < x ^; when x > x ^, E will side with R if

                                           p
                                    w<        · (1 -  )a;                                  (24)
                                          1-p

E will not side with R if
                                           p
                                    w>        · (1 -  )a;                                  (25)
                                          1-p
E will side with R with probability qE (x) if

                                           p
                                    w=        · (1 -  )a,                                  (26)
                                          1-p

where qE (x) is a function and satisfies qE (x)  [0, 1] for any x > x
                                                                    ^.
   Taking this into consideration, in any subgame perfect equilibrium, C will not challenge
when x < x^. When x > x  ^, C will not challenge if

                                           p
                                    w<        · (1 -  )a;                                  (27)
                                          1-p

C will also not challenge if

                                  p                      p
                            w>       · (1 -  )a and z <     · y;                           (28)
                                 1-p                    1-p


                                                40
C will challenge if
                                    p                      p
                             w>        · (1 -  )a and z >     · y;                           (29)
                                   1-p                    1-p
C will challenge with probability qC (x) if

                                    p                      p
                             w>        · (1 -  )a and z =     · y,                           (30)
                                   1-p                    1-p

where qC (x) is a function and satisfies qC (x)  [0, 1] for any x > x
                                                                    ^; if

                                              p
                                       w=        · (1 -  )a,                                 (31)
                                             1-p

however, C will compare
                                                           (                   )
                      0 vs. qE (x) · (-y ) + (1 - qE (x)) · (1 - p) · z - p · y ,            (32)

i.e.,
                                                 (                       )
                  0 vs. (1 - qE (x))(1 - p) · z - 1 - (1 - qE (x))(1 - p) · y,               (33)

so C will challenge with probability qC (x), where, for any x > x
                                                                ^, qC (x) = 1 if

                                       1 - (1 - qE (x))(1 - p)
                                  z>                           · y,                          (34)
                                         (1 - qE (x))(1 - p)

qC (x) = 0 if
                                       1 - (1 - qE (x))(1 - p)
                                  z<                           · y,                          (35)
                                         (1 - qE (x))(1 - p)
and qC (x)  [0, 1] if
                                       1 - (1 - qE (x))(1 - p)
                                  z=                           · y.                          (36)
                                         (1 - qE (x))(1 - p)
   We have then specified all equilibrium strategies at any x = x    ^. Therefore, at Stage 2,
the only families of subgame perfect equilibria that are empirically relevant and can involve
mixed strategies at a strictly positive share of the states of the world are:

    · When w > 1-  p
                     p
                       · (1 -  )a and z = 1-
                                           p
                                             p
                                               · y , in any subgame perfect equilibrium, if x < x
                                                                                                ^,
      then C will not challenge, E would side with R, and P would side with R; if x > x         ^,
      then C will challenge with probability qC (x)  [0, 1], E will not side with R, and P will
      not side with R.
                                                                           
      In any equilibrium of this family, the probability of challenge is x  ^
                                                                               qC (x)dF (x), while




                                                  41
      the survival probability of the status quo is
                                                   
                                S =1-                 qC (x)dF (x) · (1 - p).                   (37)
                                               x
                                               ^


      All impacts of  and  on political stability still come from their impacts on x
                                                                                   ^. All
      main insights from the main text would then remain.

    · When w = 1-  p
                     p
                       · (1 -  )a, in any subgame perfect equilibrium, if x < x
                                                                              ^, then C will
      not challenge, E would side with R, and P would side with R; if x > x   ^, then C will
      challenge with probability qC (x), where qC (x) depends on

                                           1 - (1 - qE (x))(1 - p)
                                 z vs.                             · y,                         (38)
                                             (1 - qE (x))(1 - p)

      E will side with R with probability qE (x), and P will not side with R.
                                                                        
      In any equilibrium of this family, the probability of challenge is x
                                                                         ^
                                                                           qC (x)dF (x), while
      the survival probability of the status quo is
                                           
                           S =1-              qC (x)(1 - qE (x))(1 - p)dF (x).                  (39)
                                       x
                                       ^


      Still, all impacts of  and  on political stability come from their impacts on x
                                                                                    ^. All
      main insights from the main text would then remain.


B      Institutional Compatibility under Additional Restric-
       tion on the Distribution of the State of the World
Proposition 4. If the distribution of x satisfies

                                  x · f  (x)         a
                            -                ¯ 1-                                               (40)
                                    f (x)          - 2a - r

over x  [0, pa], then a lower   [0, 1] would make R prefer a higher   [0, 1].

Proof. Observe that

          dV R (               ) dS                         dS
              =  - (1 +  )a - r ·   - aS,                      = (1 - p)pf (^
                                                                            x) · a · (1 -  ),   (41)
           d                      d                         d

and
                                       (         )
                                S = 1 - 1 - F (^
                                               x) · (1 - p).                                    (42)

                                                      42
Therefore,

   2V R (               ) S            dS
       =  - (1 +  )a - r ·       -a·
                                       d
          (               )             (                           )      dS
       = -  - (1 +  )a - r · (1 - p)pa · (1 -  )f  (^
                                                    x) · pa + f (^x) - a ·
                                                                            d
          (               )             (                  )
       = -  - (1 +  )a - r · (1 - p)pa · f (^
                                            x) · x      x) + a · (1 - p)f (^
                                                 ^ + f (^                  x)pa
                     ((               ) (                   )         )
       = -(1 - p)pa ·  - (1 +  )a - r · f (^ x) · x
                                                  ^ + f (^x) - f (^
                                                                  x)a
                     ((               )              (                  )       )
       = -(1 - p)pa ·  - (1 +  )a - r · f  (^
                                            x) · x
                                                 ^ +  - (1 + 2 )a - r · f (^  x) . (43)

Therefore,  2 V R /  0 if and only if
              (                  )              (                )
                   - (1 +  )a - r · f  (^
                                        x) · x
                                             ^ +  - (1 + 2 )a - r · f (^
                                                                       x)  0,           (44)

i.e.,
                       f  (^
                           x) · x
                                ^   - (1 + 2 )a - r           a
               -                                    =1-                 .               (45)
                         f (^
                            x)      - (1 +  )a - r       - (1 +  )a - r
Since                                        [             ]
                                   a                a
                                              0,             ,                          (46)
                              - (1 +  )a - r      - 2a - r
we have                                     [               ]
                                  a                a
                         1-                  1-           ,1 .                          (47)
                             - (1 +  )a - r      - 2a - r
Therefore,  2 V R /  0 can be guaranteed by

                                      a
                           1-                ¯,     where ¯ < 1.                        (48)
                                    - 2a - r

The proposition then follows.


C       Allowing Current Stability to Shape Future Power
        Structure
Based on the equilibrium at Stage 2, R's preference over  is straightforward: a lower 
stabilizes the status quo (higher S ) without any impact on R's status quo payoff; therefore,
R will prefer the lowest possible  .
   Proposition 3 also implies:

Corollary 3 (Higher  almost always preferred by R). As  - r  ,   1- .

                                             43
    This result suggests that when the surplus R would enjoy is sufficiently large, given any
 < 1, R will prefer  to be as high as possible. This result and R's preference over  allow
us to consider the following setting:

   · At t:

          ­ The ruling position's historical strength St-1 is given.
          ­ t =  (St-1 ) and t =  (St-1 ) are realized, where  (S ) and  (S ) satisfy S (S ) < 0
            and S (S ) > 0, respectively.
          ­ The modeled Stage 2 plays out St = 1 - (1 - F (^x)) · (1 - p)  S (t , t , ) as in
            the unique subgame perfect equilibrium;  include all factors that conditional on
            St-1 , affect St but do so not through t or t .

   · At t + 1: The same happens.

   The dynamics then follows

                       t =  (St-1 ),    t =  (St-1 ),   St = S (t , t , ) ,                 (49)

or just
                                        (                    )
                                  St = S  (St-1 ),  (St-1 ),  .                             (50)

   Steady states are then defined by
                     
                               
                     S = S ( ,  , ) : steady-state political stability;
                     
                       =  (S  ) :           steady-state right symmetry;                    (51)
                       =  (S  ) :           steady-state rule of law,

or just
                                        (                  )
                                  S  = S  (S  ) ,  (S  ) ,  .                               (52)

Existence and stability of steady states. The defining equation of steady states can
help establish a few technical results. The first result is about the possible range of St in the
dynamics:

Lemma 2. Any St in the dynamics must satisfy S  St  S
                                                    ¯, where S = p and S
                                                                       ¯ =
1 - (1 - p) · (1 - F (pa)) < 1.

Proof. Note that S  0 and S  0. Therefore, the minimum S is reached when t = 0 and
t = 1 and the maximum S¯ is reached when t = 1 and t = 0. The lemma then follows.

                                               44
    The first result helps establish the second result, which is about the existence of a steady
state given a reasonable assumption about  (·) and  (·):

Lemma 3. If  (S ),  (S ),  (S  ¯), and  (S¯) are all within the range (0, 1), then there exists
                                                (                  )
at least one steady state S  , at which St = S  (St-1 ),  (St-1 ),  crosses St = St-1 from
St > St-1 to St < St-1 , and 0  S · S + S · S  1.

Proof. Note that S > 0 and S > 0 for any  > 0 and  < 1. Therefore, by  (S ) > 0 and
                      (                   )
 ((
  S ) < 1, we have  S     (S ) ,  (S ) ,    > S ; by 0 <  (S¯) < 1 and 0 <  (S   ¯) < 1, we have
      ( ) ( ) )                         (            )
S  S   ¯ , S ¯ , < S     ¯. Since S  (s),  (s),  is continuous in s, the defining equation
        (                 )                                [    ]
S  = S  (S  ) ,  (S  ) ,  must have a solution S   S, S        ¯ , i.e., a steady state exists, at
             (                      )
which St = S  (St-1 ),  (St-1 ),  crosses St = St-1 from St > St-1 to St < St-1 . Moreover,
note that                     (               )
                          dS  (s) ,  (s) , 
                                                 = S · S + S · S  0,                          (53)
                                    ds
          (                     )
so St = S  (St-1 ),  (St-1 ),  is increasing in St-1 . Therefore, at S  ,
                            (               )
                          dS  (s) ,  (s) , 
                        0                     = S · S + S · S  1.                            (54)
                                ds



     The third result is the condition for a steady state to be stable:
                                                                      (                     )
Lemma 4. A steady state S  is stable if and only if at S  , St = S  (St-1 ),  (St-1 ), 
crosses St = St-1 from St > St-1 to St < St-1 and 0  S · S + S · S  1.
                                                                      (                     )
Proof. First, suppose a steady state S  is stable, then at S  , St = S  (St-1 ),  (St-1 ), 
crosses St = St-1 and
                            (                   )
                          dS  (S  ) ,  (S  ) , 
                      -1<                         = S · S + S · S  1.                        (55)
                                 dS 

Note that
                                      S · S + S · S  0,                                      (56)

so
                                   0  S · S + S · S  1.                                      (57)

Therefore, the crossing must be from St > St-1 to St < St-1 .
   The other direction of the lemma is straightforward. The lemma is then proven.

     The last two results establish the existence of stable steady states:

                                               45
Proposition 5. If  (S ),  (S ),  (S  ¯), and  (S ¯) are all within the range (0, 1), then there exist-
                                                                                (                    )
s at least one stable steady state, and at all the stable steady states, St = S  (St-1 ),  (St-1 ), 
crosses St = St-1 from St > St-1 to St < St-1 and 0  S · S + S · S  1.

Institutional compatibility under multiple steady states. Assuming  (S ),  (S ),
 (S¯), and  (S ¯) are all within the range (0, 1), we can have the following result: when
multiple steady states exist given , any two different steady states must be different in a
certain way, i.e., follows institutional compatibility:

Proposition 6. Given , if there are two steady states {S  ,   ,   } and {S   ,    ,    }, then
any one among the following three statements will imply the other two: 1) S   S   ; 2)
      ; 3)       .

Proof. The result follows the three defining equations of steady states and their monotonicity.


    Given multiple steady states, the second result is about the divergence of compatible
institutions:
                                                                                        
Proposition 7. If there are N  2 different stable steady states S1          < · · · < SN , then there
are N - 1 different unstable steady states S              ~N -1 , they satisfy S < S  < S
                                             ~1 < · · · < S                                ~1 < S  <
                                                                                      1           2
                                 
S2 < · · · < SN -1 < SN -1 < SN < S , and the institutional dynamics is determined by the
 ~                     ~               ¯
initial strength of the ruling position S0 :

   · if S         ~n+1 , where n = 1, . . . , N - 1, then St  S  as t  ;
        ~n < S0 < S
                                                               n+1

                ~1 , then St  S  as t  ;
   · if S  S0 < S              1

        ~N -1 < S  < S
   · if S            ¯, then St  S  as t  .
                 N                N
                             (                   )
Proof. As eventually St = S  (St-1 ),  (St-1 ),  has to cross St = St-1 from St > St-1 to
St < St-1 , we can rank the stable and unstable steady states as proposed. Neighboring
unstable steady states then divides the possible range of S into sub-ranges, starting from
each of which St will converge to the stable steady state in it.

    This result implies that the institutional difference between China and Europe can be
thought as different stable steady states given the same primitives but different initial
strengths S of the ruling position in history, which is compatible with different  and 
at very early times.



                                                 46
D      Endogenizing the Challenger and Elites' Incentives
       in a Markov Game
In this extension of Stage 2 we collapse C and E into a single player E, make her look forward
in a Markov game with an infinite number of discrete periods, and allow her to replace R.
Figure 6 shows each period of the Markov game.
                                          .
                       Game continues

                            Nature (N)
                                              Draws state of the world
                                              x per c.d.f. F (x)
                             Elites (E)


            Does not challenge                          Challenges the status quo, which
             the status quo                               is maintained by Ruler (R)

  R gets  - (1 +  )a
            E gets a                                            People (P)
           P gets a

                                                Sides                  Does not side
      Game continues                           with R                    with R

                         R gets  - (1 +  )a
                                  E gets a                                   N
                              P gets a - x
                                                           W.p. 1 - p,            W.p. p,
                                                           status quo            status quo
                             Game continues                   ends                survives
                                                            R gets r              R gets  - (1 +  )a
                                                            E gets a              E gets a
                                                           P gets a               P gets a

                                   R exits without future payoffs                 Game continues
                                                    E becomes R
                                                   New E enters
                                                 Game continues

                 x  0, a > 0,  - 2a > r, 0    1, 0    1, 0 < p < 1
              Figure 6: Extended Stage 2: Each period in the Markov game

    Compared with Figure 1, Stage 2 will now continue after each period; the prize z for C

                                                 47
to challenge and the incentive w for E not to side with R are replaced by the aspiration of
E to replace R at the end of this period; the loss y for C if her challenges fails is replaced by
the punishment that would reduce E's payoff from the status quo level a to a. About the
stochastic elements of the game, we assume that N's draws of x and whether R will survive
the challenge on her own within each period and across periods are mutually independent.
About the dynamic elements of the game, we assume that all the players have an infinite
horizon with an exogenous intertemporal discount factor   (0, 1). All other assumptions
in the main text remain here.
    We will adopt the Markov perfect equilibrium as the solution concept in our analysis.
For simplicity, we still assume that E will not challenge and P will side with R if they are
indifferent in their decision, respectively, ruling out mixed strategies. Appendix D.3 shows
that allowing for mixed strategies would accommodate a mixed-strategy equilibrium when
and only when pure-strategy equilibria do not exist, while the key insights would remain
robust.


D.1     Equilibrium Characterization
Now we analyze the extended Stage 2 by first characterizing all possible Markov perfect
equilibria and finding the conditions under which they exist. We denote the net present
values that the players enjoy at the beginning of each period as V R , V E , and V P , respectively.
We have a first result to partially characterize all Markov perfect equilibria:

Lemma 5. In any Markov perfect equilibrium, P will side with R if and only if x  x        ^
(1 -  )p · a, where x ^  [0, pa]; when x  x  ^, E will not challenge the status quo, and when
x>x  ^, E will challenge if and only if the inspiration to replace R in equilibrium dominates
the probability-adjusted punishment in case of a failed challenge:

                                                 p
                                VR-VE >               · (1 -  )a.                              (58)
                                              (1 - p)

Proof. In any Markov perfect equilibrium, P will side with R if and only if

                   a - x + V P  (a + V P ) · (1 - p) + (a + V P ) · p,                         (59)

i.e.,
                                     x  (1 -  )p · a  x
                                                      ^.                                       (60)

Given this strategy of P and the continuation strategy of E in the equilibrium, E will not



                                                48
challenge if x  x
                ^, since
                                      a + V E  a + V E                                   (61)

holds for any   [0, 1] and V E ; when x > x
                                          ^, E will challenge if and only if

                      a + V E < (a + V R ) · (1 - p) + (a + V E ) · p,                   (62)

i.e.,
                                                p
                                VR-VE >              · (1 -  )a.                         (63)
                                             (1 - p)
The lemma is then proven.

   Note that the analysis is parallel to Section 3.1.2, the definition of x
                                                                          ^ is the same as in
Section 3.1.2, and Condition (58) is parallel to Conditions (4) and (6).
   By Lemma 5, only two Markov perfect equilibria are possible. The first one is a secured-R
equilibrium:
Proposition 8 (Secured-R equilibrium in the Markov game). If

                                    - (2 +  )a      p
                     h(,  )                    -         · (1 -  )a  0,                  (64)
                                     1-          (1 - p)

then "E never challenges the status quo; P would not side with R if and only if x > x  ^" is a
Markov perfect equilibrium; in this equilibrium, the survival probability of the status quo is
S = 1.
Proof. For "E never challenges the status quo; P would not side with R if and only if x > x
                                                                                          ^"
to be a Markov perfect equilibrium, the condition

                                                p
                                VR-VE                · (1 -  )a                          (65)
                                             (1 - p)

must hold, where, given E and P's strategies in this equilibrium,

                                    - (1 +  )a                   a
                            VR =                    and V E =      .                     (66)
                                     1-                         1-

The condition is then equivalent to

                            - (1 +  )a    a     p
                                       -             · (1 -  )a,                         (67)
                             1-          1-  (1 - p)

i.e.,
                                    - (2 +  )a      p
                     h(,  )                    -         · (1 -  )a  0.                  (68)
                                     1-          (1 - p)

                                               49
The proposition is then proven.

    The intuition of the result is as follows: the function h(,  ) measures E's inspiration
                                /
V R - V E = ( - (2 +  )a) (1 -  ) to replace R given the specified strategies, net of the
                                      (          )
probability-adjusted punishment p/(1 - p) · (1 -  )a on E in case the challenge fails. The
condition h(,  )  0 then suggests that the inspiration cannot dominate the punishment.
Lemma 5 then implies that we have the secured-R equilibrium.
    Note that this equilibrium is parallel to the scenario in Section 3.1.2 when Conditions
(4) and (6) do not hold. Following the same argument as in Section 3.1.2, this equilibrium is
empirically not much relevant, as in reality the chance for R to be ousted was always strictly
positive; it is also trivial, in the sense that no challenge will happen in equilibrium.
    The second equilibrium is an unsecured-R equilibrium:

Proposition 9 (Unsecured-R equilibrium in the Markov game). If
                 (           )
                  - (1 +  )a · S + r · (1 - S )     a     p
        g (,  )                                 -     -        · (1 -  )a > 0,           (69)
                           1 - S                  1 -  (1 - p)

where
                       (         )
                S = 1 - 1 - F (^
                               x) · (1 - p)  [p, 1]          and   ^  (1 -  )p · a,
                                                                   x                     (70)

then "E will challenge the status quo if and only if x > x^; P would not side with R if and
            ^" is a Markov perfect equilibrium; in this equilibrium, R's stability is S  1.
only if x > x

Proof. For "E will challenge the status quo if and only if x > x
                                                               ^; P would not side with R if
and only if x > x
                ^" to be a Markov perfect equilibrium, the condition

                                                 p
                                    VR-VE >           · (1 -  )a                         (71)
                                              (1 - p)

must hold, where, given E and P's strategies in this equilibrium,
                                (                        )
                      V   R
                              =  - (1 +  )a + V      R
                                                       · S + r · (1 - S )
                                (            )
                              =  - (1 +  )a · S + r · (1 - S ) + V R · S
                                (             )
                                   - (1 +  )a · S + r · (1 - S )
                              =                                                          (72)
                                            1 - S




                                                50
and
                (    (          ) )         (       )
       V E = a · 1 - 1 - F (^x) · p + a · 1 - F (^
                                                 x) · p + V E · S + V R · (1 - S )
                (             (         ) )
           = a · 1 - (1 -  ) · 1 - F (^
                                      x) · p + V E · S + V R · (1 - S )
                (             (         ) )
             a · 1 - (1 -  ) · 1 - F (^
                                      x) · p + V R · (1 - S )
           =                                                  ,                             (73)
                                  1 - S

with
                                   (         )
                            S = 1 - 1 - F (^
                                           x) · (1 - p)  [p, 1].                            (74)

The condition is then equivalent to, with some algebra,
                 (          )
                 - (1 +  )a · S + r · (1 - S )     a     p
       g (,  )                                 -     -        · (1 -  )a > 0.               (75)
                          1 - S                  1 -  (1 - p)

The proposition is then proven.

    Again, the intuition of Proposition 9 follows Lemma 5: the function g (,  ) indicates,
given the specified strategies, how E's inspiration V R - V E to replace R is compared with
the punishment in case the challenge fails. The condition g (,  ) > 0 then suggests that the
inspiration dominates the punishment. Lemma 5 then implies that we have the unsecured-R
equilibrium.
    Following the same argument as in Section 3.1.2, the unsecured-R equilibrium is empir-
ically relevant and nontrivial. We thus now explore the conditions under which it always
exists and is the unique equilibrium. The following result first shows that the secured-R
equilibrium and the unsecured-R equilibrium cannot exist simultaneously:

Corollary 4. Given r   - 2a, if g (,  ) > 0, then h(,  ) > 0, i.e., if the unsecured-R
equilibrium exists, then the secured-R equilibrium does not exist.

Proof. Observe that, by r   - 2a, for any S  [p, 1], g (,  )  g (,  )           S =1
                                                                                       = h(,  ).
Therefore, if g (,  ) > 0, then h(,  ) > 0.

    The intuition of Corollary 4 is as follows. Since R is safer in the secured-R equilibrium
than in the unsecured-R equilibrium, E's inspiration to replace R is stronger, too. There-
fore, if E's inspiration is already so strong that the unsecured-R equilibrium is supported
(g (,  ) > 0), then given the strategies specified in the secured-R equilibrium, E's inspiration
must be too strong to support the secured-R equilibrium (h(,  ) > 0).
    This corollary helps derive a set of conditions under which the unsecured-R equilibrium
will generally exist and be the unique equilibrium, parallel to Proposition 1:

                                              51
                                                                        (       /
Proposition 10 (Focus on unsecured-R equilibrium in the Markov game). If (1 - p) (1 -
           )
 )(1 - p) · a  r   - 2a, then given any   [0, 1] and   [0, 1], the unsecured-R
equilibrium exists and is the unique Markov perfect equilibrium.
                                               (          /         )
Proof. For any   [0, 1] and   [0, 1], by 0 < (1 - p) (1 -  )(1 - p) · a  r   - 2a
and S  [p, 1], we have

                  ( - 2a) · S + r · (1 - S )      a        p
         g (,  )                             -       -         ·a
                          1 - S                 1 -  (1 - p)
                     r      (1 - p) + p(1 -  )           r        1-p+p
                        -                         ·a>        -             ·a
                  1 - S       (1 -  )(1 - p)          1 - p (1 -  )(1 - p)
                     r             1
                        -                    · a  0.                                        (76)
                  1 - p (1 -  )(1 - p)

Therefore, g (,  ) > 0, i.e., the unsecured-R equilibrium exists, and by Corollary 4, the
secured-R equilibrium does not exist. Therefore, the unsecured-R equilibrium is the unique
equilibrium.
                   (         /                )
    In this result, (1 - p) (1 -  )(1 - p) · a  r is parallel to w > ap/(1 - p) and
z > yp/(1 - p) in Proposition 1, guaranteeing that E's aspiration to replace R is sufficiently
strong so that E will challenge if P will not side with R.


D.2     Analysis of the Unsecured-R Equilibrium
To focus on the empirically relevant, nontrivial unsecured-R equilibrium in our analysis, from
                                                                      (       /                )
now on we assume that the condition in Proposition 10 holds, i.e., (1 - p) (1 -  )(1 - p) ·
a  r   - 2a, so that the unsecured-R equilibrium exists and is the unique Markov perfect
equilibrium. Without losing generality, as in Section 3.2, we also assume that the state of
the world x's probability density function satisfies f (x)  [f , f¯]  (0, ) over x  [0, pa].
    Now we can derive parallel results to Sections 3.1.3 and 3.2. First note that as in Section
3.1.3, the probability of challenge is still 1 - F (^
                                                    x) and the survival probability of the status
quo is still
                                            (         )
                                 S = 1 - 1 - F (^   x) · (1 - p),                            (77)

where x^  (1 -  )p · a, so Proposition 2 still holds in this Markov game.
   Now examine R's preference over  and  . The net present value of R's payoffs in
equilibrium is
                   (           )                    (                )
                    - (1 +  )a · S + r · (1 - S )      - (1 +  )a - r · S + r
            VR   =                                =                           ,             (78)
                             1 - S                           1 - S

                                               52
which differs from Equation (10) only at that it includes the future payoffs. Therefore, R
will still prefer  to be as low as possible.
    On R's preference over  , first, since Proposition 2 still holds in this Markov game, the
political­economic trade-off still appears and Lemma 1 still holds. We can then derive the
following result parallel to Proposition 3:

Proposition 11 (Institutional compatibility in the Markov game). If  <   1 - (1 -
  /(                              )
 ) (1 -  (1 - p)) ( - 2a - r) + r c, then R will prefer  to be as high as possible; if
                    /(                 )
 >   ¯  1 - (1 -  )p  - a - (  r(1 -  ) c¯, then R will prefer  to be as low as possible,
                                                       )/ (             )
where  < ¯ < 1 and if  > 2a + 1-  c
                                    
                                     + (1 -  (2 - p))r      1 -  (1 - p) , then  > 0.

Proof. The marginal impact of  on R's net present value in equilibrium is
                         (                               (                     ))
                                                             (-(1+ )a-r)S +r
                              - (1 +  )a - r +                     1-S
                                                                                    ·   dS
                                                                                        d
                                                                                             - aS
                   R
                dV
                   =                                                                                .   (79)
                 d                                    1 - S
                                                  (   /               )
By Lemma 1,   [0, 1], S  [p, 1], and 0 < (1 - p) (1 -  )(1 - p) · a  r   - 2a, we
have
               (                        )
                  (1- (S -p))( -2a-r)+r
         dV R              1-S
                                          · ca · (1 -  ) - a
              
          d                        1 - S
                           (                                                  )
                    a        (1 -  (1 - p)) ( - 2a - r) + r
                         ·                                   · c · (1 -  ) - 1 , (80)
               1 - S                        1-

so, if
                    (1 -  (1 - p)) ( - 2a - r) + r
                                                   · c · (1 -  ) - 1 > 0,                               (81)
                                 1-
i.e.,
                                                    1-
                        <1- (                                      )     ,                              (82)
                                     (1 -  (1 - p)) ( - 2a - r) + r · c
then dV R /d > 0. At the same time, we have
                                 (                           )
                                                  ( -a)
                       dVR           -a-r+         1-
                                                                 ·c
                                                                  ¯a · (1 -  ) - ap
                          
                        d                         1 - S
                                           ((          )                )
                                    a           -a
                             =         ·            -r ·c¯ · (1 -  ) - p ,                              (83)
                                 1 - S          1-




                                                   53
so, if                        (         )
                                   -a
                                      -r ·c
                                          ¯ · (1 -  ) - p < 0,                           (84)
                                   1-
i.e.,
                                             (1 -  )p
                              >1- (                     )    ¯,                          (85)
                                          - a - r(1 -  ) · c
                                                           ¯
then dV R /d < 0. Finally, note  <       ¯ < 1, and  > 0 is equivalent to  > 2a +
(                      )/(            )
  1-
   c
     + (1 -  (2 - p))r    1 -  (1 - p) . The proposition is then proven.

   Proposition 11 differs from Proposition 3 only at that  and     ¯ are differently defined,
respectively, due to the change in the expression of V R . This is then followed by parallel
results to Section 3.3. We have then shown that we can derive all the parallel results to the
main text from the Markov game.


D.3      Allowing for Mixed Strategies
Here we allow for mixed strategies by dropping the earlier assumption that E will not chal-
lenge and P will side with R if they are indifferent between their options. We then re-
characterize all the Markov perfect equilibria of the game at Stage 2 and examine whether
the main insights would remain. As in Appendix A, we assume  < 1; we also assume that
x is a continuous random variable so that its distribution does not have any mass point, and
that F (ap) < 1 so that 1 - F (^x) > 0 always holds.
    In any Markov perfect equilibrium, P's strategy is then to not to side with R when x > x ^
and to side with R when x < x     ^. As x is a continuous random variable, we can leave P's
strategy when x = x ^ unspecified without much real consequence.
    By  < 1, given P's strategy and E's continuation strategy in the equilibrium, E's strategy
is then not to challenge when x < x  ^; when x > x^, E will challenge with a given probability
qE (x)  [0, 1], which is a function of x > x
                                           ^, and we denote
                                         
                                             qE (x)dF (x)
                                   ¯E 
                                   q     x
                                         ^
                                                           [0, 1].                       (86)
                                             1 - F (^
                                                    x)

In particular, if in equilibrium

                                                  p
                               VR-VE >                 · (1 -  )a,                       (87)
                                               (1 - p)




                                                 54
then qE (x) = 1 for any x  x
                           ^, with q
                                   ¯E = 1; if in equilibrium

                                                p
                               VR-VE <               · (1 -  )a,                            (88)
                                             (1 - p)

then qE (x) = 0 for any x  x
                           ^, with q
                                   ¯E = 0; if in equilibrium

                                                p
                               VR-VE =               · (1 -  )a,                            (89)
                                             (1 - p)

then qE (x) should make this condition hold. Again, as x is a continuous random variable,
we can leave E's strategy when x = x  ^ unspecified.
   In the equilibrium with such strategies, we must have
                                  (               )
                                     -  (1 +   )a   · S + r · (1 - S )
                           VR =                                        ,                     (90)
                                                1 - S
             (    (         )        )        (           )
   V = a · 1 - 1 - F (^
    E
                          x) · q
                               ¯E · p + a · 1 - F (^    x) · q¯E · p + V E · S + V R · (1 - S )
             (             (          )        )
          a · 1 - (1 -  ) · 1 - F (^x) · q
                                         ¯E · p + V R · (1 - S )
       =                                                             ,
                                 1 - S
                                                                                             (91)
and
                                      (         )
                               S = 1 - 1 - F (^
                                              x) · q
                                                   ¯E · (1 - p).                            (92)

By some algebra, the function that governs the existence of the equilibrium turns out to be
                   p
      VR-VE -           · (1 -  )a
                (1 - p)
                ((              )                                          )
         1-         - (1 +  )a · S + r · (1 - S )     a     p
      =       ·                                   -     -        · (1 -  )a .               (93)
        1 - S                 1 - S                 1 -  (1 - p)

Now define
                       (         )
                      - (1 +  )a · S + r · (1 - S )     a     p
               ¯E ) 
        k (, , q                                    -     -        · (1 -  )a,              (94)
                               1 - S                  1 -  (1 - p)

where
                         (         )
                  S = 1 - 1 - F (^
                                 x) · q
                                      ¯E · (1 - p) and x
                                                       ^ = (1 -  )pa.                       (95)

   Note that by F (pa) < 1 and  - 2a > r, k (, , q                                 ¯E  [0, 1].
                                                  ¯E ) is strictly decreasing over q
We can then characterize the Markov perfect equilibria in three scenarios, except for E and
P's strategies when x = x
                        ^:

                                               55
   1. When k (, , 0) < 0, the unique family of Markov perfect equilibria that can exist
      must satisfy:

            · P will side with R when x < x
                                          ^ and will not side with R when x > x
                                                                              ^;
            · E will never challenge when x = x
                                              ^.

   2. When k (, , 1) > 0, the unique family of Markov perfect equilibria that can exist
      must satisfy:

            · P will side with R when x < x
                                          ^ and will not side with R when x > x
                                                                              ^;
            · E will not challenge when x < x
                                            ^ and will challenge when x > x
                                                                          ^.

   3. When k (, , 0)  0 and k (, , 1)  0, there exists a unique q
                                                                ¯E  [0, 1] such that

                                                k (, , q
                                                       ¯E ) = 0,                                  (96)

         and the unique family of Markov perfect equilibria that can exist must satisfy:

            · P will side with R when x < x
                                          ^ and will not side with R when x > x
                                                                              ^;
            · E will challenge with a given probability qE (x)  [0, 1], where the function qE (x)
              satisfies                     
                                             x
                                             ^
                                               qE (x)dF (x)
                                                             =q¯E ,                         (97)
                                               1 - F (^
                                                      x)
              when x > x
                       ^ and will not challenge when x < x
                                                         ^.

   Note that Scenario 1 corresponds to Proposition 8, where h(,  )  k (, , 0), and Sce-
nario 2 corresponds to Proposition 9, where g (,  )  k (, , 1). Now examine whether our
main messages remain in Scenario 3.
   In Scenario 3, in equilibrium, we always have
                       (         )
                      - (1 +  )a · S + r · (1 - S )     a     p
               ¯E ) 
        k (, , q                                    -     -        · (1 -  )a = 0,                (98)
                               1 - S                  1 -  (1 - p)

i.e.,                                               (                      )
                 (                   )                   1   p · (1 -  )
                      - (1 +  )a - r · S + r =             +                   · a · (1 - S ).    (99)
                                                        1-    (1 - p)
This implies
                                         pa(1-S )
                                          (1-p)
                                                · d(1 -  ) + aS · d
                             dS =                      (               ) .                       (100)
                                                               p·(1- )
                                     - (1 +  )a - r + 1- + (1-p) a
                                                          1




                                                        56
By  - 2a > r, we see that a higher  and a lower  will increase in equilibrium the survival
probability of the status quo S , corresponding to Proposition 2, which is for Scenario 2.
   This result also suggests that in equilibrium

                       dS                   aS
                          =                   (                )
                       d                               p·(1- )
                             - (1 +  )a - r + 1- 1
                                                   
                                                     +  (1-p)
                                                                  a
                                     ((              )         )
                                             p·(1- )
                                  a·     1
                                        1-
                                           +  (1-p)
                                                       ·a-r
                          =(                    (                 ) )2 .                       (101)
                                                           ·(1- )
                              - (1 +  )a - r + 1-  1
                                                     
                                                       +p (1-p)
                                                                   a

This implies
                                     ((                      )   )
                                                   p·(1- )
                                  a·       1
                                          1-
                                               +       ·a-r
                                                   (1-p)
                           dS
                                   (                       )2        ¯
                                                                     b( )                      (102)
                           d
                                        - 2a - r + 1-
                                                    1
                                                      
                                                       · a

and
                                     ((                      )   )
                                                   p·(1- )
                             a·       +    1
                                          1-
                                              ·a-r (1-p)
                        dS
                           (           (         ) )2  b( ),                                   (103)
                        d
                             - a - r + 1- + (1-p) a
                                         1     p




where both ¯ b( ) and b( ) are decreasing in  . The insight in Lemma 1 then maintains. A
result similar to Proposition 11 would then follow.
   To summarize, allowing for mixed strategies would allow the mixed-strategy, Scenario-
3 equilibria, in which the main insights from Scenario 2 would maintain, but with more
technical complexity. In light of this, we can rule out mixed strategies from the Markov
game, gaining in simplicity without losing much intuition.


E      Relevance of Elites and People in Conflicts
There existed a wide range of conflicts in both Chinese and European histories. Having
carefully examined significant examples, we argue that the positions taken by the Elites and
the People were critical in determining the outcome of the conflict. Below we discuss some
examples.26
  26
    An incomplete list of the examples we examine include, for China, the Qin­Han turnover, Rebellion
of the Seven Prince States, Western Han­Xin turnover, Xin­Eastern Han turnover, Eastern Han­Three


                                                    57
    History has shown that given the Elites' political, economic, and military resources,
whether they sided with the Ruler when the Ruler was challenged was critical to the outcome
of the challenge. For example, the fate of the French throne during the Hundred Years' War
closely followed whether the Duke of Burgundy, first John the Fearless and later his son Philip
the Good, allied with the English or veered back to the French ruler (Seward, 1978). During
the Wars of the Roses (1455­1485), "crucially, Thomas, Lord Stanley, refused to answer
Richard [III of England]'s summons" in the battle of Bosworth (1485), and his brother "Sir
William Stanley committed his men, tipping the battle decisively in Henry [Tudor, later
Henry VII of England]'s favour," delivering the demise of Richard III and the coronation of
Henry VII (Grummitt, 2014, p. 123). In China, during the civil war at the end of the Sui
dynasty (611­618), Emperor Yang was killed in a coup by Yuwen Huaji, the commander of
the royal guard and the son of Duke Yuwen Shu; during the late Tang dynasty, after Qiu
Fu, Wang Xianzhi, and Huang Chao led peasants to revolt all over the country (859­884),
it was the regional governors, such as Wang Chongrong and Li Keyong, who fought hard to
recover Chang'an, defeated the uprisings, and restored the throne of Tang.
    The People's position was more than often crucial, too, as we can see in the history of
not only China but also Europe. In Chinese history, in the final years of the Qin, Xin,
Sui, Tang, Yuan, and Ming dynasties, following the initial rebellion within the country or
invasion from the outside, peasants revolted and contributed to the end of these dynasties.
In Europe, for example, Morton (1938, p. 46, 63) commented on English history: "the king
was able to make use of the peasantry in a crisis when his position was threatened by a
baronial rising," and "even the strongest combination of barons had failed to defeat the
crown when, as in 1095 [Robert de Mowbray's rebellion] and in 1106 [the challenge of Duke
Robert Curthose of Normandy over the throne of Henry I], it had the support of other classes
and sections of the population."27 In the Hundred Years' War, the turning point toward the
eventual French triumph was the rise of Joan of Arc, as she inspired the common people
of France to join the war.28 In England, shortly before and during the Wars of the Roses,
Kingdoms turnover, Western­Eastern Jin turnover, Eastern Jin­Southern Dynasties turnover, Sui­Tang
turnover, Tang­Zhou turnover, An Lushan Rebellion, Huang Chao Rebellion and Tang­Five Dynasties and
Ten Kingdoms turnover, Northern­Southern Song turnover, Yuan­Ming turnover, Ming­Qing turnover, and
Revolt of the Three Feudatories; for Europe, the Rebellion of Robert de Mowbray, Henry I's invasion of
Normandy, 1215 Magna Carta, Second Barons' War, Hundred Years' War, Jacquerie, Wat Tyler's Rebellion,
Richard II­Henry IV of England turnover, Jack Cade's Rebellion, Wars of the Roses, German Peasants'
War, Dutch Revolt, and Thirty Years' War. Some examples include more than one entries of examination.
These cover 15 and 14 entries for China and Europe, respectively, and 29 in total.
  27
     Finer (1997b, p. 901) also observes that the English fyrd "was retained, and even called out by the
Norman kings against their rebellious Norman barons."
  28
     For more details on the French throne's lack of popular support before Joan of Arc, the change after
that, and the implications of the change on the development of the war, see Morton (1938) and Seward
(1978).


                                                   58
popular support was generally important in determining the fates of Richard II, Henry IV,
Edward IV, and Richard III (Grummitt, 2014). In the German Peasants' War, as the status
quo was challenged by peasants across southwestern Germany, the uprisings were eventually
defeated by the Swabian League, given that the support from the common people in cities
were inconsistent.
   These examples show that both the Elites and the People are highly relevant in conflicts.
This gives us confidence to link the power structure among the Ruler and both the Elites
and the People to the stability of autocratic rule.




                                            59
